[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg66)  [Next](hchg68.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_488">p. 488</span>

### IV

#### THE MYSTERY OF INITIATION

The Mystic Aspects of the Graal legend having been developed up to this
stage, the question arises whether they have points of correspondence
with any scheme of the Instituted Mysteries, whether any element which
is present in the romances can be regarded as a faint and far off
reflection of something which at that time was known and done in any
secret schools. The possibility has presented itself already to the mind
of scholarship, which, having performed admirable work in the study of
the Graal texts, is still in search of a final explanation concerning
them. The shadow of the old Order of the Temple has haunted them in
dreams fitfully, and they have lingered almost longingly over vague
imagined reflections of the Orgies of Adonis and Tammuz. As behind the
Christian symbolism of the extant literature there spreads the whole
world of pagan folk-lore, so--at least antecedently--there might be
implied also some old scheme of the epopts. It seems permissible
therefore to offer an alternative, under proper judgments of reserve, as
something which--if otherwise considerable--may be held tentatively
until later circumstances of research either lead it into demonstration
or furnish a fitting substitute. The Graal legends are comparable to
certain distinct literatures with which the theory here put forward will
connect them by a twofold consanguinity of purpose. Scholarship had
scarcely troubled itself with the great books of Kabalism till it was
found or conceived that they could be made to enforce the official
doctrines of Christianity. Many errors of enthusiasm followed, but the
books of the mystery of Israel became in this manner the public heritage
of philosophy, and we are now able to say after what manner it enters
into the general scheme of mystic knowledge. The

<span id="page_489">p. 489</span>

literature of alchemy, in like manner, so long as it was in the hands of
certain amateurs of infant science and its counterfeits, remained
particular to themselves, and outside a questionable research in physics
it had no office or horizon until it was discovered or inferred that
many curious texts of the subject had been written in a language of
subterfuge, that in place of a metallurgical interest it was concerned
in its way with the keeping of spiritual mysteries. There were again
errors of enthusiasm, but a corner of the veil was lifted. Now, it is
indubitably the message of the Graal that there is more in the Eucharist
than is indicated by the sufficing graces imparted to the ordinary
communicant, and if it is possible to show that behind this undeclared
excess there lies that which has been at all times sought by the Wise,
that *est in sacramento quicquid quærunt sapientes*, then the Graal
literature will enter after a new manner into our heritage from the
past, and another corner of the veil will be lifted on the path of
knowledge. It will be seen that the literature--contrary to what it
appears on the surface--is not without points of comparison in other
Christian cycles--that it does not stand exactly alone, even if its
consanguinities, though declared by official religion, are not entirely
before the face of the world but within the sanctuaries of secret
fraternities. To suggest this is not to say that these stories of old
are a defined part or abstract of any mysteries of initiation; they are
at most a byway winding through a secret woodland to a postern giving
upon the chancel of some great and primeval abbey.

Those who have concerned themselves with the subject of hidden knowledge
will know that the secret claims have been put forth under all manners
of guises. This has arisen to some extent naturally enough in the course
of the ages and under the special atmosphere of motives peculiar to
different nations. It has also come about through the institution of
multiples of convention on the part of some who have become in later,
times the

<span id="page_490">p. 490</span>

custodians of the mysteries, such wardens having been actuated by a
twofold purpose, firstly, to preserve their witness in the world, and,
secondly, to see that the knowledge was, as far as might be, kept away
from the world. This is equivalent to saying that the paramount law of
silence has of necessity a permanent competitor in the law of the sign.
We may take the readiest illustration in the rituals of Craft Masonry.
They contain the whole marrow of *bourgeoisie*, but they contain also
the shadow of the great mysteries revealed occasionally. The unknown
person or assembly which conceived the closing of the Lodge according to
one of the grades had a set of moral feelings in common with those of
all the retired masters in the craft of joinery, and a language like a
journeyman carpenter, but this notwithstanding the words of the adepts
had passed over them and they spoke of the Hidden Token as no one had
ever spoken before. That closing gives the true explanation of the
secret which cannot be told and yet is imparted quite simply; of that
mystery which has never been expressed and can yet be recited by the
least literate occupant of the chair placed in Wisdom. Nor does it prove
in communication to be anything that is strictly unfamiliar. And yet the
explanation, so far from making the concealed part of the rite familiar
and a thing of no moment, has built about the concealment a wall of
preservation which has made its real significance more profound and in
the minds of the adepts more important.

The Graal literature is open to a parallel criticism, and the result is
also the same. Whatever disappointment may await, in fine, the pursuit
of an inquiry like the present, partly on account of the uncouth
presentation of important symbolism to the mind of the early romancist,
partly by reason of the inherent defect of romance as a vehicle of
symbolism, and more than either by the fatal hiatus brought about
through the loss of the earliest documents, there is enough evidence to

<span id="page_491">p. 491</span>

show that a very strange leaven was working in the mass of the texts.
Let me add in respect of it, with all necessary reservations and in no
illiberal spirit, that the quality of this leaven can be appreciated
scarcely by those who are unacquainted (*a*) with the inward phases of
the life of Christian sanctity during the Middle Ages, after which
period the voices sound uncertain and the consciousness of experience
more remote, and (*b*) with the interior working of those concealed
orders of which the Masonic experiment is a part only, and elementary at
that. The most important lights are therefore either in the very old
books or in the catholic motive which characterises secret rituals that,
whether old or not, have never entered into the knowledge of the outside
world.

The testimony is of two kinds invariably--first of all, to the existence
of the Great Experiment and the success with which, under given
circumstances, it can be carried to its term, and, secondly, to a great
failure in respect of the external world. The one is reflected by the
achieved Quest of the Holy Graal, and the other by the removal of the
Graal. In respect of the one it is as if a great mystery had been
communicated at one time in the external places, but as if the
communication had afterwards been suspended, the secret had as if died.
In respect of the other, it is as if the House of Doctrine had been
voided. Did these statements exhaust the content of the alternatives,
the testimony might be that of a sect, but we shall see at the proper
time after what manner they conform to external doctrine, even if the
keepers of that doctrine should themselves be unable to see the law of
the union.

The great literatures and the great individual books may be often at
this day as so many counters or heaps of letters put into the hands of
the mystic, and he interprets them after his own manner, imparting to
them that light which, at least intellectually, abides in himself. I
make this formal statement because I realise that it is perilous for my
position and because it enables me to

<span id="page_492">p. 492</span>

add that though literatures may be clay in our hinds, we must not
suppose that they who in the first place put a shape of their own kind
on the material which they had ingarnered were invariably conscious that
it would bear that other seal and impression which we set upon it in our
own minds as the one thing that is desirable. It is too much to suppose
that behind the external sense of texts there was always designed that
inward and illusory significance which in some of them we seem to trace
so indubitably. The Baron de la Motte Fouqué once wrote a beautiful and
knightly romance in which a correspondent discovered a subtle and
complete allegory, and the author, who planned, when he wrote it, no
subsurface meaning, did not less sincerely confess to the additional
sense, explaining in reply that high art in literature is true upon all
the planes. There are certain romances which are found to connect in
this manner with the mystery of our science--that is to say, in the
non-intentional way, and we must only be thankful to discern that there
is the deep below the deep, without pressing interpenetration into a
formal scheme. It is well to notice this position and thus go before a
criticism which presents itself rather than calls to be sought out. The
books of the Holy Graal are not exactly of this kind. A text which says
that certain secret words were once imparted under very wonderful and
exceptional circumstances is certainly obtruding a meaning behind
meaning; another which affirms that a certain mythical personage was
ordained secretly, owing to a similar intervention, and was made thereby
the first Bishop of Christendom, manifests an ulterior motive, or there
are no such motives in the world. And further, when the two great Quests
of the whole literature are written partly in the form of confessed
allegory, it is not unreasonable to infer that they had some such motive
throughout; while, in fine, as their express, undisguised intention is
to show the existence of an arch-natural Mass, the graces and the
mysteries of which can be experienced and seen by some who are of

<span id="page_493">p. 493</span>

perfect life, then the interpretation which illustrates this intention
by the mystic side of Eucharistic doctrine in the Church offers a true
construction, and its valid criticism is *vere dignum et justum est,
æquum ét salutare*. I will pour three cups to the health and coronation
of him who shall discover the speculative proto-Perceval of primeval
folk-lore, yet on the present subject let him and all other brethren in
the holy places of research keep silence, unless God graces them with
agreement. The unknown writers of the *Longer Prose Perceval* and the
*Quest of Galahad* spoke of the Great Experiment as those who knew
something of their theme and bore true witness on the term of the
research.

We know in our own hearts that eternity is the sole thing which
signifies ultimately and great literature should confess to no narrower
horizon. It happens that they begin sometimes by proposing a lesser
theme, but they are afterwards exalted; and this was the case with the
Graal books, which were given the early legends of Perceval according to
the office of Nature, but afterwards the legend of Galahad according to
the Law of Grace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. The Mystery of Faith](hchg68.md)
