[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg15)  [Next](hchg17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### § *C*.--THE BROKEN SWORD

The Graal Cup was not so much connected with the Passion as originated
therefrom, because it is clear in history that, or ever Robert de Borron
spoke of secret words, the meaning of Mass chalices, and the transit of
the Great Hallow from East to West, the Precious Blood had been brought
already within the wonder-world of relics. So also the sacred Lance had
received its justification in tradition before it was exalted in
romance. The allocation of other objects within the same sphere of
devotion was so natural that it was not likely to be resisted, but it
must be observed that the

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

attributions were inherited and not invented by the makers of books of
chivalry. Face-cloth and loin-cloth, nails and crown of thorns had long
been included among the objects provided for veneration before the *Book
of the Holy Graal* or the *Longer Prose Perceval* had dreamed of
registering them among the Hallows of the Graal ark, or otherwhere in
their holy and marvellous shrines. That they were capable of inventing
relics is shown by the history of the sacred Sword, and such relics had
their imputed antecedents in Scripture; but the things of the Passion of
Christ were too sacred for their interference, and they were left in the
hands of the Church. The Church perhaps was not idle, and the Church did
not scruple perhaps, but minstrels and weavers of stories knew their
proper limits and abode therein. Their respect in the case under notice
guarantees it in yet another, for which reason I hold it as certain that
never did Robert de Borron tamper with Eucharistic formulæ, or, in other
words, that, whether from far or near, he inherited and did not invent
the sacred words of the mystery.

The Sword of the Graal is considerable under two aspects--firstly, as a
derivative from folk-lore, which passes, as we have seen, through
certain branches of the literature without suffering an especial change
in its nature; secondly, as a hallowed object having an imputed
derivation from the history of the Church of God under one of its two
covenants. In the second case, we must be prepared to find--and this is
natural also--that certain reflections from folk-lore, as from the
earlier state of the object, are to be found in its consecrated form. In
the Chrétien portion of the *Conte del Graal* the Sword is suspended
from the neck of a page or squire and is brought to the Master of the
House as a present from his niece, with leave to bestow it apparently
howsoever he will, so only that it shall be well used. An inscription
upon it says that it will never break except in one peril, which is
known only to the smith who forged it.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In his time as a
craftsman he made three such weapons, and no others will follow. As
regards this particular example, the belt was worth a treasure, the
crosspiece was of fine gold, and the sheath was of Venetian smith's
work. It is given to Perceval by the King of the Graal Castle as
something to him predestined. But it is only at a later stage that he
learns under what circumstances it will fly in pieces and how it may be
repaired--namely, by plunging it in a certain lake which is hard by the
smithy of him who wrought it. The continuation of Gautier ignores these
facts and reproduces the Sword at the Castle, where it is carried by a
crowned knight; it is broken already and Gawain is asked to resolder it,
in which task he fails. Perceval succeeds, on the occasion of his second
visit, except for a slight crevice, thus proving that, at least in a
certain measure, he is a lover of God, a true knight, and one who loves
also the Church, which is the Spouse of God. The conclusion of Manessier
furnishes the history of the Hallow in full, though it has been the
subject of allusion previously: (*a*) one stroke was given therewith; it
destroyed the realm of Logres and the country thereto adjacent; (*b*)
this stroke was inflicted on the King's brother, in the course of a
battle; (*c*) when the King himself took up the fragments un- warily, he
was pierced through the thigh, and the wound will be healed only when
his brother's death has been avenged. In Chrétien, on the contrary, the
wound of the Graal King is caused by a spear which passes through his
two thighs. The intercalation or alternative conclusion of Gerbert sends
Perceval again into exile, because certain imperfections in his life
account for the fact that he cannot resolder the Sword, and the Quest
must be fulfilled better. The Hallow remains in the Castle, but another
sword is introduced and serves to indicate that behind the strange
memorial of this unknown poet there were sources of legend which, if we
could now recover them, might place yet another construction upon the
root-matter of the Graal legend. In Gerbert the sword under notice is

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

broken not in a conflict which calls for a conventional vengeance, after
the worthless motives of folk-lore, but in an attempt to enforce an
entrance into the Earthly Paradise.

Passing over the Lesser Chronicles, which, although in the *Didot
Perceval* it is hinted on one occasion that there were many worthy
relics, make no reference to the Sword, and coming to the Greater
Chronicles we find that in the *Book of the Holy Graal* there is a
Hallow of this kind, and it is very important from the standpoint of the
romance itself and for the Quest which follows therefrom. It was the
sword of David the King, and it was placed, as we have seen, by Solomon
in a mysterious ship destined to sail the seas for centuries as a
testimony to Galahad that his ancestor was aware of his coming at the
end of the times of the Graal. During the course of its history more
than one wound is inflicted therewith, and the circumstances under which
it is broken are also told variously. In the *Book of the Holy Graal*
there are actually two swords; to that of David the particular virtue
ascribed is that no one can draw it--before the predestined hero in the
days of the Quest--without being visited heavily for his rashness. The
doom works automatically even to the infliction of death. It is only by
a kind of accident that this sword is broken, and then it is rejoined
instantly, according to one of the codices. In another there is a
distinct account, which does not say how or whether the sword was
resoldered in fine. As regards the second sword, it is merely an
ordinary weapon with which Joseph II. is smitten by a certain seneschal
when he is endeavouring to convert the prince of a certain part of Great
Britain. The sword breaks when it pierces him, and the point remains in
the wound. After various miracles, which result in the general
conversion of the people, the sufferer places his hand on the point of
the sword, which is apparently protruding from his thigh; it comes out
of the wound, and the place heals up immediately. Joseph then takes the
two portions of the broken sword and says: "God

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

grant that this good weapon shall never be soldered except by him who is
destined to accomplish the adventure of the Siege Perilous at the Round
Table, in the time of King Arthur; and God grant also that the point
shall not cease to exude blood until the two portions are so soldered."

It is reasonable to expect that these Hallows should prove a source of
confusion as to their duplication and their purpose. I do not conceive
that the sword which is brought out of Fairyland in the *Huth Merlin*,
which is claimed by Balan, which brings about the Dolorous
Stroke--though this is inflicted actually by another instrument, which
in fine involves the two brothers in mutual destruction, can be
connected with either of the weapons with which we have been just
dealing. The alternative later *Merlin* has no mystery of swords which
can be identified with the Hallow of the Graal, and the prose *Lancelot*
knows nothing of that of David. It speaks, however, of a knight named
Elias, who carries two swords; one of them is enclosed in a priceless
sheath, and is said to be that which pierced the loins of Joseph of
Arimathæa and was broken therein. It is scarcely necessary to notice
that the father here is confused with the son. The *Quest of Galahad*
distinguishes the two swords, except in the Welsh version, which
identifies them by a natural mischance. That one of them by which Joseph
was wounded is presented to Galahad for soldering, and when the elect
knight has performed the task, it is given into the charge of Bors,
because he was a good knight and a worthy man. After the soldering "it
arose grete and marvellous, and was full of grete hete that many men
felle for drede." It seems to follow that it was brought back to Logres
on the return of Sir Bors from Sarras. The Sword of David was carried to
Sarras, as we may infer, by Galahad, but it was not taken to heaven with
the Graal and Lance, the reason being doubtless that it was not a symbol
of the Passion. In the *Longer Prose Perceval* the Sword, as we know, is
that with which St. John the Baptist was beheaded, and though

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

there is, firstly, no attempt to account for the presence of this Hallow
in England, nor, secondly, any reference to it in early literature, the
identification helps us to understand better its place among the
Hallows, as some other swords met with in the literature have scarcely a
title to be included with sacred objects. The office of Gawain, before
he can know anything of Graal mysteries, is to obtain this Sword from
its wrongful keepers, and herein he succeeds. The scabbard is loaded
with precious stones and the mountings are of silk with buttons of gold.
The hilt has also precious stones, and the pommel is a holy and sacred
stone set upon it by a certain Roman Emperor. When the Sword came forth
from the scabbard it was covered with blood, and this seems always to
have been the case at the hour of noon, which was the time of the
saint's martyrdom. When noon has passed it becomes clear and green like
an emerald. It is the same length as another sword, but when sheathed
neither the weapon nor the scabbard seems to be of two spans length. It
is said on the testimony of Josephus that the Old Law was destroyed by a
stroke of this sword without recovery, and that to effect the
destruction our Lord Himself suffered to be smitten in the side with the
Spear. These things are not to be understood on the open sense of the
text.

The Greater Chronicles of the Graal may be, as they indeed are, upon
God's side, but the judgment concerning this sub-section of the Lesser
Hallows must be that the Sword is an impediment before the face of the
symbolism of the cycle, and often an idle wonder which we could wish to
be taken out of the way. We could wish also--or at least I
personally--that something of the mystery behind the ascription of
Gerbert might come at this day into our hands. In the *Parsifal* of
Wolfram the hero of that great Quest is refreshed as by fruits brought
from the Earthly Paradise on the occasion of his first visit to the
Temple of the Holy Graal. We know not how or why, but this is another
reflection, probably from the source of Gerbert, and one which takes

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

us no further, except that from time to time, by dim hints and
allusions, we see that the legend of the Graal is not so far apart from
the legend of Eden. In this manner we recur to the German cycle, and
there we find that there is a sword of mark in the *Parsifal;* it is
that which was given to the hero by Amfortas, the Graal King. Now that
this, amidst any variations, is the same story as that which is told by
Chrétien is rather evident than likely. Another sword broke when
Parsifal was fighting with his unknown brother Feirfis, because it would
not drink the blood of his kinship, and this is the far antithesis of
some of the French stories. In Heinrich's *Diu Crône*, a fair youth of
exalted mien carries a fair broad sword, which he lays before the King
of the Castle, and this sword is given by the King to Gawain after he
has asked the question which we know to be all important.

In conclusion as to this matter, the Hallow of the Sword is not unlike a
corresponding weapon in some of the grades of Masonic chivalry; in the
same way as the reverend Knights therein do not, in many cases, know how
to use the symbolic arm, so in the Graal literature the poets and
romancers have accepted the custody of something which is so little to
their purpose that they know scarcely what they shall do therewith: had
they only thought less of their folk-lore and hence omitted it entirely,
they would have told a better--aye, even a truer--story from the
standpoint of their own symbolism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § D.--The Dish](hchg17.md)
