[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg58)  [Next](hchg60.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

# BOOK VII

## THE HOLY GRAAL IN THE LIGHT OF THE CELTIC CHURCH

### I

#### STATEMENT OF A POSSIBLE IMPLICIT ACCOUNTING FOR ALL CLAIMS

AMONG all external organisations there is one institution--and there is
one only--which, on the principle that the best is the nearest, might be
expected to offer some of those signs and warrants that we should expect
in a society, a sodality, a body--let me say, at once, in a
church--which could and did connect with the idea of the Holy Graal--as
something nearest to its source, if not indeed that centre from which
the entire mystery originated.

The early history of the Holy Graal, as distinguished from the several
quests undertaken for the discovery of that sacred object, is one of
Christianity colonising. We know in the French cycle, by the universal
voice of the texts, that it was a mystery which was brought into
Britain, and seeing that the legend, as a whole, is--apart or otherwise
from anything involved by the implicits thereof--assuredly of Celtic
origin, its religious elements, in the absence of any special and
extrinsic claims, must be accounted for most readily by the
characteristics of the Celtic Church.

It is much closer to our hands than anything which has been suggested
alternatively, and it was unquestionably

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

that environment in which some of the legends developed. Those who have
previously recognised, in their imperfect and dubious way, that the
great legends have a mystic aspect, and that hence they are probably
referable to something in instituted mysticism, have put forward bare
possibilities, and, independently of these, scholarship has itself gone
much further afield. It has thought of the Far East as the home of the
Holy Graal, and some who are mystics by more than a predisposition on
the surface, know certainly--even if it is in a certain sense only--that
there is a country deep in Asia. Now, albeit the limits of our evidence
concerning the Celtic Church are circumscribed somewhat narrowly, there
seems no doubt that this Church bore traces of Eastern influence--by
which I mean something stronger and plainer than resides in the common
fact that Christianity itself came to us from the oriental world. If,
therefore, the Holy Graal has any marks and spirit of the East, it might
be accounted for in this manner by way of the most colourable inference.
If, however, we prefer to consider without any further preface what is
the palmary claim of all, and if therefore we appeal to the veiled
suggestion of pre-eminence in the Graal priesthood in respect of an
extra-valid form of consecrating the Eucharistic elements and of a
super-apostolical succession, it may be advanced that here is simply an
exaggerated reflection of that which was actually claimed by the Celtic
Church and more especially by that Church in Wales. The claim was that
it had a title to existence independently of Rome, Christianity having
been established in these islands for a long period prior to the arrival
of St. Augustine, which arrival, from this point of view, was an
incursion upon territory already conquered and held to a defined extent
rather than a sacred endeavour to spread the gospel of Christ; thus it
brought spiritual war rather than the light of truth. I have classed
these two points together--that is to say, the alleged oriental origin
and the original independence of Rome--not because I regard the second
as important in

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

comparison with the first, but because as a fact we know that the Celtic
Church had a certain autonomous existence long before the legend of
Joseph of Arimathæa was devised in the local interests of Glastonbury.
It was not, therefore, at the beginning any question of Angevin
ambition. Further, we can, I think, understand very well how this claim
may have been exaggerated in legend, so as to cover--as I have said--the
special implicits which I have traced in the Graal literature, and
therefore to account for it within as the general characteristics of the
Celtic Church may account for it reasonably without. I propose now to
set forth some other specific analogies, from which we shall be enabled
in fine to draw a general conclusion whether we can be satisfied with
the evidence as it so stands, or whether we must go further. Let us
remember, in the first place, that the earlier point, if it can be taken
apart from the later, would mean probably an origin for the Holy Graal
independent of Celtic environment, like that of some Eastern heretical
sects which passed into southern France; otherwise a derivation through
Spain; or, as an alternative to both, the transit, for example, of the
Johannine tradition westward. But if we abandon the earlier and are
compelled to have recourse, or this mainly, to the later point, then the
legend of the Holy Graal--because it contains elements which are foreign
to the mind of romance, though it is expressed in the romance form--must
belong to that class of fable which has been invented in an external
interest, and its position is not much better than one of forged
decretals; it is, indeed, a decretal in literature, put forward in many
forms and with many variants, and it would be useless to look therein
for any secret intention beyond that of the particular pretension which
it was designed to support. With the merits and defects of Celtic
Christianity in Britain, we are sufficiently acquainted to deal rather
summarily respecting the value of any mystical suggestions which are
discernible in the cycles or remanents of literature which must be
regarded as belonging thereto.

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The suggested
implicit with which I am dealing, if found to obtain, would signify
therefore the closing of the whole inquiry.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Formulæ of the Hypothesis Scheduled](hchg60.md)
