[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg46)  [Next](hchg48) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VI

#### A PREFACE OR INTRODUCTORY PORTION APPERTAINING TO ALL THE QUESTS

There is a certain sense in which we can say that the knight of old was
consecrated like the priest of old, and we can picture the whole
ceremony as if it were included in some unwritten part of the
*Pontificale Romanum*. The institution of chivalry existed for a
particular impression of ecclesiastical idealism on one domain of the
life in the world. It was as if it were the outcome of some undeclared
design to dedicate even warfare to the high ends of the Church, as if
the implied covenant of battle were that a man should be so prepared
through all his days that no sudden and violent death should find him
unfitted for his transit. The causes of strife are many, and some of
them are doubtful enough, but so clothed in the armour of salvation the
natural-born hero experienced a kind of rebirth and came forth, so far
as he himself was concerned, a soldier of the cross. One section at
least in the romantic literature of chivalry was devoted to this ideal,
and better than any formal catechism of doctrine and conduct did it
uphold the authority of the Church and illustrate the principles of its
practice. That section was the quest of the Holy Graal in its proper
understanding, and on the authority of this fact I can say that this
branch became a search after high sanctity expressed in the form of
romance; as such it does not differ from the quest-in-chief of holiness.
It has been rendered after more than one manner out of the consecrated
implicits imbedded in consciousness, as if this were the rare and secret
book from which the texts, almost indifferently, claim to have derived
their knowledge, and it happens--for our greater misdirection--that some

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

of the modes of transcript are like *Frater Pereclinus de Faustis* in
the old mystery of salvation--that is to say, they are far from the
goal.

These statements--which are introduced like an interlude in a section
apart and as if extrajudical--will sound strangely in the ears of those
who have preceded me, and it must be understood that, of course, I am
speaking of things as they are found at their highest in the great
texts; but the evidence is there; it is there also in terms that it is
impossible to elude and impossible also to discount. In respect of the
*Conte del Graal*, we must surrender to Nature the things which are
Nature's; but the *Longer Prose Perceval* says that of God moveth its
High History, and I say likewise--but in a more exalted degree
still--concerning the *Quest of Galahad*. Were it otherwise, the
literature of the Graal would be like the records of any other princes
of this world, and my predilections would have nothing therein. My true
intent from the beginning of my life in letters has been for the delight
of the soul in God, and I have not consented with my heart to the making
of books for another and lesser end.

It was only by slow stages that the course of the literature rose up to
that height at which it found rather than created the ideal of Galahad.
We may take as our most obvious illustration of the developing process
one crucial point which characterises the Perceval quests, and this is
the loves of the hero. The earlier branches of the *Conte del Graal*
show little conscience on the subject of restraint, the deportment of
the hero being simply a question of opportunity. I know that we are
dealing with a period when the natural passions were condoned rather
easily, though the Church had intervened to consecrate the rite of
marriage after an especial manner. Hence it was little stigma for a hero
of chivalry to be born out of lawful wedlock, or to beget sons of desire
who would shine in his light and their own subsequently. The ideal of
virginity remained, all this notwithstanding,

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

so that the makers of romance knew well enough where the instituted
counsels of perfection lay. It is comparatively late in the cycles that
ascetic purity became an indefectible title to success in the Quest of
the Holy Graal, about which time Gawain and Lancelot were relegated to
their proper places--ridicule and confusion, in the one case, and final,
though not irreverent, disqualification in the other.

The *Didot Perceval* offers a frigid quality of abstinence, apart from
either sympathy or enlightenment, and without one touch of grace to make
it kindred with the ardours and solitudes of the Divine Life. The poem
of Gerbert preserves the hero's virginity even on his marriage night,
but the precaution--considering the texts which he had elected to
follow--has the aspect of a leap in the dark. Wolfram insures the
chastity of Perceval by introducing the marriage of his questing knight
at an early stage. The *Longer Prose Perceval* is like heaven, knowing
neither marriage nor giving in marriage, or at least nuptials are so
utterly made in heaven that they are not reflected on earth.
Blanchefleur has disappeared entirely, and it is never supposed that the
Quest would be achieved in perfection by one who was not a virgin. If we
turn now to the story of Galahad, we shall find that the Quest of the
Holy Graal has become an unearthly experiment. There is illumination,
there is sanctity, there is ecstasy, and the greatest of these is
ecstasy, because it is the term of the others. All the high researches
end in a rapture, and thereby is that change of location which does not
mean passage through space. I believe that the author of the Great Quest
knew what he was doing when--leaving nothing outside--he so transmuted
all, and assuredly in the order of romance he spoke as no man had spoken
before him.

Now, seeing that all subjects bring us back to the one subject; that in
spite, for example, of any scandalous histories, every official
congregation returns us to the. one official Church; so, at whatever
point we may begin,

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I affirm that
every quest takes us ultimately to that of Galahad. It would seem,
therefore, that this is the crown of all. If Galahad had come in the
good time instead of in the evil, the Graal would have been set up for
adoration before the whole face of Logres. But the Quest says that the
world was not worthy, though the *Parsifal* seems to say: "Behold, I am
with you always."

Of Perceval and his great experiment there are several phases; but this
is the lesser Quest. Of Galahad there is one phase only, led up to by
many romances, but represented in fine by a single transcendent text.
This text is the quintessence and transmutation of everything,
allocating all seekers--Perceval, Bors, Lancelot, Gawain--to their
proper spheres, over whom shines Galahad as an exalted horn in the great
pentagram of chivalry. Of the Perceval Quest there are two great
versions; one of them, as I have already noted, is an alternative
conclusion to the cycle of the Greater Chronicles; and one--which is the
German *Parsifal*--all antecedents notwithstanding, is something set
apart by itself in a peculiar house of mystery. It is the story of the
natural man taken gradually to the heights. There is also a third quest,
that of the *Didot Perceval*, which, amidst many
[insufficiencies](errata.htm#3), is important for several reasons after
its own manner--that is to say, because of its genealogy. The fourth is
the *Conte del Graal*, and this--apart from Gerbert--is of no importance
symbolically, though it is a great and powerful talisman of archaic
poetry. The truth is that for all the high things there are many
substitutes, after the manner of colourable pretences, and many
transcripts, as out of the language of the angels into that of man,
after the same way that the great external churches have expressed the
mysteries of doctrine in words of one syllable for children who are
learning to read. But the absolute and direct message of the things most
high, coming in the name of these, is alone commonly. In fine, it
sometimes happens that as from any corner of the veil the prepared eyes
can look through and perceive something

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

of the immeasurable region which lies beyond the common faculties of
sense, so there are mysteries of books which are in no way sufficient in
themselves, but they contain the elements and portents concerning all
those great things of which it is given the heart to conceive. Among
these are the Graal books in the forms which present the legend at its
highest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. The Longer Prose Perceval](hchg48)
