[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](yor02)  [Next](yor04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER II

### CHIEF GODS.

THE tendency which we noted in the case of the Ewe speaking peoples to
replace gods which were purely local, and only worshipped by those
dwelling in the vicinity, by tribal gods, and by gods worshipped by an
entire people, has in the case of the Yoruba tribes been very fully
developed, and all the gods possessing any importance are known to and
worshipped by the Yoruba-speaking peoples as a whole. The effect of
increasing the number of general objects of worship has been to diminish
the importance of the local objects of worship, the *genii loci*, who,
except in Jebu and in some of the remoter districts, have been so shorn
of their power as now to- be scarcely above the level of the fairies and
water-sprites of mediæval England, or, which is perhaps a closer
parallel, of the Naiads and Hama-dryads of ancient Greece. This of
course is what was to be expected, for the general objects of worship
govern, between them, all the phenomena which most nearly affect
mankind; and the special function of each *genius loci* is thus now
vested in some other god, who is believed to be more powerful, because
he is worshipped over a larger axea and has a more numerous following.
Gods, however, which are purely tutelar have not been so much affected,
and tutelary dieties of towns and of individuals are still common,
because the native, while enrolling himself as a follower of a general
god, likes also to have a protector whose sole business is to guard his
interests; and who, though his power may be limited, is not likely to be
distracted by the claims of others to his attention.

The term used by the Yoruba tribes to express a superhuman being, or
god, is *orisha*, and as it is used equally to express the images and
sacred objects, and also as an adjective with the meaning of sacred or
holy, it answers exactly to the Tshi term bohszon, the Gã *wong*, and
the Ewe *vodu*. The word *orisha* seems to be compounded of *ori*
(summit, top, head) and *sha* (to select, choose); though some natives
prefer to derive it from *ri* (to see) and *isha* (selection, choice),
and thus to make it mean "One who sees the cult."

## (1) OLORUN.

Olorun is the sky-god of the Yorubas, that is, he is the deified
firmament, or personal sky, just as Nyankupon is to the Tshis, Nyonmo to
the Gas, and Mawu to the Ewes. As was mentioned in the last volume, the
general bias of the negro mind has been in favour of selecting the
firmament for the chief Nature god, instead of the Sun, Moon, or Earth;
and in this respect the natives resemble the Aryan Hindus, Greeks, and
Romans, with whom Dyaus pitar, Zeus, and Jupiter equally represented the
firmament.\[1\]

\[1. The Tshis and Gas use the words Nyankupon and Nyonmo to express
sky, rain, or thunder and lightning, and the Ewes andYorubas, the words
Mawn and Olorun to express the two former. The Tshi peoples say
*Nyankupon lom* (Nyankupon knocks); "It is thundering"; *Nyankupon aba*
(Nyankupon has come), "It is raining"; and the Gã peoples, Nyonmo,
knocks (thunders), Nyonmo pours, Nyonmo drizzles, &c., while in just the
same way the Ancient Greeks ascribed these phenomena to Zeus, who
snowed, rained, hailed, gathered clouds, and thundered. Nyankupon has
for epithets the following: *Amosu* (Giver of Rain); *Amovua* (Giver of
Sunshine); *Tetereboensu* (Wide-speading Creator of Water), and
*Tyoduampon*, which seems to mean "Stretched-out Roof" (*Tyo*, to draw
or drag, *dua*, wood, and *pon*, flat surface).

Nyankupon and Nyonmo thunder and lighten as well as pour out rain, but
Olorun, like the Ewe Mawu, does not wield the thunderbolt, which has
become the function of a special thunder-god, and he consequently has
suffered some reduction in importance. The name Olorun means "Owner of
the Sky" (*oni*, one who possesses, *orun*, sky, firmament, cloud\[1\]),
and the sky is believed to be a solid body, curving over the earth so as
to cover it with a vaulted roof.

Like Nyankupon, Nyonmo, and Mawu, Olorun is considered too distant, or
too indifferent, to interfere in the affairs of the world. The natives
say that he enjoys a life of complete idleness and repose, a blissful
condition according to their ideas, and passes his time dozing or
sleeping. Since he is too lazy or too indifferent to exercise any
control over earthly affairs, man on his side does not waste time in
endeavouring to propitiate him, but reserves his worship and sacrifice
for more active agents. Hence Olorun has no priests, symbols, images, or
temples,

\[1. The *n* in *oni*, or *ni*, always changes to *l* before the vowels
*a*, *e*, *o*, and *u*. See Chapter on Language, Verbs (6).\]

and though, in times of calamity, or affliction, whjen the other gods
have turned a deaf ear to his supplications, a native will, perhaps, as
a last resource, invoke Olorun, such occasions are rare, and as a
general rule the god is not worshipped or appealed to. The name Olorun,
however, occurs in one or two set phrasesor sentences, which appear to
show that at one time greater regard was paid to him. For instance, the
proper reply to the morning salutation, "Have you risen well?" is *O yin
Olorun*, "Thanks to Olorun;" and the phrase "May Olorun protect you" is
sometimes heard as an evening salutation. The former seems to mean that
thanks are due to the sky for letting the sun enter it; and the latter
to be an invocation of the firmament, the roof of the world, to remain
above and protect the earth during the night. Sometimes natives will
raise their hands and cry, "Olorun, Olorun!" just as we say, "Heaven
forbid!" and with an equal absence of literal meaning.

Olorun has the following epithets:--

\(1\) *Oga-ogo* (*Oga*, distinguished or brave person; *ogo*, wonder,
praise).

\(2\) *Olowo* (*ni-owo*) "Venerable one."

\(3\) *Eleda* (*da*, to cease from raining), "He who controls the rain."

\(4\) *Elemi*, "a living man," literally "he who possesses breath." It
is a title applied to a servant or slave, because his master's breath is
at his mercy; and it is in this sense also that it is used to Olorun,
because, if he were evilly, disposed, he could let fall the solid
firmament and crush the world.

\(5\) *Olodumaye* or *Olodumare*. The derivation of this epithet is
obscure, but it probably means "Replenisher of brooks" (*0lodo*,
possessing brooks). We find the same termination in *Oshumaye* or
*Oshumare*, Rainbow, and in *Osamaye* or *Osamare*, Water Lily, and it
is perhaps compounded of *omi*, water, and *aye*, a state of
being.alive.

It may be mentioned that, just as the missionaries have caused
Nyankupon, Nyonmo, and Mawu to be confused with the Jehovah of the
Christians, by translating these names as "God," so have they done with
Olorun, whom they consider to be a survival from a primitive revelation,
made to all mankind, in the childhood of the world. But Olorun is merely
a nature-god, the personally divine sky, and he only controls phenomena
connected in the native mind with the roof of the world. He is not in
any sense an omnipotent being. This is well exemplified by the proverb
which says, "A man cannot cause rain to fall, and Olorun cannot give you
a child," which means that, just as a man cannot perform the functions
of Olorun and cause rain to fall, so Olorun cannot form a child in the
womb, that being the function of the god Obatala, whom we shall next
describe. In fact, each god, Olorun included, has, as it were, his own
duties; and while he is perfectly independent in his own domain, he
cannot trespass upon the rights of others.

## (2) OBATALA.

Obatala is the chief god of the Yorubas. The name means "Lord of the
White Cloth" (*Oba-ti-ala*.), and is explained by the fact that white is
the colour sacred to Obatala, whose temples, images, and paraphernalia
are always painted white, and whose followers wear white cloths. Another
derivation is Oba-ti-ala, "Lord of Visions," and this gains some
probability from the fact that Obatala has the epithets of Orisha
*oj'enia*, "The Orisha who enters man," and Alabalese
(*Al-ba-ni-ase*),\[1\] "He who predicts the future," because he inspires
the oracles and priests, and unveils futurity by means of visions. "Lord
of the White Cloth," however, is the translation most commonly adopted,
and appears to be the correct one. The god is always represented as
wearing a white cloth.

Obatala, say the priests, was made by Olorun, who then handed over to
him the management of the firmament and the world, and himself retired
to rest. Obatala is thus also a sky-god, but is a more anthropomorphic
conception than Olorun, and performs functions which are not in the
least connected with the firmament. According to a myth, which is,
however, contradicted by another, Obatala made the first man and woman
out of clay, on which account he has the title of *Alamorere*, "Owner of
the best clay;" and because he kneaded the clay himself he is called
Orisha *kpokpo*, "The Orisha who kneads clay" (*kpo*, to knead or temper
clay). Though this point is disputed by some natives, all are agreed
that Obatala forms the child in the mother's womb, and women who desire
to become mothers address their prayers to him; while albinoism and
congenital deformities are regarded as his handiwork, done either to
punish

\[1. *Al-oni* (one who. has); *ba* (to overtake); *ni* (to have); *ase*
(a coming to pass), "One who overtakes the coming to pass."\]

some neglect towards him on the part of the parents, or to remind his
worshippers of his power.

Obatala is also styled "Protector of the Town Gates," and in this
capacity is represented as mounted on a horse, and armed with a spear.
On the panels of the temple doors rude carvings are frequently seen of a
horseman with a spear, surrounded by a leopard, tortoise, fish, and
serpent. Another epithet of Obatala is *Obatala gbingbiniki*, "The
enormous Obatala." His special offerings are edible snails.

Amongst the Ewe-speaking Peoples at Porto Novo, Obatala determines the
guilt or innocence of accused persons by means of an oracle termed
*Onshe* or *Onishe* (messenger, ambassador). It consists of a hollow
cylinder of wood, about 31/2 feet in length and 2 feet in diameter, one
end of which is covered with draperies and the other closed with shells
of the edible snail. This cylinder is placed on the head of the accused,
who kneels on the ground, holding it firmly on his head with a hand at
each side. The god, being then invoked by the priests, causes the
cylinder to rock backwards and forwards, and finally to fall to the
ground. If it should fall forward the accused is innocent, if backward
guilty. The priests say that Obatala, or a subordinate spirit to whom he
deputes the duty, strikes the accused, so as to make the cylinder fall
in the required direction; but sceptics and native Christians say that a
child is concealed in the cylinder and overbalances it in front or
behind, according to instructions given beforehand by the priests. They
add that when a child has served for a year or two and grown too big for
the cylinder he is put to death, in order that the secret may be
preserved; and is succeeded by another, who, in his turn, undergoes the
same fate-but all this is mere conjecture.

## (3) ODUDUA.

Odudua, or Odua, who has the title of Iya agbe, The mother who
receives," is the chief goddess of the Yorubas. The name means "Black
One" (dit, to be black; dudit, black), and the negroes consider a
smooth, glossy, black skin a great beauty, and far superior to one of
the ordinary cigar-colour. She is always represented as a woman sitting
down, and nursing a child.

Odudua is the wife of Obatala, but she was coeval with Olorun, and not
made by him, as was her husband. Other natives, however, say that she
came from Ife, the holy city, in common with most of the other gods, as
described in a myth which we shall come to shortly. Odudua represents
the earth, married to the anthropomorphic sky-god. Obatala and Odudua,
or Heaven and Earth, resemble, say the priests, two large
cut-calabashes, which, when once shut, can never be opened. This is
symbolised in the temples by two whitened saucer-shaped calabashes,
placed one covering the other; the upper one of which represents the
concave firmament stretching over and meeting the earth, the lower one,
at the horizon.

According to some priests, Obatala and Odudua represent one androgynous
divinity; and they say that an image which is sufficiently common, of a
human being with one arm and leg, and a tail terminating in a sphere,
symbolises this. This notion, however, is not one commonly held, Obutala
and Odudua being generally, and almost universally, regarded as two
distinct persons. The phallus and yoni in juxtaposition are often seen
carved on the doors of the temples both of Obatala and Odudua; but this
does not seem to have any reference to androgyny, since they are also
found similarly depicted in other places which are in no way connected
with either of these deities.

According to a myth Odudua is blind. In the beginning of the world she
and her husband Obatala were shut up in darkness in a large, closed
calabash, Obatala being in the upper part and Odudua in the lower. The
myth does not state how they came to be in this situation, but they
remained there for many days, cramped, hungry, and uncomfortable. Then
Odudua began complaining, blaming her husband for the confinement; and a
violent quarrel ensued, in the course of which, in a frenzy of rage,
Obatala tore out her eyes, because she would not bridle her tongue. In
return she cursed him, saying "Naught shalt thou eat but snails," which
is the reason why snails are now offered to Obatala. As the myth does
not make Odudua recover her sight, she must be supposed to have remained
sightless, but no native regards her as being blind.

Odudua is patroness of love, and many stories are told of her adventures
and amours. Her chief temple is in Ado, the principal town of the state
of the same name, situated about fifteen miles to the north of Badagry.
The word *Ado* means a lewd person of eithersex, and its selection for
the name of this town is accounted for by the following legend. Odudua
was once walking alone in the forest when she met a hunter, who was so
handsome that the ardent temperament of the goddess at once took fire.
The advances which she made to him were favourably received, and they
forthwith mutually gratified their passion on the spot. After this, the
goddess became still mora enamoured, and, unable to tear herself away
from her lover, she lived with him for some weeks in a hut, which they
constructed of branches at the foot of a large silk-cotton tree. At the
end of this time her passion had burnt out, and having become weary of
the hunter, she left him; but before doing so she promised to protect
him and all others who might come and dwell in the favoured spot wliere
she had passed so many pleasant hours. In consequence many people came
and settled there, and a town gradually grew up, which was named Ado, to
commemorate the circumstances of its origin. A temple was built for the
protecting goddess; and there, on her feast days, sacrifices of cattle
and sheep are made, and women abandon themselves indiscriminately to the
male worshippers in her honour.

## (4) AGANJU AND YEMAJA.

Before her amour with the hunter, Odudua bore to her husband, Obatala, a
boy and a girl, named respectively Aganju. and Yemaja. The name Aganju
means uninhabited tract of country, wilderness, plain, or forest, and
Yemaja, "Mother of fish" (*yeye*, mother; *eja*, fish). The offspring of
the union of Heaven and Earth, that is, of Obatala and Odudua, may thus
be said to represent Land and Water. Yemaja is the goddess of brooks and
streams, and presides over ordeals by water. She is represented by a
female figure, yellow in colour, wearing blue beads and a white cloth.
The worship of Aganju seems to have fallen into disuse, or to have
become merged in that of his mother; but there is said to be an open
space in front of the king's residence in Oyo where the god was formerly
worshipped, which is still called *Oju-Aganju*-"Front of Aga-nju."

Yemaja married her brother Aganju, and bore a son named Orungan. This
name is compounded of orun, sky, and gan, from ga, to be high; and
appears to mean "In the height of the sky." It seems to answer to the
*khekheme*, or "Free-air Region" of the Ewe peoples; and, like it, to
mean the apparent space between the sky and the earth. The offspring of
Land and Water would thus be what we call Air.

Orungan fell in love with his mother, and as she refused to listen to
his guilty passion, he one day took advantage of his father's absence,
and ravished her. Immediately after the act, Yemaja sprang to her feet
and fled from the place wringing her hands and lamenting; and was
pursued by Orungan, who strove to console her by saying that no one
should know of what had occurred, and declared that he could not live
without her. He held out to her the alluring prospect of living with two
husbands, one acknowledged, and the other in secret; but she rejected
all his proposals with loathing, and continued to run away. Orungan,
however, rapidly gained upon her, and was just stretching out his hand
to seize her, when she fell backward to the ground. Then her body
immediately began to swell in a fearful manner, two streams of water
gushed from her breasts, and her abdomen burst open. The streams from
Yemaja's breasts joined and formed a lagoon, and from her gaping body
came the following:--(l) Dada (god of vegetables), (2) Shango (god of
lightning), (3) Ogun (god of iron and war), (4) Olokun (god of the sea),
(5) Olosa (goddess of the lagoon), (6) Oya (goddess of the river Niger),
(7) Oshun (goddess of the river Oshun), (8) Oba (goddess of the river
Oba), (9) Orisha Oko (god of agriculture), (10) Oshosi (god of hunters),
(11) Oke (god of mountains), (12) Aje Shaluga (god of wealth), (13)
Shankpanna (god of small-pox), (14) Orun (the sun), and (15) Oshu (the
moon).\[1\] To commemorate this event, a town which was given the name
of Ife (distention, enlargement, or swelling up), was built on the spot
where Yemaja's body burst open, and became the holy city of the
Yoruba-speaking tribes. The place where her body fell used to be shown,
and probably still is; but the town was destroyed in 1882, in the war
between the Ifes on the one hand and the Ibadans and Modakekes on the
other.

The myth of Yemaja thus accounts for the origin of several of the gods,
by making them the grandchildren of Obatala and Odudua; but there are
other gods, who

\[1. The order, according to some, was Olokun, Oloss, Shango, Oye,
Oshun, Oba, Ogun, Dada, and the remainder as above.\]

do not belong to this family group, and whose genesis is not accounted
for in any way. Two, at least, of the principal gods are in this
category, and we therefore leave for the moment the minor deities who
sprung from Yemaja, and proceed with the chief gods, irrespective of
their origin.

## (5) SHANGO.

Shango, the god of thunder and lightning, is, next to Obatala, the most
powerful god of the Yorubas; he was the second to spring from the body
of Yemaja. His name appears to be derived from *shan*, "to strike
violently," and *go*, "to bewilder;" and to have reference to peals of
thunder, which are supposed to be produced by violent blows.\[1\] He has
the epithet of Jakuta, "Hurler of stones," or "Fighter with stones"
(*Ja*, to hurl from aloft, or *ja*, to fight, and *okuta*, stone); and
stone implements, which have long ceased to be used in West Africa, are
believed to be his thunderbolts.

To wield the thunderbolt is certainly one of the proper functions of the
sky-god, and the process by which he becomes deprived of it is not by
any means clear. It does not appear to be the result of advancing
culture, for the Zeus of the Greeks and the Jupiter of the Romans, who
had respectively the epithets *Kerauneios* and *Tonans*, retained it; as
do the Nyankupon of the Tshis and the Nyonmo of the Gas; while, like the
Ewes and Yorubas, the Aryan Hindus

\[1. For the same notion among the Tshis and Gas, *see* Note at p. 36.\]

made another god, namely, Indra, offspring of Dyaus, wield the
lightning.

The notion we found amongst the Ewes that a birdlike creature was the
animating entity of the thunderstorm has no parallel here, and Shango is
purely anthropomorphic. He dwells in the clouds in an immense brazen
palace, where he maintains a large retinue and keeps a great number of
horses; for, besides being the thunder-god, he is also the god of the
chase and of pillage.\[1\] From his palace, Shango hurls upon those who
have offended him red-hot chains of iron, which are forged for him by
his brother Ogun, god of the river Ogun, of iron and of war; but this,
it should be observed, is seemingly a modern notion, and the red-hot
chains furnished by Ogun have a suspicious resemblance to the
thundefbolts of Jupiter, forged by Vulcan. The Yoruba word for lightning
is *mana-mana* (*ma-ina*, a making of fire), and has no connection
either with iron (*irin*) or a chain (*ewon*); while the name Jakuta
shows that Shango is believed to hurl stones and not iron. The
iron-chain notion, therefore, appears to have been borrowed from some
foreign source, and, moreover, not to yet have made much progress. The
Oni-Shango, or Priests of Shango,\[2\] in their chants always speak of
Shango as hurling stones; and whenever a house is struck by lightning
they rush in a body to pillage it and to find the stone, which, as they
take

\[1. Hunting and thunder were likewise the functions of the Aztec god,
or goddess, Mixcoatl. (Nadaillac, "Prehistoric America," p. 298.)

2\. Oni, one who possesses or gets.\]

it with them secretly, they always succeed in doing. A chant of the
Oni-Shango very commonly heard is, "Oh Shango, thou art the master. Thou
takest in thy hand thy fiery stones, to punish the guilty and satisfy
thine anger. Everything that they strike is destroyed. Their fire eats
up the forest, the trees are broken down, and all living creatures are
slain;" and the lay-worshippers of Shango flock into the streets during
a thunderstorm crying, "Shango, Shango, Great King! Shango is the lord
and master. In the storm he hurls his fiery stones against his enemies,
and their track gleams in the midst of the darkness." "May Shango's
stone strike you," is a very common imprecation.

According to some natives, Oshumare, the Rainbow, is the servant of
Shango, his office being to take up water frorn the earth to the palace
in the clouds. He has a messenger named Ara, "Thunder-clap," whom he
sends out with a loud noise. A small bird called *papagori* is sacred to
Shango, and his worshippers profess to be able to understand its cry.

Shango married three of his sisters: Oya, the Niger; Oshun, the river of
the same name, which rises in Ijesa and flows into the water-way between
Lagos and the Lekki lagoon, near Emina; and Oba, also a river, which
rises in Ibadan and flows into the Kradu Water. All three accompany
their husband when he goes out, Oya taking with her her messenger
*Afefe* (the Wind, or Gale of Wind), and Oshun and Oba carrying his bow
and sword. Shaugo's slave *Biri* (Darkness) goes in attendance.

The image of Shango generally represents him as a man standing, and is
surrounded by images, smaller in size, of his three wives; who are also
represented as standing up, with the palms of their hands joined
together in front of the bosom. Oxen, sheep, and fowls are the offerings
ordinarily made to Shango, and, on important occasions, human beings.
His colours are red and white. He is consulted with sixteen cowries,
which are thrown on the ground, those which he with the back uppermost
being favourable, and those with the back downward the reverse. He
usually goes armed with a club called oshe, made of the wood of the ayan
tree, which is so hard that a proverb says, "The ayan tree resists the
axe." In consequence of his club being made of this wood, the tree is
sacred to him.

The priests and followers of Shango wear a wallet, emblematic of the
plundering propensities of their lord, and the chief priest is called
*Magba*, "The Receiver." As amongst the Ewe tribes, a house struck by
lightning is at once invaded and plundered by the disciples of the god,
and a fine imposed on the occupants, who, it is held, must have offended
him. Persons who are killed by lightning may not, properly speaking, be
buried; but if the relations of the deceased offer a sufficient payment,
the priests usually allow the corpse to be redeemed and buried.
Individuals rendered insensible by lightning are at once despatched by
the priests, the accident being regarded as proof positive that Shango
requires them. A common idea is that Shango is subject to frequent
outbursts of ungovernable temper, during which he thumps and bangs
overhead, and hurls down stones at those who have given him cause for
offence.

The foregoing are, with the exception of the myth of the fiery chains,
the old ideas respecting Shango; but on to them are now rapidly becoming
grafted some later myths, which make Shango, an earthly king who
afterwards became a god. This Shango was King of Oyo, capital of Yoruba,
and became so unbearable through rapacity, cruelty, and tyranny, that
the chiefs and people at last sent him a calabash of parrots' eggs, in
accordance with the custom that has already been mentioned; with a
message that he must be fatigued with the cares of government, and that
it was time for him to go to sleep. On receiving this intimation,
Shango, instead of allowing himself to be quietly strangled by his
wives, defied public opinion and endeavoured to assemble his adherents;
and, when this failed, sought safety in flight. He left the palace by
night, intending to endeavour to reach Tapa, beyond the Niger, which was
his mother's native place; and was accompanied only by one wife and one
slave, the rest of his household having deserted him. During the night
the wife repented of her hasty action, and also left him; so, when in
the morning Shango found himself lost in the midst of a pathless forest,
he had no one with him but his slave. They wandered about without food
for some days, seeking in vain for a path which would lead them out of
the forest, and at last Shango, left his slave, saying, "Wait here till
I return, and we will then try further." After waiting a long time, the
slave, as his master did not appear, went in search of him, and before
long found his corpse hanging by the neck from an *ayan*-tree.
Eventually the slave succeeded in extricating himself from the forest,
and finding himself in a part of the country he knew, made his way
towards Oyo, where he told the news.

When the chiefs and elders heard that Shango had hanged himself they
were much alarmed, fearing that they would be held responsible for his
death. They went, in company, with the priests, to the place where the
slave had left the body, but were unable to find it, for it was no
longer on the tree. They searched in every direction, and at last found
a deep pit in the earth, from which the end of an iron chain protruded.
They stooped over the pit and listened, and could hear Shango talking
down in the earth. They at once erected a small temple over the pit, and
leaving some priests there to propitiate the new god, and establish a
worship, returned to Oyo, where they proclaimed: "Shango is not dead. He
has become an *orisha*. He has descended into the earth, and lives among
the dead people, with whom we have heard him conversing." Some of the
townspeople, however, being ignorant and foolish, did not believe the
story, and when the criers cried, "Shango is not dead," they laughed and
shouted in return, "Shango is dead. Shango hanged himself." In
consequence of this wicked conduct, Shango came in person, with a
terrific thunderstorm, to punish them for their behaviour; and, in order
to show his power, he killed many of the scoffers with his fiery stones,
and set the town on fire. Then the priests and elders ran about -among
the burning houses, shouting, "Shango did not hang himself. Shango has
become an *orisha*. See what these bad men have brought upon you by
their unbelief. He is angry because they laughed at him, and he has
burned your houses with his fiery stones because you did not vindicate
his honour." Then the populace fell upon the scoffers and beat them to
death, so that Shango was appeased, and his anger turned away. The place
where Shango descended into the earth was called Kuso, and soon became a
town, for many people went to dwell there.

Perhaps this myth really does refer to some former King of Oyo, though
why such a king should usurp the functions of the thunder-god, is not at
all clear. It is inconsistent in part, for it makes the chiefs and
elders alarmed at the suicide of Shango, because they feared to be held
responsible for his death; yet they would have been equally responsible
had he complied with established custom, and committed suicide when he
received the parrots' eggs they sent him. The fact of the *ayan* being
sacred to the god Shango, no doubt caused that tree to be selected for
the legendary suicide of the king Shango; and the iron chain which
protruded from the hole in the ground was probably suggested by the
notion of red-hot chains of lightning. As we have said, this myth is
rapidly becoming blended with the older ones, and, in consequence of
these events having taken place at Kuso, Shango has the title of
*Oba-Kuso,* "King of Kuso."

Another myth makes Shango the son of Obatala, and married to the three
river goddesses Oya, Oshun, and Oba, but reigning as an earthly king at
Oyo. The story relates that one day Shango obtained from his father
Obatala a powerful charm, which, when eaten, would enable him to
vanquish all who opposed him. Shango ate most of the medicament, and
then gave the rest to Oya to keep for him; but she, as soon as his back
was turned, ate the rest herself. Next morning the chiefs and elders
assembled at the palace as usual, to judge the affairs of the people,
and each spoke in his turn; but when it came to Shango's turn to speak,
flames burst forth from his mouth, and all fled in terror. Oya, too,
when she began to scold ber women in the palace, similarly belched forth
flames, so that everybody ran away, and the palace was deserted. Shango
now saw that he was, as a god, inferior to none; so calling his three
wives to him, and taking in his hand a long iron-chain, he stamped on
the earth till it opened under him, and descended into it with his
wives. The earth closed again over them, after they had gone down, but
the end of the chain was left protruding from the ground.

This myth well exemplifies the confusion that has now been created in
men's minds between the thunder-god proper and the demi-god, the result
being a kind of compound Shango, possessing attributes of each. The
Shango of this story resembles in his marital relations the thunder-god,
but the descent into the earth with the iron chain, the end of which is
left above ground, is like the legendary descent of the deified king,
and is probably only another version of the same event. It is probable
that contact with Mohammedans has had something to do with the invention
of this myth. The genii, as we read of them in the "Arabian Nights," are
frequently described as breathing forth flames to destroy their
opponents; and a descent into the earth, which opens when stamped upon,
is a mode of exit often found in the same collection. These ideas do not
appear to be ones at all likely to have arisen spontaneously in the
negro mind, and we find nothing of the sort in the groups cognate to the
Yoruba. Moreover, a thunder-god must, from the very nature of his being,
live above the eaxth amongst the clouds; and to make him descend into
the bowels of the earth, is to place him in a situation where he could
not exercise the functions of his office. These remarks equally apply to
the following myth.

Since his descent into the earth with his three wives at Oyo, Shango has
often come back to the world. One day, when down in the earth, he
quarrelled with Oya, who had stolen some of his "medicines;" and she,
terrified at his violence, ran away, and took refuge with her brother
the Sea-God (Olokun). As soon as Shango discovered where she had gone,
he swore a great oath to beat her so that she would never forget it.
Next morning he came up from below with the Sun, and, following him in
his course all the day, arrived with him in the evening at the place
where the sea and sky join, and so descended with him into the
territories of his brother Olokun. The Sun had not knowingly shown
Shango the road across the sky to Olokun's palace, for Shango had been
careful to keep behind him all the time, nearly out of sight, and to
hide when the Sun looked round.

When Shango reached Olokun's palace and saw his wife Oya there, he made
a great noise and commotion. He rushed towards her to seize her, but
Olokun held him; and while the two were struggling together Oya escaped,
and ran to bide with her sister Olosa (the Lagoon). When Olokun saw that
Oya had gone he released Shango, who, now more furious than ever, ran
after his wife cursing and threatening her. In his rage he tore up the
trees by their roots, as he ran along, tossing them here and there. Oya,
looking out from her sister's house, saw him coming along the banks of
the lagoon, and, knowing that Olosa could not protect her, ran out
again, and fled along the shores towards the place where the Sun goes
down. As she was running, and Shango coming behind, roaring and yelling,
she saw a house near at hand, and, rushing into it, claimed protection
of a man whom she found there, whose name was Huisi. She begged Huisi to
defend her. Huisi asked what he, a man, could do against Shango; but Oya
gave him to eat of the "medicines" she had stolen from her husband, and
he, being thus made an *orisha*, promised to protect her. As Shango
approached, Huisi ran from his house down to the banks of the lagoon,
and tearing up a large tree by the roots, brandished it in the air, and
defied Shango. There being no other tree there, Shango seized Huisi's
canoe, shook it like a club, and the two weapons, striking together,
were shattered to pieces. Then the two oiishas wrestled together. Flames
burst from their mouths, and their feet tore great fissures in the earth
as they dragged each other to and fro. This struggle lasted a long time
without either being able to gain the mastery, and at last Shango,
filled with fury at being baffled, and feeling his strength failing,
stamped on the earth, which opened under him, and he descended into it,
dragging Huisi down with him. At the commencement of the combat, Oya had
fled to Lokoro;\[1\] she remained there, and the people built a temple
in her honour. Huisi, who had become a god by virtue of the "medicine"
he had eaten, also had a temple erected in his honour, on the spot where
he had fought with Shango.

In this myth Oya steals the medicine and gives it to Huisi; in the
former one she also stole it, but ate it herself. In each case it caused
flames to burst from the mouth.

## (6) IFA.

Ifa, god of divination, who is usually termed the God of Palm Nuts,
because sixteen palm-nuts are used in the process of divination, comes
after Shango in order of eminence. The name Ifa apparently means
something scraped or wiped off: he has the title of Gbangba
(explanation, demonstration, proof). Ifa's secondary attribute is to
cause fecundity: he presides at births, and women pray to him to be made
fruitful; while on this account offerings are always made to him before
marriage, it being considered a disgrace not to bear children. To the
native mind there is no conflict of function between Ifa and Obatala,
for the former causes the woman to become pregnant, while the latter
forms the child in the womb, which is supposed to be a different thing
altogether.

\[1. Near Porto Novo.\]

Ifa first appeared on the earth at Ife, but he did not come from the
body of Yemaja, and his parentage and origin are unexplained. He tried
to teach the inhabitants of Ife how to foretell future events, but they
would not listen to him, so he left the town and wandered about the
world teaching mankind. After roaming about for a long time, and
indulging in a variety of amours, Ifa fixed his residence at Ado, where
he planted on a rock a palm-nut, from which sixteen palm-trees grew up
at once.

Ifa has an attendant or companion named Odu (? One who emulates), and a
messenger called Opele (*ope*, puzzle, or *ope*, palm-tree). The
bandicoot (*okete*) is sacred to him, because it lives chiefly upon
palm-nuts. The first day of the Yoruba week is Ifa's holy day, and is
called *ajo awo*, "day of the secret." On this day sacrifices of
pigeons, fowls, and goats are made to him, and nobody can perform any
business before accomplishing this duty. On very important occasions a
human victim is immolated.

A priest of Ifa is termed a *babalawo* (*baba-ni-awo*), "Father who has
the secret," and the profession is very lucrative, as the natives never
undertake anything of.importance without consulting the god, and always
act in accordance with the answer returned. Hence a proverb says, "The
priest who is more shrewd than another adopts the worship of Ifa." As
Ifa knows all futurity, and reveals coming events to his faithful
followers, he is considered the god of wisdom, and the benefactor of
mankind. He also instructs man how to secure the goodwill of the other
gods, and conveys to him their wishes, His priests pluck all the hair
from their bodies and shave their heads, and always appear attired in
white cloths.

The general belief is that Ifa possessed the faculty of divination from
the beginning, but there is a myth which makes him acquire the art from
the phallic god Elegba. In the early days of the world, says the myth,
there were but few people on the earth, and the gods found themselves
stinted in the matter of sacrifices to such an extent that, not
obtaining enough to eat from the offerings made by their followers,\[1\]
they were obliged to have recourse to various pursuits in order to
obtain food. Ifa, who was in the same straits as the other gods, took to
fishing, with, however, but small success; and one day, when he had
failed to catch any fish at all, and was very hungry, he consulted the
crafty Elegba, who was also in want, as to what they could do to improve
their condition. Elegba replied that if he could only obtain the sixteen
palm-nuts from the two palms -that Orungan\[2\] the chief man, had in
his plantation, he would show Ifa how to forecast the future; and that
he could then use his knowledge in the service of mankind, and so
receive an abundance of offerings. He stipulated that in return for
instructing Ifa in the art of divination, he should always be allowed
the first choice of all offerings made. Ifa agreed to the bargain, and
going to Orungan, asked for the sixteen palm-nuts, explaining

\[1. Compare this with Lucian, "Zeus in Tragedy," where Zeus complains
that the sea captain Mnesitheus had, only sacrificed one cock to
entertain sixteen gods.

2\. The son and ravisher of Yemaja is also so named\]

to him what he proposed to do with them. *Orungan*, very eager to know
what the future had in store for him, at once promised the nuts, and ran
with his wife Orisha-bi, "Orisha-born," to get them. The trees, however,
were too lofty for them to be able to reach the palm-nuts, and the stems
too smooth to be climbed; so they retired to a little distance and drove
some monkeys that were in the vicinity into the palms. No sooner were
the monkeys in the trees than they seized the nuts, and, after eating
the red pulp that covered them, threw the bard kernels down on the
ground, where Orungan and his wife picked them up. Having collected the
whole sixteen, Orisha-bi tied them up in a piece of cloth, and put the
bundle under her waist-cloth, on her back, as if she were carryino, a
child. Then they carried the palm-nuts to Ifa. Elegba kept his promise
and taught Ifa the art of divination, and Ifa in his turn taught
Oruno-an, who thus became the first *babalawo*, It is in memory of these
events that when a man wishes to consult Ifa, he takes his wife with
him, if he be married, and his mother if he be single, who carries the
sixteen palm-nuts, tied up in a bundle, on her back, like a child; and
that the *babalawo*, before consulting the god, always says, "*Orugan,
ajuba oh. Orisha-bi ajuba oh*." ("Orungan, I hold you in grateful
remembrance. Orisha-bi, I hold you in grateful remembrance."

For the consultation of Ifa a whitened board is employed, exactly
similar to those used by children in Moslem schools in lieu of slates,
about two feet long and eight or nine inches broad, on which are marked
sixteen figures. These figures are called "mothers." The sixteen
palm-nuts are held loosely in the right hand, and thrown through the
half-closed fingers into the left hand. If one nut remain in the right
hand, two marks are made, thus \|  \|; and if two remain. one mark,
\|.\[1\] In this way are formed the sixteen "mothers," one of which is
declared by the *babalawo* to represent the inquirer; and from the order
in which the others are produced he deduces certain results. The
interpretation appears to be in accordance with established rule, but
what that rule is is only known to the initiated. The following are the
"mothers":

\[1. This process is repeated eight times, and the marks are made in
succession in two columns of four each.\]

<img src="gr000002.gif" width="568" height="570" /><img src="gr000003.gif" width="507" height="849" />

No. 6 is No. 5 inverted; 8 is 7 inverted; 10, 9 inverted; 13, 12
inverted; and 14, 11 inverted. Meji means "two," or "a pair," and the
following appears to be the meaning of the names:--(1) The close pair
(*buru*, closely). (2) The removed pair (*Yekuro*, to remove). (3) The
street pair (*Ode*, a street). (4) The closed-up pair (*Di*, to close
up, make dense). (5) The squatting-dog pair (*losho*, to squat like a
dog). (6) The cross-bow pair (*oron*, cross-bow). (7) The striped pair
(*abila*, striped). (8) ?Vulture-pair (*akala*, vulture). (9) The
pointing pair (*sha*, to point). (10) The pair ending downward (*Ku*, to
end, *da*, to upset on the ground). (11) ?The top-heavy pair (*Dura*, to
make an effort to recover from a stumble; *opin*, end, point). (12) The
tattoo-mark pair (*ture*, name of certain tattoo-marks). (13) The edge
pair (*leti*, on the edge of). (14) The folded-up pair (*Ka*, to fold or
coil). (15) The opened pair (*shi*, to open). (16) The alternate pair
(*fo*, to pass over, pass by, jump over, skip).

From these sixteen "mothers" a great many combinations can be made by
taking a column from two different "mothers," and figures thus formed
are called "children." Thus (13) and (2) and (11) and (10) make
respectively-

<img src="gr000004.gif" width="574" height="161" />

As the figures are read from right to left, the system is probably
derived from the Mobammedans. James Hamilton, indeed, describes\[1\] a
very similar mode of divination which he saw in the oasis of Siwah,
where it was called *Derb el ful*, or *Derb el raml*, according to
whether beans or sand were used. He says: "Seven beans are held in the
palm of the left hand, which is struck with a smart blow with the right
half-closed fist, so that some of the beans jump into the right hand -
if an odd number, one is marked; if even, two. The beans are replaced in
the left hand, which is again struck with the right, and the result
marked below the first. This being repeated four times gives the first
figure, and the operation is performed until there are obtained four
figures, which are placed side by side in a square; these are then read
vertically and perpendicularly (*sic*), and also from corner to corner,
thus giving in all ten figures. As each may contain four odd or four
even numbers, they are capable of sixteen permutations, each of which
has a separate signification, and a proper house, or part of the square
in which it should appear."

The initiation fee paid to a priest for teaching the art of divination
is, it is said, very heavy, and moreover does not cover the whole of the
expense; for the Oracle is, like Oracles generally, ambiguous and
obscure, and the neophyte finds that he constantly has to refer to the
priests for explanations of its meaning, and on each such occasion he is
required to pay a consultation fee. When a man is initiated the priest
usually informs him that he must

\[1. "Wanderings in North Africa," pp. 264-65.\]

henceforward abstain from some particular article of food, which varies
with the individual.

Ifa figures in connection with a legendary deluge, the story of which,
now adapted to the Yoruba theology, was probably derived from the
Mohammedans. Some time after settling at Ado, Ifa became tired of living
in the world, and accordingly went to dwell in the firmament, with
Obatala. After his departure, mankind, deprived of his assistance, was
unable to properly interpret the desires of the gods, most of whom
became in consequence annoyed. Olokun was the most angry, and in a fit
of rage he destroyed nearly all the inhabitants of the world in a great
flood, only a few being saved by Obatala, who drew them up into the sky
by means of a long iron chain. After this ebullition of anger, Olokun
retired once more to his own domains, but the world was nothing but mud,
and quite unfit to live in, till Ifa came down from the sky, and, in
conjunction with Odudua, once more made it habitable.

## (7) ELEGBA.

Elegba, or Elegbara (Elegba-Bara), often called Esbu, is the same
phallic divinity who was described in the volume on the Ewe-speaking
Peoples. The name Elegba seems to mean, "He who seizes" (*Eni-gba*), and
Bara is perhaps *Oba-ra*, "Lord of the rubbing" (*Ra*, to rub one thing
against another). Eshu appears to be from *shu*, to emit, throw out,
evacuate, The propensity to make mischief, which we noted as a minor
characteristic of the Ewe Elegba, is much more prominent in the Yoruba
god, who thus more nearly approaches a personification of evil. He is
supposed always to carry a short knobbed club, which, originally
intended to be a rude representation of the *phallus*, has, partly
through want of skill on the part of the modellers of the images, and
partly through the growing belief in Elegba's malevolence, come to be
regarded as a weapon of offence.\[1\] Because he bears this club he has
the title of *Agongo ogo*. *Ogo* is the name of the knobbed club, and is
most probably a euphemism for the phallus; it is derived from *go*, to
hide in a bending or stooping posture. The derivation of *agongo* is
less easy to determine, but it seems to be from *gongo*, tip, extremity.

The image of Elegba, who is always represented naked, seated with his
bands on his knees, and with an immensely, disproportionate *phallus*,
is found in front of almost every house, protected by a small hut roofed
with palm-leaves. It is with reference to this that the proverb says:
"As Eshw has a malicious disposition, his house is made for him in the
street" (instead of indoors). The rude wooden representation of the
*phallus* is planted in the earth by the side of the hut, and is seen in
almost every public place; while at certain festivals it is paraded in
great pomp, and pointed towards the young girls, who dance round it.

Elegba, in consequence of the bargain he made with

\[1. In the case of Priapus we find a similar connection between the
phallus and a cudgel. See Catullus, xx., "The Garden God."\]

Ifa, receives a share of every sacrifice offered to the other gods. His
own proper sacrifices are, as among the Ewe tribes, cocks, dogs and
he-goats, chosen on account of their amorous propensities; but on very
important occasions a human victim is offered. In such a case, after the
head has been struck off, the corpse is disembowelled, and the entrails
placed in front of the image in a large calabash or wooden dish; after
which the body is suspended from a tree, or, if no tree be at hand, from
a scaffolding of poles. Turkeybuzzards are sacred to Elegba and are
considered his messengers, no doubt because they devour the entrails and
bodies of the sacrifices.

There is a noted temple Lo Elegba in a grove of palms near Wuru, a
village situated about ten miles to the east of Badagry. The market of
Wuru is under his protection, and each vendor throws a few cowries on
the ground as a thank-offering. Once a year these cowries are swept up
by the priests, and with the sum thus collected a slave is purchased to
be sacrificed to the god. A slave is also sacrificed annually, towards
the end of July, to Elegba in the town of Ondo, the capital of the state
of the same name. Elegba's principal residence is said to be on a
mountain named Igbeti, supposed to be situated near the Niger. Here he
has a vast palace of brass, and a large number of attendants.

Circumcision among the Yorubas, as among the Ewes, is connected with the
worship of Elegba, and appears to be a sacrifice of a portion of the
organ which the god inspires, to ensure the well-being of the remainder.
To circumcise is *dako (da-oko) da*, to be acceptable as a sacrifice,
and *oko*, the foreskin. Circumcision is *ileyika*, or *ikola*, the
former of which means "the circular cutting" (*ike*, the act of cutting,
and *ikeya*, a circuit), and the latter, "the cutting that saves"
(*ike*, the act of cutting, and *ola*, that which saves). Except among
the Mohammedans there is no special time for performing the rite of
circumcision, it being fixed for each individual by Ifa, after
consultation, but usually it is done early in life. No woman would have
connection with an uncircumcised man. A similar operation is performed
on girls, who are excised, by women operators, shortly before puberty,
that is, between the ages of ten and twelve years.

As is the case in the western half of the Slave Coast, erotic dreams are
attributed to Elegba, who, either as a female or male, consorts sexually
with men and women during their sleep, and so fulfils in his own person
the functions of the *incubi* and *succubi* of mediaeval Europe.

## (8) OGUN.

Ogun is the god of iron and of war, and, like Shango, is also a patron
of hunters. Iron is sacred to him, and when swearing by Ogun it is usual
to touch an iron implement with the Ilorgue. The name Ogun seems to mean
"One who pierces" (*gun*, to pierce, or thrust with something pointed).
He is specially worshipped by blacksmiths, and by those who make use of
iron weapons or tools. Any piece of iron can be used as a symbol of
Ogun, and the ground is sacred to him because iron ore is found in it.
He is one of those who sprang from the body of Yemaja.

The usual sacrifice offered to Ogun is a dog, together with fowls, palm
oil, and minor articles of food. A proverb says, "An old dog must be
sacrificed to Ogun," meaning that Ogun claims the best; and a dog's
head, emblematic of this sacrifice, is always to be seen fastened up in
some conspicuous part of the workshops of blacksmiths. On very important
occasions, however, a human victim is offered, and, as in the case of a
sacrifice to Elegba, the entrails are exposed before the image and the
body suspended from a tree. The victim is slain by having his head
struck off upon the stool of Ogun, over which the blood is made to gush.
The reason of this is that the blood is believed to contain the vital
principle, and therefore to be an offering, particularly acceptable to
the gods.

This belief appears to be common to most barbarons peoples; the
Israelites held it,\[1\] and blood was considered to be so peculiarly
the portion of their national god, that the blood of all animals slain,
whether for sacrifice or food, had to be presented as an offering, no
one being allowed to eat it under pain of death.\[2\]

When war has been decided upon, a slave is purchased at the expense of
the town, or tribe, and offered as a sacrifice to Ogun, to ensure
success. The day before that on which he is to be immolated, the victim
is led with great ceremony through the principal thoroughfares, and
paraded in the market, where he is allowed to say or do anything he
pleases (short of escaping his impending fate), may gratify his

\[1. Genesis ix. 4; Leviticus xvii. 11, 14.

2\. Leviticus xvii. 3,4; iii. 16,17; vii. 28-27.\]

desire with any woman who takes his fancy, and give his tongue every
licence. The reason of his being thus honoured for the twenty-four hours
before being sacrificed, is that it is believed he will be born again
and become a king; and, after the head has been struck off, the corpse
is treated with the greatest respect by all. In order for this sacrifice
to be effective, it is necessary that the war leaders should take the
field before the body begins to become offensive. The Ibadans, who
appear to be rather averse to human sacrifice, always used to perform
this duty by deputy, paying the priests of Ife to sacrifice for them a
slave in that town. When the war of 1877 began they omitted to do this,
thinking that the affair would not be serious; and, attributing their
subsequent want of success to the omission, they afterwards sacrificed a
slave to Ogun in their camp at Kiji in 1885, they having been prevented
from doing it earlier by their leader, a Mohammedan, who died in that
year.

The priests of Ogun usually take out the hearts of human victims, which
are dried, reduced to powder, then mixed with rum, and sold to persons
who wish to be endowed with great courage, and who drink the mixture.
The reason of this is that the heart is believed to be the seat of
courage and to inherently possess that quality; and that when the heart
is devoured or swallowed the quality with which it is inspired is also
taken into the system.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III: Minor Gods.](yor04)
