[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](yor09)  [Next](yor11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IX.

### CEREMONIES AT BIRTH, MARRIAGE, AND DEATH.

## I. AT BIRTH.

THE ceremonies at birth resemble in the main those observed by the
Ewe-speaking peoples, and described in the last volume, but there are a
few changes which may be attributed to increased priestly influence.

As soon as the pangs of labour seize a woman a priestess takes charge of
her, and has the care of her and the child; while, soon after the child
is born, a *babalawo* appears on the scene to ascertain what ancestral
soul has been re-born in the infant. As soon as this important point is
decided, the parents are informed that the child must conform in all
respects to the manner of life of the ancestor who now animates it; and
if, as often happens, they profess ignorance, the *babalawo* supplies
the necessary knowledge.

Seven days after birth, if the child be a girl, nine days, if it be a
boy, the *babalawo* comes again and offers a sacrifice of a cock and a
hen to Ifa and the Olori, or indwelling spirit of the child's head;
after which, in order to prevent Elegba from interfering with the mother
and child, the entrails of the two sacrifices are sprinkled with
palm-wine, taken outside the house, and placed before his image.

Then follows a ceremony which appears to be one of purification, for
here, as among the Tshi and Ewe tribes, the mother and child are
considered unclean, as are women during the *menses*. The water which is
always in the earthen vessels placed before the images of the gods, is
brought to the house and thrown up on the thatched roof, and as it drips
down from the eaves the mother and child pass three times through the
falling drops. The *babalawo* next makes a water of purification with
which he bathes the child's head, he repeats three times the name by
which the infant is to be known, and then holds him in his arms so that
his feet touch the ground. After these ceremonies have been duly
performed the fare is extinguished and the embers carried away; the
house is then carefully swept out, live coals are brought, and a fresh
fire lighted. We thus appear to have a combination of a purification by
water and a purification by fire. After the new fire has been kindled,
another sacrifice of fowls is made to Ifa, and the proceedings are at an
end.

## II. AT MARRIAGE.

When a man desires to marry a girl, his parents visit her parents and
make proposals of marriage. If they are accepted, the suitor sends a
present of native cloths and kola-nuts, and, after consulting a
*babalawo*, a day is appointed for the wedding.

The marriage-feast is held at the house of the parents of the
bridegroom, and the bride is conducted there by a procession of women,
who sing an epithalamium. The bride is put to bed by a female of the
bridegroom's family, who remains concealed in the apartment till the
bridegroom has joined the bride; after which she secures the "tokens of
virginity," and, coming out of the room, displays them to the assembled
company. She then carries them to the house of the parents of the bride,
who never attend a daughter's wedding-feast, and next morning they are
hung on the fence for the edification of the public. In this abstention
of the bride's parents from the feasting and merrymaking, we perhaps
find a lingering survival from marriage by capture. The producer of the
"tokens" is selected from the family of the bridegroom to ensure that
there is no deception, because the husband's family has no interest in
falsifying the facts, while the wife's family has; but virginity in a
bride is only of paramount importance when the girl has been betrothed
in childhood. The marriage-feast is continued on the next day.

It is not uncommon for newly-married couples to visit some celebrated
shrine and offer sacrifice together, a practice which, together with the
fixing of the wedding-day by a *babalawo*, shows an increasing
disposition on the part of the priests to control or interfere with
matters which are purely social and quite beyond the domain of religion.

## III. AT DEATH.

The ceremonies observed by the Yoruba tribes at death chiefly differ
from those of the Ewe tribes in the addition of various religious
observances.

When the breath has departed from the body there is the usual outburst
of exaggerated grief, with loud cries, lamentations, and frenzied
gestures, and the eldest son of the deceased, or the brother, if there
be no son, at once sends for a *babalawo*, to ascertain if the deceased
died from natural causes, or through the machinations of witches. The
*babalawo*, after sacrificing. a fowl, inquires at the oracle of Ifa, by
means of the board and sixteen palm-nuts; and if it affirms that the
death was caused by witchcraft, further inquiry is made to know if any
other member of the family is threatened with a like fate, and also if
the soul of the deceased is in danger of further molestation from the
evil spirits who have been influenced by the malpractices of the
sorcerers. Should the oracle declare that the soul of the deceased is in
danger, a sheep or goat is sacrificed, and the carcass, sprinkled with
palm-oil, is carried outside the town, and deposited at a spot where two
or more paths meet, which has the effect of causing the evil spirits to
disperse in as many directions as there are paths. The *babalawo* then
prepares the usual water of purification with shea-butter and edible
snails, and dipping into the vessel a palm-branch, sacred to Ifa,
sprinkles the corpse, the room, and the spectators with the fluid. At
the same time he invokes the soul of the deceased to leave the house as
soon as the funeral rites have been performed, and proceed peacefully to
its destination, wishing it a safe journey. He says, "May the road be
open to you. May nothing evil meet you on the way. May you find the road
good when you go in peace."

After these preliminaries, the corpse is washedwith rum, or a decoction
of aromatic herbs, and attired in its best clothes. The thumbs and the
great toes are then tied tocether. If the deceased be a man the head is
shaved, and the hair, carefully wrapped up in a piece of -white cotton,
is buried in the earth behind the house. If a woman, the exposed parts
of the body are stained with a decoction of the bark of a tree, which
gives a reddish hue to the skin. Finally, the corpse is wrapped up in
many native cloths, and placed on a mat at the door of the room.

In the meantime a death-feast has been prepared, and now commences,
while outside the house a continual beating of drunis is kept up,
together with frequent discharges of musketry, fired in honour of the
deceased. The feast, at which intoxicants are used lavishly, soon
becomes a veritable orgie, in which, however, the chief mourners, that
is, the widows and daughters of the deceased, take no part; for as soon
as they have performed the last offices for the dead, and have placed
the corpse at the door, they are shut up in an adjacent apartment, where
they are compelled by custom to remain during, the three days that a
corpse invariably lies in state. While thus immured they are forbidden
to wash, and usage requires them to refuse all food, at least for the
first twenty-four hours, after which they usually allow themselves to be
persuaded to take some nourishment.

The conventional mourning is the business of the women of the household,
who, while the men are feasting utter loud lamentations in the room in
which they are confined; and, in consequence of this, the epithet
*isokun*, "a mourner," is often applied to a female child; a male, on
the other hand, being sometimes called *iwale*, "a digger," i.e., of a
grave. A father might thus say that he had begotten two mourners and a
digger, meanin, two daughters and a son. Female friends usually come to
join in the lamentations, the conventional character of which is
referred to in the proverb "A mourner mourns and goes on her way
(without afterthought), but one who ponders over sad memories mourns
without ceasing." There are also professional mourners, chosen for their
poetical turn of expression, whose services are engaged in well-to-do
households, and who often contrive to work up the real mourners to a
condition of frenzied grief. A professional mourner sings in a sad tone,
which rises and falls in -a modulated wail; "He is gone, the lion of a
man. He was not a sapling, or a bush, to be torn out of the earth, but a
tree-a tree to brave the hurricane; a, spreading tree, under which the
hearts of his family could rest in peace," &c. &c. while the widows and
daughters lament their lonely and unprotected state, somewhat as
follows:--

"I go to the market; it is crowded. There are many people there, but he
is not among them. I wait, but he comes not. Ah me! I am alone.

"Never more shall I see him. It is over; he is gone. I shall see him no
more. Ah me! I am alone. "I go into the street. The people pass, but he
is not there. Night falls, but he comes not. Ah me! I am alone.

"Alas! I am alone. Alone in the day-alone in the darkness of the night.
Alas! my father (or husband) is dead. Who will take care of me?"

On the afternoon of the third day of the wake the body is placed on some
boards, or on a door taken off its hinges, covered with a rich native
cloth, and borne at a trot through the streets by the men. Male friends
and relations accompany the bier, singing the praises of the deceased,
and throwing handfuls of cowries among the spectators. This procession
returns to the house towards evening, and the corpse is then interred in
a grave that has been dug in the earthen floor, and which is so
contrived that the head of the deceased may project beyond the line of
the outer wall of the house. Most of the cloths in which the corpse is
wrapped are taken off, and the body, covered with grass mats so that no
earth may soil it, is carefully lowered into the grave. A coffin is
sometimes used, but not often. Food, rum, and cowries are placed in the
grave, the body is sprinkled with the blood of a he-goat, sacrificed to
propitiate Elegba, a few more cowries are thrown in, and then the grave
is filled up amid the wishes for a safe and pleasant journey to which we
have already referred.\[1\]

When the grave is full the earth is smoothed down,

\[1. Chapter vii.\]

and sometimes, when many articles of value have been entombed, the
surface is moistened with water to make the earth settle down, and
slaves and dependents are made to sleep on it night after night, for the
double purpose of protecting it and of obliterating all trace of its
exact position. After the interment, the feast, which had been suspended
since the afternoon, recominences; and drinking and shouting. amid the
firing of muskets, the jangle of native gongs, and the dull thud of the
drums, continues all night.

Next day, about noon, the male relations walk out in a body, and wander
about the town, as if looking for the deceased, and chanting "We look
for our father, and cannot find him"; to which the bystanders reply, "He
has gone to his house." Returning from this, the mourners carry on the
feast till the evening of the next day, when the bones of the victims
that have been sacrificed, and those of the fowls and sheep that have
been eaten by the guests, are collected and placed over the grave. All
the articles which the deceased had in daily use, such as his pipe, the
mat on which he slept, the plate or vessel froin which he ate, his
calabashes, and other things of sinall value, are carried out into the
bush and burned.

Up to this point the soul of the deceased is supposed to have been
lingering near his old home, and this destruction of his property is
intended to signify to the soul that he must now depart, since there is
no longer anything belonging to him. In former tinics the destruction of
property was carried much further than at present. Usually the apartment
in which the deceased is buried is closed, and never used again, and
sometimes the roof is removed. Rich families even abandon the house
altogether, and it is said to have been usual in days bygone to burn it.
The deceased is called three times by name, and adjured to depart, and
no longer haunt the dwellings of the living. After this invitation to be
gone, the fowl, called *adire-iranna*,\[1\] is sacrificed, which,
besides securing a right-of-way for the soul, is supposed also to guide
it. The feathers. of the fowl are scattered around the house, and the
bird itself carried out to a bush-road, where it is cooked and eaten.
The road on which the adire-iranna is eaten must be outside the town and
lead away from it, for though the natives believe that Deadland is under
the earth, they think that it is necessary to eat the fowl on a road
leading into the bush, in order to place it in a proper position for
commencing its office of guide to the soul.

The relations may not wash themselves or comb their hair during the
funeral ceremonies, in consequence of which the rites themselves are
sometimes styled *Ofo*, "Unwashed." On the last day they shave their
heads, and then pay visits of thanks to those who assisted at the
funeral. The time of mourning after the conclusion of these ceremonies
varies with the rank and influence of the deceased, and with the
locality. Three months is usually considered long enough, but a
commemoration-feast is often held a year after the death. During the
period of mourning the hair must be left unkempt as it grows, and women

\[1. See p. 128.\]

must cover the head with a cloth of a dark blue colour. A widow remains
shut up for forty days, and may not wash her cloths during that time.

It is considered the greatest disgrace to a family not to be able to
hold the proper ceremonies at the death of one of their number, a notion
which is comprehensible when we remember how much the welfare of the
soul of the deceased is supposed to depend upon their performance. Hence
families not unfrequently reduce themselves almost to beggary in order
to carry them out, or pawn or sell their children to raise the money
necessary. Sometimes, too, they conceal the death and bide the body
until they have secured the requisite means, and such concealments have
been known to last for three or four months. The body is treated with
resinous herbs so that it becomes desiccated, and while it remains in
the house, the soul is believed to abide in its old home, where food and
drink are provided for it, till such time as the proper ceremonies can
be held, and it be legitimately ushered on its new career.

A common imprecation is *Oku igbe*, "Bush death," meaning "May you die
in the bush, alone and uncared for, and so receive no funeral-rites." A
proverb contrasts a man's duties to his relations with those towards the
members of any secret society to which he may belong, such as the
*Ogboni*, and insists upon the importance of the former, because of the
obligation upon his relations to bury him.

It runs, "A man must honestly perform all the duties incumbent on
relationship, even though he may belong to a secret society. When he has
attended to the society he must attend to his relations, because it is
they who must bury him when he dies."

This desire for a very ceremonial funeral, which owes its origin to the
native beliefs concerning the soul, lasts long after the negro has been
transplanted across the Atlantic, and has lost all notion of its motive.
In most of the West India Islands, but particularly in the Bahamas,
where the bulk of the negro population is of Yoruba descent, a grand
funeral is considered the greatest desideratum. To attain this end,
burial-societies are formed, the members of which pay subscriptions all
their lives in order to be buried with pomp. Every member of such a
society is bound to attend the funeral of another member, and the result
is a procession of men in uniforms, more or less grotesque, with banners
and various insignia. Often a band heads the *cortége*, and many a man
occupies his last moments in giving directions as to the manner in which
the funeral is to take place."

\[1. See the following, which appeared in the *Nassau Guardian*, New
Providence, Bahamas, 10th January, 1891:--

NOTICE.

All to whom it may concern.

Dear Friends,

Mr. A- B- had been a member of the Grant's Town Friendly Society for
many years, and was financial up to July, 1891. During his illness he
requested that the Band of the said Society play the Dead March in Saul
wben be died. The message came to the President from Mr. J- C. S-,
ex-President of the Society. The Band, in conjunction with the members,
was summoned to meet at the Society's Hall, in uniform, at 3 o'clock
sharp. The members were present waiting on the Band, but only the
Bandmaster and three other members came, and they had to leave the Hall,
proceeding to the house of the deceased without the Band.

I am sorry to say that if the Band cannot attend on members (deceased)
of the Society to which they belong, it will be best for the Society to
do away with the Band. If members are paying, their monies towards Band
Funds, they should have the use of the Band when required.

(Signed) Z. C-.

Pres. G. T. F. Society.\]

When a man dies abroad his family make the greatest exertions to obtain
something belonging to him, over which the usual rites may be held. Hair
or nailparings are most sought for this purpose, but, if these cannot be
obtained, a portion of the clothing worn by the deceased suffices. Such
remains are called *eta*, a word which seems to mean something brought
from one place to another. Through a confusion between objective and
subjective connection, these relics, which bring the deceased to mind,
are suppposed to bring the soul to the place where the funeral
ceremonies are held.

{Chapter X, Systems of Government, omitted}

{Chapter XI, Laws and Customs, omitted}

{Chapter XII, Language, omitted}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII: Proverbs.](yor11)
