<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act005)  [Next](act007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001.md)

[Acts 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 6:1</span></span>

In those days ... - The first part of this chapter contains an account
of the appointment of "deacons." It may be asked, perhaps, why the
apostles did not appoint these officers at the first organization of the
church? To this, question we may reply, that it was better to defer the
appointment until an occasion should occur when it would appear to be
manifestly necessary and proper. When the church was small, its alms
could be distributed by the apostles themselves without difficulty But
when it was greatly increased when its charities were multiplied; and
when the distribution might give rise to contentions, it was necessary
that this matter should be entrusted to the hands of "laymen," and that
the "ministry" should be freed from all embarrassment, and all
suspicions of dishonesty and unfairness in regard to pecuniary matters.
It has never been found to be wise that the temporal affairs of the
church should be entrusted in any considerable degree to the clergy, and
they should be freed from such sources of difficulty and embarrassment.

Was multiplied - By the accession of the three thousand on the day of
Pentecost, and of those who were subsequently added, [Act
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#004.md); [Act
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#014.md).

A murmuring - A complaint - as if there had been partiality in the
distribution.

Of the Grecians - There has been much diversity of opinion in regard to
these persons, whether they were "Jews" who had lived among the
Gentiles, and who spoke the Greek language, or whether they were
proselytes from the Gentiles. The former is probably the correct
opinion. The word used here is not what is commonly employed to
designate the inhabitants of Greece, but it properly denotes those who
"imitate" the customs and habits of the Greeks, who use the Greek
language, etc. In the time when the gospel was first preached, there
were two classes of Jews - those who remained in Palestine, who used the
Hebrew language, and who were appropriately called "Hebrews"; and those
who were scattered among the Gentiles, who spoke the Greek language, and
who used in their synagogues the Greek translation of the Old Testament,
called the Septuagint. These were called "Hellenists," or, as it is in
our translation, "Grecians." See the notes on [Joh
7:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#035.md). These were doubtless the persons
mentioned here - not those who were proselyted from Gentiles, but those
of Jewish origin who were not natives of Judea, who had come up to
Jerusalem to attend the great festivals. See [Act
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#005.md), [Act
2:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009.md). Dissensions would be very
likely to arise between these two classes of persons. The Jews of
Palestine would pride themselves much on the fact that they dwelt in the
land of the patriarchs and the land of promise; that they used the
language which their fathers spoke, and in which the oracles of God were
given; and that they were constantly near the temple, and regularly
engaged in its solemnities. On the other hand, the Jews from other parts
of the world would be suspicious, jealous, and envious of their
brethren, and would be likely to charge them with partiality, or of
taking advantage in their contact with them. These occasions of strife
would not be destroyed by their conversion to Christianity, and one of
them is furnished on this occasion.

Because their widows ... - The property which had been contributed, or
thrown into common stock, was understood to be designed for the equal
benefit of "all" the poor, and particularly, it would seem, for the poor
widows. The distribution before this seems to have been made by the
apostles themselves - or possibly, as Mosheim conjectures (Commentary de
rebus Christianorum ante Constantinum, pp. 139, 118), the apostles
committed the distribution of these funds to the Hebrews, and hence, the
Grecians are represented as complaining against them, and not against
the apostles.

In the daily ministration - In the daily distribution which was made for
their needs. Compare [Act 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#035.md). The
property was contributed doubtless with an understanding that it should
be "equally" distributed to all classes of Christians that had need. It
is clear from the Epistles that "widows" were objects of special
attention in the primitive church, and that the first Christians
regarded it as a matter of indispensable obligation to provide for their
needs, [Ti1 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#003.md), [Ti1
5:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#009.md), [Ti1
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#016.md); [Jam
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#027.md).

[Acts 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 6:2</span></span>

Then the twelve - That is, the apostles. Matthias had been added to them
after the apostasy of Judas, which had completed the original number.

The multitude of the disciples - It is not necessary to suppose that all
the disciples were convened, which amounted to many thousands, but that
the business was laid before a large number; or perhaps "the multitude"
here means those merely who were more particularly interested in the
matter, and who had been engaged in the complaint.

It is not reason - The original words used here properly denote "it is
not pleasing or agreeable"; but the meaning evidently is, it is not
"suitable" or "proper." It would be a departure from the design of their
appointment, which was to preach the gospel, and not to attend to the
pecuniary affairs of the church.

Leave the word of God - That we should neglect or abandon the preaching
of the gospel so much as would be necessary if we attended personally to
the distribution of the alms of the church. The "gospel" is here called
the "Word of God," because it is his message; it is what he has spoken,
or which he has commanded to be proclaimed to people.

Serve tables - This expression properly denotes "to take care of, or
provide for the table, or for the daily needs of a family." It is an
expression that properly applies to a steward or a servant. The word
"tables" is, however, sometimes used with reference to "money," as being
the place where money was kept for the purpose of "exchange, etc.," [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012.md); [Mat
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#027.md). Here the expression means,
therefore, to attend to the pecuniary transactions of the church, and to
make the proper distribution for the needs of the poor.

[Acts 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 6:3</span></span>

Look ye out - Select, or choose. As this was a matter pertaining to
their own pecuniary affairs, it was proper that "they" should be
permitted to choose such men as they could confide in. By this means the
apostles would be free from all suspicions. It could not be pretended
that "they" were partial, nor could it ever be charged on them that they
wished to embezzle the funds by managing them themselves, or by
entrusting them to men of their own selection. It follows from this,
also, that the right of selecting "deacons" resides "in" the church, and
does not pertain to the ministry. It is evidently proper that men who
are to be entrusted with the alms of the church should be selected by
the church itself.

Among you - That is, from among the Grecians and Hebrews, that there may
be justice done, and no further cause of complaint.

Seven men - Seven was a sacred number among the Hebrews, but there does
not appear to have been any "mystery" in choosing this number. It was a
convenient number, sufficiently large to secure the faithful performance
of the duty, and not so large as to cause confusion and embarrassment.
It does not follow, however, that the same number is now to be chosen as
deacons in a church, for the precise number is not commanded.

Of honest report - Of fair reputation; regarded as men of integrity.
Greek: "testified of," or "bear witness to"; that is, whose characters
were well known and fair.

Full of the Holy Ghost - This evidently does not mean endowed with
miraculous gifts, or the power of speaking foreign languages, for such
gifts were not necessary to the discharge of their office, but it means
people who were eminently under the influence of the Holy Spirit, or who
were of distinguished piety. This was all that was necessary in the
case, and this is all that the words fairly imply.

And wisdom - Prudence, or skill, to make a wise and equable
distribution. The qualifications of deacons are still further stated and
illustrated in [Ti1 3:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008.md). In this
place it is seen that they must be people of eminent piety and fair
character, and that they must possess "prudence," or wisdom, to manage
the affairs connected with their office. These qualifications are
indispensable to a faithful discharge of the duty entrusted to the
officers of the church.

Whom we may appoint - Whom we may "constitute," or set over this
business. The way in which this was done was by prayer and the
imposition of hands, [Act 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#006.md). Though
they were "selected" by the church, yet the power of ordaining them, or
setting them apart, was retained by the apostles. Thus, the rights of
"both" were preserved - the right of the church to designate those who
should serve them in the office of deacon, and the right of the apostles
to organize and establish the church with its appropriate officers; on
the one hand, a due regard to the liberty and privileges of the
Christian community, and, on the other, the security of proper respect
for the office as being of apostolic appointment and authority.

Over this business - That is, over the distribution of the alms of the
church - not to preach, or to govern the church, but solely to take care
of the sacred funds of charity, and distribute them to supply the needs
of the poor. The office is distinguished from that of "preaching" the
gospel. To that the apostles were to attend. The deacons were expressly
set apart to a different work, and to that work they should be confined.
In this account of their original appointment, there is not the
slightest intimation that they were to "preach," but the contrary is
supposed in the whole transaction. Nor is there here the slightest
intimation that they were regarded as an order of "clergy," or as in any
way connected with the clerical office. In the ancient synagogues of the
Jews there were three men to whom was entrusted the care of the poor.
They were called by the Hebrews "parnasin" or "pastors" (Lightfoot, Hor.
Heb. et Talin.; [Mat 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023).md). From these
officers the apostles took the idea probably of appointing deacons in
the Christian church, and doubtless intended that their duties should be
the same.

[Acts 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 6:4</span></span>

But we will give ourselves continually - The original expression used
here denotes "intense and persevering" application to a thing, or
unwearied effort in it. See the notes on [Act
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#014.md). It means that the apostles
designed to make this their constant and main object, undistracted by
the cares of life, and even by attention to the temporal needs of the
church.

To prayer - Whether this means "private" or "public" prayer cannot be
certainly determined. The passage, however, would rather incline us to
suppose that the "latter" was meant, as it is immediately connected with
preaching. If so, then the phrase denotes that they would give
themselves to the duties of their office, one part of which was public
prayer, and another preaching. Still it is to be believed that the
apostles felt the need of secret prayer, and practiced it, as
preparatory to their public preaching.

And to the ministry of the word - To preaching the gospel, or
communicating the message of eternal life to the world. The word
"ministry" διακονία diakonia properly denotes the employment of a
"servant," and is given to the preachers of the gospel because they are
employed in this as the "servants" of God and of the church. We have
here a view of what the apostles thought to be the proper work of the
ministry. They were set apart to this work. It was their main, their
only employment. To this their lives were to be devoted, and both by
their example and their writings they have shown that it was on this
principle they acted. Compare [Ti1
4:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#015.md); [Ti2
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#002.md). It follows also that if their
time and talents were to be wholly devoted to this work, it was
reasonable that they should receive competent support from the churches,
and this reasonable claim is often urged. See the [Co1
9:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#007.md) notes; [Gal
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#006.md) note.

[Acts 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 6:5</span></span>

And the saying - "The word" - the counsel, or command,

And they chose Stephen ... - A man who soon showed Acts 7 that he was in
every way qualified for his office, and also suited to defend the cause
of the Lord Jesus. This man had the distinguished honor of being the
first Christian martyr.

And Nicolas - From this man some of the fathers (Iren., lib. 1:27;
Epiphanius, 1; Haeres., 5) says that the sect of the "Nicolaitanes,"
mentioned with so much disapprobation [Rev
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#006.md), [Rev
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#015.md), took their rise. But the
evidence of this is not clear.

A proselyte - A "proselyte" is one who is converted from one religion to
another. See the notes on [Mat 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#015.md).
The word does not mean here that he was a convert to "Christianity" -
which was true - but that he had been converted at Antioch from paganism
to the Jewish religion. As this is the only proselyte mentioned among
the seven deacons, it is evident that the others were native-born Jews,
though a part of them might have been born out of Palestine, and have
been of the denomination of "Grecians," or "Hellenists."

Of Antioch - This city, often mentioned in the New Testament ([Act
11:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019.md), [Act
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026.md); [Act
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022.md), [Act
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#035.md); [Gal
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011), etc..md), was situated in Syria, on
the river Orontes, and was formerly called "Riblath." It is not
mentioned in the Old Testament, but is frequently mentioned in the
Apocrypha. It was built by Seleucus Nicanor, b.c. 301, and was named
"Antioch," in honor of his father Antiochus. It became the seat of
empire of the Syrian kings of the Macedonian race, and afterward of the
Roman governors of the eastern provinces. In this place the disciples of
Christ were first called "Christians," [Act
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026.md). Josephus says it was the third
city in size of the Roman provinces, being inferior only to Seleucia and
Alexandria. It was long, indeed, the most powerful city of the East. The
city was almost square, had many gates, was adorned with fine fountains,
and possessed great fertility of soil and commercial opulence. It was
subject to earthquakes, and was often almost destroyed by them. In 588
a.d. above 60,000 persons perished in it in this manner. In 970 a.d. an
army of 100,000 Saracens besieged it, and took it. In 1268 a.d. it was
taken possession of by the Sultan of Egypt, who demolished it, and
placed it under the dominion of the Turks. It is now called "Antakia,"
and until the year 1822 it occupied a remote corner of the ancient
enclosure of its walls, its splendid buildings being reduced to hovels,
and its population living in Turkish debasement. It contains now about
10,000 inhabitants (Robinson's Calmet). This city should be
distinguished from Antioch in Pisidia, also mentioned in the New
Testament, [Act 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#014.md).

[Acts 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 6:6</span></span>

And when they had prayed - Invoking in this manner the blessing of God
to attend them in the discharge of the duties of their office.

They laid their hands ... - Among the Jews it was customary to lay hands
on the head of a person who was set apart to any particular office, [Num
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#018.md); Compare [Act
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#019.md). This was done, not to impart any
power or ability, but to "designate" that they received their authority
or commission from those who thus laid their hands on them, as the act
of laying hands on the sick by the Saviour was an act signifying that
the power of healing came from him, [Mat
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#018.md); compare [Mar
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018.md). In such cases the laying on of
the hands conveyed of itself no healing power, but was a sign or token
that the power came from the Lord Jesus. Ordination has been uniformly
performed in this way. See [Ti1 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#022.md).
Though the seven deacons had been chosen by the church to this work, yet
they derived their immediate commission and authority from the apostles.

[Acts 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 6:7</span></span>

And the word of God increased - That is, the gospel was more and more
successful, or became more mighty and extensive in its influence. An
instance of this success is immediately added.

And a great company of the priests - A great "multitude." This is
recorded justly as a remarkable instance of the power of the gospel. How
great this company was is not mentioned, but the number of the priests
in Jerusalem was very great; and their conversion was a striking proof
of the power of truth. It is probable that they had been opposed to the
gospel with quite as much hostility as any other class of the Jews. And
it is now mentioned, as worthy of special record, that the gospel was
sufficiently mighty to humble even the proud, and haughty, and selfish,
and envious priests to the foot of the cross. One design of the gospel
is to evince the power of truth in subduing all classes of people; and
hence, in the New Testament we have the record of its having actually
subdued every class to the obedience of faith. Some mss., however, here
instead of "priests" read Jews. This reading is followed in the Syriac
version.

Were obedient to the faith - The word "faith" here is evidently put for
the "Christian religion." Faith is one of the main requirements of the
gospel [Mar 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016.md), and by a figure of
speech is put for the gospel itself. To become "obedient to the faith,"
therefore, is to obey the requirements of the gospel, particularly what
requires us to "believe." Compare [Rom
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#016.md). By the accession of the
"priests" also no small part of the reproach would be taken away from
the gospel, that it made converts only among the lower classes of the
people. Compare [Joh 7:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#048.md).

[Acts 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 6:8</span></span>

And Stephen - The remarkable death of this first Christian martyr, which
soon occurred, gave occasion to the sacred writer to give a detailed
account of his character, and of the causes which led to his death.
Hitherto the opposition of the Jews had been confined to threats and
imprisonment; but it was now to burst forth with furious rage and
madness, that could be satisfied only with blood. This was the first in
a series of persecutions against Christians which filled the church with
blood, and which closed the lives of thousands, perhaps a million, in
the great work of establishing the gospel on the earth.

Full of faith - Full of "confidence" in God, or trusting entirely to his
promises. See the notes on [Mar 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016.md).

And power - The power which was evinced in working miracles.

Wonders - This is one of the words commonly used in the New Testament to
denote miracles.

[Acts 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 6:9</span></span>

Then there arose - That is, they stood up against him, or they opposed
him.

Of the synagogue - See the notes on [Mat
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023.md). The Jews were scattered in all
parts of the world. In every place they would have synagogues. But it is
also probable that there would be enough foreign Jews residing at
Jerusalem from each of those places to maintain the worship of the
synagogue; and at the great feasts, those synagogues adapted to Jewish
people of different nations would be attended by those who came up to
attend the great feasts. It is certain that there was a large number of
synagogues in Jerusalem. The common estimate is, that there were four
hundred and eighty in the city (Lightfoot; Vitringa).

Of the Libertines - There has been very great difference of opinion
about the meaning of this word. The chief opinions may be reduced to
three:

1\. The word is Latin, and means properly a "freedman," a man who had
been a slave and was set at liberty. Many have supposed that these
persons were manumitted slaves of Roman origin, but who had become
proselyted to the Jewish religion, and who had a synagogue in Jerusalem.
This opinion is not very probable; though it is certain, from Tacitus
(Ann., lib. 2:c. 85), that there were many persons of this description
at Rome. He says that 4,000 Jewish proselytes of Roman slaves made free
were sent at one time to Sardinia.

2\. A second opinion is, that these persons were Jews by birth, and had
been taken captives by the Romans, and then set at liberty, and were
thus called "freedmen" or "liberties." That there were many Jews of this
description there can be no doubt. Pompey the Great, when he subjugated
Judea, sent large numbers of the Jews to Rome (Philo, In Legat. a.d.
Caium). These Jews were set at liberty at Rome, and assigned a place
beyond the Tiber for a residence. See Introduction to the Epistle to the
Romans. These persons are by Philo called "libertines," or "freedmen"
(Kuinoel, in loco). Many Jews were also conveyed as captives by Ptolemy
I. to Egypt, and obtained a residence in that country and the vicinity.

3\. Another opinion is, that they took their name from some "place"
which they occupied. This opinion is more probable from the fact that
all the "other" persons mentioned here are named from the countries
which they occupied. Suidas says that this is the name of a place. And
in one of the fathers this passage occurs: "Victor, Bishop of the
Catholic Church at Libertina, says, unity is there, etc." from this
passage it is plain that there was a place called "Libertina." That
place was in Africa, not far from ancient Carthage. See Dr. Pearce's
Commentary on this place.

Cyrenians - Jews who dwelt at "Cyrene" in Africa. See the notes on [Mat
27:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#032.md).

Alexandrians - Inhabitants of Alexandria in Egypt. That city was founded
by Alexander the Great, 332 b.c., and was populated by colonies of
Greeks and Jews. It was much celebrated, and contained not less than
300,000 free citizens, and as many slaves. The city was the residence of
many Jews. Josephus says that Alexander himself assigned to them a
particular quarter of the city, and allowed them equal privileges with
the Greeks (Antiq., [Rom 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#007.md), [Rom
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002.md); Against Apion, [Rom
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004).md). Philo affirms that of five parts
of the city, the Jews inhabited two. According to his statement, there
dwelt in his time at Alexandria and the other Egyptian cities not less
than "ten hundred thousand Jews." Amron, the general of Omar, when he
took the city, said that it contained 40,000 tributary Jews. At this
place the famous version of the Old Testament called the "Septuagint,"
or the Alexandrian version, was made. See Robinson's Calmet.

Cilicia - This was a province of Asia Minor, on the seacoast, at the
north of Cyprus. The capital of this province was Tarsus, the native
place of Paul, [Act 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#011.md). As Paul was
of this place, and belonged doubtless to this synagogue, it is probable
that he was one who was engaged in this dispute with Stephen. Compare
[Act 7:58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058.md).

Of Asia - See the notes on [Act 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009.md).

Disputing with Stephen - Doubtless on the question whether Jesus was the
Messiah. This word does not denote "angry disputing," but is commonly
used to denote "fair and impartial inquiry"; and it is probable that the
discussion began in this way, and when they were overcome by "argument,"
they resorted, as disputants are apt to do, to angry criminations and
violence.

[Acts 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 6:10</span></span>

To resist - That is, they were not able to "answer" his arguments.

The wisdom - This properly refers to his knowledge of the Scriptures;
his skill in what "the Jews" esteemed to be wisdom - acquaintance with
their sacred writings, opinions, etc.

And the spirit - This has been commonly understood of the Holy Spirit,
by which he was aided; but it rather means the "energy, power," or
"ardor" of Stephen. He "evinced" a spirit of zeal and sincerity which
they could not withstand; which served, more than mere argument could
have done, to convince them that he was right. The evidence of
sincerity, honesty, and zeal in a public speaker will often go further
to convince the great mass of mankind, than the most able argument if
delivered in a cold and indifferent manner.

[Acts 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 6:11</span></span>

Then they suborned men - To suborn in law means to procure a person to
take such a false oath as constitutes perjury (Webster). It has
substantially this sense here. It means that they induced them to
declare what was false, or to bring a false accusation against him. This
was done, not by declaring a palpable and open falsehood, but by
"perverting" his doctrines, and by stating their own "inferences" as
what he had actually maintained - the common way in which people oppose
doctrines from which they differ. The Syriac reads this place, "Then
they sent certain men, and instructed them that they should say, etc."
This was repeating an artifice which they had before practiced so
successfully in relation to the Lord Jesus Christ. See [Mat
26:60-61](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#060.md).

We have heard ... - When they alleged that they had heard this is not
said. Probably, however, they referred to some of his discourses with
the people when he performed miracles and wonders among them, [Act
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#008.md).

Blasphemous words - See the notes on [Mat
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#003.md). Moses was regarded with profound
reverence. His laws they held to be unchangeable. Any intimation,
therefore, that there was a greater Lawgiver than he, or that his
institutions were mere shadows and types, and were no longer binding,
would be regarded as blasphemy, even though it should be spoken with the
highest professed respect for Moses. That the Mosaic institutions were
to be changed, and give place to another and a better dispensation, all
the Christian teachers would affirm; but this was not said with a design
to blaspheme or revile Moses. "In the view of the Jews," to say that was
to speak blasphemy; and hence, instead of reporting what he actually
"did" say, they accused him of "saying" what "they" regarded as
blasphemy. If reports are made of what people say, their very "words"
should be reported; and we should not report our inferences or
impressions as what they said.

And against God - God was justly regarded by the Jews as the giver of
theft law and the author of their institutions. But the Jews, either
willfully or involuntarily, not knowing that they were a shadow of good
things to come, and were therefore to pass away, regarded all
intimations of such a change as blasphemy against God. God had a right
to change or abolish those ceremonial observances, and it was "not"
blasphemy in Stephen to declare it.

[Acts 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 6:12</span></span>

And they stirred up the people - They "excited" the people, or alarmed
their fears, as had been done before when they sought to put the Lord
Jesus to death, [Mat 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#020.md).

The elders - The members of the Sanhedrin, or Great Council.

Scribes - See the notes on [Mat 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#004.md).

To the council - To the Sanhedrin, or the Great Council of the nation,
which claimed jurisdiction in the matters of religion. See the notes on
[Mat 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#004.md).

[Acts 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 6:13</span></span>

And set up false witnesses - It has been made a question why these
persons are called "false" witnesses, since it is supposed by many that
they reported merely the "words" of Stephen. It may be replied that if
they did report merely his "words"; if Stephen had actually said what
they affirmed, yet they perverted his meaning. They accused him of
"blasphemy"; that is, of calumnious and reproachful words against Moses
and against God That Stephen had spoken in such a manner, or had
designed to "reproach" Moses, there is no evidence. What was said in the
mildest manner, and in the way of cool argument, might easily be
perverted so as in "their view" to amount to blasphemy. But there is no
evidence whatever that Stephen had ever used these words on any
occasion, and it is altogether improbable that he ever did, for the
following reasons:

\(1\) Jesus himself never affirmed that he would destroy that place. He
uniformly taught that it would be done by the "Gentiles," Matt. 24. It
is altogether improbable, therefore, that Stephen should declare any
such thing.

\(2\) it is equally improbable that he taught that Jesus would abolish
the special customs and rites of the Jews. It was long, and after much
discussion, before the apostles themselves were convinced that they were
to be changed, and when they were changed it was done gradually. See
[Act 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#014.md), etc.; [Act
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#002.md), etc.; [Act
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020.md); [Act
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#020.md), etc. The probability therefore
is, that the whole testimony was "false," and was artfully invented to
produce the utmost exasperation among the people, and yet was at the
same time so plausible as to be easily believed. For on this point the
Jews were particularly sensitive; and it is clear that they had some
expectations that the Messiah would produce some such changes. Compare
[Mat 26:61](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#061.md) with [Dan
9:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026.md). The same charge was afterward
brought against Paul, which he promptly denied. See [Act
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#008.md).

This holy place - The temple.

The law - The Law of Moses.

[Acts 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 6:14</span></span>

Shall change - Shall abolish them, or shall introduce others in their
place.

The customs - The ceremonial rites and observances of sacrifices,
festivals, etc., appointed by Moses.

[Acts 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 6:15</span></span>

Looking stedfastly on him - Fixing the eyes intently on him. They were
probably attracted by the unusual appearance of the man, his meekness,
his calm and collected fearlessness, and the proofs of conscious
innocence and sincerity.

The face of an angel - This expression is one evidently denoting that he
manifested evidence of sincerity, gravity, fearlessness, confidence in
God. It is used in the Old Testament to denote special wisdom, [Sa2
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#017.md); [Sa2
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#027.md). In [Gen
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#010.md), it is used to denote special
majesty and glory, as if it were the face of God. When Moses came down
from Mount Sinai, it is said that the skin of his face shone so that the
children of Israel were afraid to come near him, [Exo
34:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#029.md); [Co2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007.md), [Co2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013.md). Compare [Rev
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016.md); [Mat
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002.md). The expression is used to denote
the impression produced on the countenance by communion with God; the
calm serenity and composure which follow a confident committing of all
into his hands. It is not meant that there was anything "miraculous" in
the case of Stephen, but it is language that denotes calmness, dignity,
and confidence in God, all of which were so marked on his countenance
that it impressed them with clear proofs of his innocence and piety. The
language is very common in the Jewish writings. It is not unusual for
deep feeling, sincerity, and confidence in God, to impress themselves on
the countenance. Any deep emotion will do this; and it is to be expected
with religious feeling, the most tender and solemn of all feeling, will
diffuse seriousness, serenity, calmness, and peace not affected
sanctimoniousness, over the countenance.

In this chapter we have another specimen of the manner in which the
church of the Lord Jesus was established. It was from the beginning
amidst scenes of persecution, encountering opposition adapted to try the
nature and power of religion. If Christianity was an imposture, it had
enemies acute and malignant enough to detect the imposition. The
learned, the cunning, and the mighty rose up in opposition, and by all
the arts of sophistry, all the force of authority, and all the
fearfulness of power, attempted to destroy it in the commencement. Yet
it lived; it gained new accessions of strength from every new form of
opposition; it evinced its genuineness more and more by showing that it
was superior to the arts and malice of earth and of hell.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 7](act007.md)

</div>
