<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act025)  [Next](act027.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#001.md)

[Acts 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 26:1</span></span>

Then Paul stretched forth the hand - See the notes on [Act
21:40](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#040.md). This was the usual posture of
orators or public speakers. The ancient statues are commonly made in
this way, with the right hand extended. The dress of the ancients
favored this. The long and loose robe, or outer garment, was fastened
usually with a hook or clasp on the right shoulder, and thus left the
arm at full liberty.

And answered for himself - It cannot be supposed that Paul expected that
his defense would be attended with a release from confinement, for he
had himself appealed to the Roman emperor, [Act
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#011.md). His design in speaking before
Agrippa was, doubtless:

\(1\) To vindicate his character, and obtain Agrippa's attestation to
his innocence, that thus he might allay the anger of the Jews;

\(2\) To obtain a correct representation of the case to the emperor, as
Festus had desired this in order that Agrippa might enable him to make a
fair statement of the case [Act
25:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#026.md); and,

\(3\) To defend his own conversion, and the truth of Christianity, and
to preach the gospel in the hearing of Agrippa and his attendants, with
a hope that their minds might be impressed by the truth, and that they
might be converted to God.

[Acts 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 26:2</span></span>

I think myself happy - I esteem it a favor and a privilege to be
permitted to make my defense before one acquainted with Jewish customs
and opinions. His defense, on former occasions, had been before Roman
magistrates, who had little acquaintance with the opinions and customs
of the Jews; who were not disposed to listen to the discussion of the
points of difference between him and them, and who looked upon all their
controversies with contempt. See [Act
24:25](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#025.md). They were, therefore, little
qualified to decide a question which was closely connected with the
Jewish customs and doctrines; and Paul now rejoiced to know that he was
before one who, from his acquaintance with the Jewish customs and
belief, would be able to appreciate his arguments. Paul was not now on
his trial, but he was to defend himself, or state his cause, so that
Agrippa might be able to aid Festus in transmitting a true account of
the case to the Roman emperor. It was his interest and duty, therefore,
to defend himself as well as possible, and to put him in possession of
all the facts in the case. His defense is, consequently, made up chiefly
of a most eloquent statement of the facts just as they had occurred.

I shall answer - I shall be permitted to make a statement, or to defend
myself.

Touching ... - Respecting.

Whereof I am accused of the Jews - By the Jews. The matters of the
accusation were his being a mover of sedition, a ringleader of the
Christians, and a profaner of the temple, [Act
24:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#005.md).

[Acts 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 26:3</span></span>

To be expert - To be skilled or well acquainted.

In all customs - Rites, institutions, laws, etc. Everything pertaining
to the Mosaic ritual, etc.

And questions - Subjects of debate, and of various opinions. The
inquiries which had existed between the Pharisees, Sadducees, scribes,
etc. Paul could say this of Agrippa without falsehood or flattery.
Agrippa was a Jew; he had passed much of his time in the kingdom over
which he presided; and though he had spent the early part of his life
chiefly at Rome, yet it was natural that he should make himself
acquainted with the religion of his fathers. Paul did not know how to
flatter people, but he was not unwilling to state the truth, and to
commend people as far as truth would permit.

Wherefore - On this account; because you are acquainted with those
customs. The Romans, who regarded those customs as superstitious, and
those questions as matters to be treated with contempt, could not listen
to their discussion with patience. Agrippa, who knew their real
importance, would be disposed to lend to all inquiries respecting them a
patient attention.

[Acts 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 26:4</span></span>

My manner of life - My opinions, principles, and conduct.

From my youth - Paul was born in Tarsus; but at an early period he had
been sent to Jerusalem for the purpose of education in the school of
Gamaliel, [Act 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#003.md).

Which was at the first - Which was from the beginning; the early part of
which; the time when the opinions and habits are formed.

Know all the Jews - It is not at all improbable that Paul was
distinguished in the school of Gamaliel for zeal in the Jewish religion.
The fact that he was early entrusted with a commission against the
Christians Acts 9 shows that he was known. Compare [Phi
3:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#004.md). He might appeal to them,
therefore, in regard to the early part of his life, and, doubtless, to
the very men who had been his violent accusers.

[Acts 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 26:5</span></span>

Which knew me - Who were well acquainted with me.

From the beginning - ἄνωθεν anōthen. Formerly; or from the very
commencement of my career. Who were perfectly apprised of my whole
course.

If they would testify - If they would bear witness to what they know.

That after the most straitest - The most rigid; the most strict, not
only in regard to the written Law of God, but to the traditions of the
elders. Paul himself elsewhere testifies [Phi
3:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#004.md) that he had enjoyed all the
advantages of birth and training in the Jewish religion, and that he had
early distinguished himself by his observance of its rites and customs.

Sect - Division or party.

I lived a Pharisee - I lived in accordance with the rules and doctrines
of the Pharisees. See the notes on [Mat
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007.md). The reasons why Paul here refers
to his early life are:

\(1\) As he had lived during the early period of his life without crime;
as his principles had been settled by the instruction of the most able
of their teachers, it was to be presumed that his subsequent life had
been of a similar character.

\(2\) as he, at that period of his life, evinced the utmost zeal for the
laws and customs of his country, it was to be presumed that he would not
be found opposing or reviling them at any subsequent period. From the
strictness and conscientiousness of his past life, he supposed that
Agrippa might argue favorably respecting his subsequent conduct. A
virtuous and religious course in early life is usually a sure pledge of
virtue and integrity in subsequent years.

[Acts 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 26:6</span></span>

And now I stand - I stand before the tribunal. I am arraigned.

And am judged - Am tried with reference to being judged. I am undergoing
a trial on the point in which all my nation are agreed.

For the hope - On account of the hope; or because, in common with my
countrymen, I had entertained this hope, and now believe in its
fulfillment.

Of the promise ... - See the references in the margin. It is not quite
certain whether Paul refers here to the promise of the Messiah or to the
hope of the resurrection of the dead. When he stood before the Jewish
Sanhedrin [Act 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006.md), he said that he
was called in question on account of holding the doctrine of the
resurrection of the dead. But it may be observed that in his view the
two things were closely united. He hoped that the Messiah would come,
and he hoped therefore for the resurrection of the dead. He believed
that he had come, and had risen, and therefore he believed that the dead
would rise. He argued the one from the other. And as he believed that
Jesus was the Messiah, and that he had risen from the dead, and that he
had thus furnished a demonstration that the dead would rise, it was
evident that the subject of controversy between him and the Jews
involved everything that was vital to their opinions and their hopes.
See [Act 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#008.md).

Made of God - Made by God. See the marginal references. The promises had
been made to the fathers of a Messiah to come, and that embraced the
promise of a future state, or of the resurrection of the dead. It will
help us to understand the stress which Paul and the other apostles laid
on the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead to remember that it
involved the whole doctrine of the separate existence of the soul and of
a future state. The Sadducees denied all this; and when the Pharisees,
the Saviour, and the apostles opposed them, they did it by showing that
there would be a future state of rewards and punishments. See the
argument of the Saviour with the Sadducees explained in the notes on
[Mat 22:23-32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#023.md).

Unto our fathers - Our ancestors, the patriarchs, etc.

[Acts 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 26:7</span></span>

Unto which promise - To the fulfillment of which promise they hope to
come; that is, they hope and believe that the promise will be fulfilled,
and that they will partake of its benefits.

Our twelve tribes - This was the name by which the Jews were designated.
The ancient Jewish nation had hoped to come to that promise; it had been
the hope and expectation of the nation. Long before the coming of the
Messiah, ten of the twelve tribes had been carried captive to Assyria,
and had not returned, leaving but the two tribes of Benjamin and Judah.
But the name, "the twelve tribes," as used to designate the Jewish
people, would be still retained. Compare [Jam
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001.md). Paul here says that the hope
referred to had been that of the Jewish nation. Except the comparatively
small portion of the nation, the Sadducees, the great mass of the nation
had held to the doctrine of a future state. This Agrippa would know
well.

Instantly - Constantly; with intensity ἐν en ἐκτένεια ekteneia; with
zeal. This was true, for, amidst all the sins of the nation, they
observed with punctuality and zeal the outward forms of the worship of
God.

Serving God - In the ordinances and observances of the temple. As a
nation they did not serve him in their hearts, but they kept up the
outward forms of religious worship.

Day and night - With unwearied zeal; with constancy and ardor, [Luk
2:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#037.md). The ordinary Jewish services and
sacrifices were in the morning and evening, and might be said to be
performed day and night. Some of their services, as the Paschal supper,
were prolonged usually until late at night. The main idea is, that they
kept up the worship of God with constant and untiring zeal and devotion.

For which hope's sake - On account of my cherishing this hope in common
with the great mass of my countrymen. See [Act
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006.md). If Paul could convince Agrippa
that the main point of his offence was what had been the common belief
of his countrymen, it would show to his satisfaction that he was
innocent. And on this ground he put his defense - that he held only what
the mass of the nation had believed, and that he maintained this in the
only consistent and defensible manner that God had, in fact, raised up
the Messiah, and had thus given assurance that the dead would rise.

[Acts 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 26:8</span></span>

Why should it be thought ... - The force of this question will be better
seen by an exclamation point after why τί ti. "What! is it to be thought
a thing incredible?" etc. It intimates surprise that it should be
thought incredible, or implies that no reason could be given why such a
doctrine should be unworthy of belief.

A thing incredible - A doctrine which cannot be credited or believed.
Why should it be regarded as absurd?

With you - This is in the plural number, and it is evident that Paul
here addressed, not Agrippa alone, but those who sat with him. There is
no evidence that Agrippa doubled that the dead could be raised, but
Festus, and those who were with him, probably did, and Paul, in the
ardor of his speech, turned and addressed the entire assembly. It is
very evident that we have only an outline of this argument, and there is
every reason to suppose that Paul would dwell on each part of the
subject at greater length than is here recorded.

That God should raise the dead - Why should it be regarded as absurd
that God - who has all power, who is the creator of all, who is the
author of the human frame should again restore man to life and continue
his future existence? The resurrection is no more incredible than the
original creation of the body, and it is attended with no greater
difficulties. And as the perfections of God will be illustrated by his
raising up the dead; as the future state is necessary to the purposes of
justice in vindicating the just and punishing the unjust, and as God is
a righteous moral governor, it should not be regarded as an absurdity
that he will raise up those who have died, and bring them to judgment.

[Acts 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 26:9</span></span>

I verily thought - I indeed μὲν men supposed. Paul here commences the
account of his conversion, and states the evidence on which he judged
that he was called of God to do what he had done. He begins by saying
that it was not because he was originally disposed to be a Christian,
but that he was violently and conscientiously opposed to Jesus of
Nazareth, and had been converted when in the full career of opposition
to him and his cause.

With myself - I thought to myself; or, I myself thought. He had before
stated the hopes and expectations of his countrymen, [Act
26:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#006.md). He now speaks of his own views
and purposes. "For myself, I thought," etc.

That I ought to do - That I was bound, or that it was a duty incumbent
on me - δεῖν dein. "I thought that I owed it to my country, to my
religion, and to my God, to oppose in every manner the claims of Jesus
of Nazareth to be the Messiah." We here see that Paul was conscientious,
and that a man may be conscientious even when engaged in enormous
wickedness. It is no evidence that one is right because he is
conscientious. No small part of the crimes against human laws, and
almost all the cruel persecutions against Christians, have been carried
on under the plea of conscience. Paul here refers to his
conscientiousness in persecution to show that it was no slight matter
which could have changed his course. As he was governed in persecution
by conscience, it could have been only by a force of demonstration, and
by the urgency of conscience equally clear and strong, that he could
ever have been induced to abandon this course and to become a friend of
that Saviour whom he had thus persecuted.

Many things - As much as possible. He was not satisfied with a few
things a few words, or purposes, or arguments; but he felt bound to do
as much as possible to put down the new religion.

Contrary to the name ... - In opposition to Jesus himself, or to his
claims to be the Messiah. The "name" is often used to denote the
"person" himself, [Act 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006.md).

[Acts 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 26:10</span></span>

Which thing I also did ... - [Act 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#003.md).

And many of the saints ... - Many Christians, [Act
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#003.md).

And when they were put to death - In the history of those transactions,
there is no account of any Christian being put to death except Stephen,
Acts 7. But there is no improbability in supposing that the same thing
which had happened to Stephen had occurred in other cases. Stephen was
the first martyr, and as he was a prominent man his case is particularly
recorded.

I gave my voice - Paul was not a member of the Sanhedrin, and this does
not mean that he voted, but simply that he joined in the persecution; he
approved it; he assented to the putting of the saints to death. Compare
[Act 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#020.md). The Syriac renders it, "I
joined with those who condemned them." It is evident, also, that Paul
instigated them in this persecution, and urged them on to deeds of blood
and cruelty.

[Acts 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 26:11</span></span>

And I punished them oft ... - See [Act
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#019.md).

And compelled them to blaspheme - To blaspheme the name of Jesus by
denying that he was the Messiah, and by admitting that he was an
impostor. This was the object which they had in view in the persecution.
It was not to make them blaspheme or reproach God, but to deny that
Jesus was the Messiah, and to reproach him as a deceiver and an
impostor. It is not necessarily implied in the expression, "and
compelled them to blaspheme," that he succeeded in doing it, but that he
endeavored to make them apostatize from the Christian religion and deny
the Lord Jesus. It is certainly not impossible that a few might thus
have been induced by the authority of the Sanhedrin and by the threats
of Paul to do it, but it is certain that the great mass of Christians
adhered firmly to their belief that Jesus was the Messiah.

And being exceedingly mad - Nothing could more forcibly express his
violence against the Christians. He raged like a madman; he was so
ignorant that he laid aside all appearance of reason; with the fury and
violence of a maniac, he endeavored to exterminate them from the earth.
None but a madman will persecute people on account of their religious
opinions; and all persecutions have been conducted like this, with the
violence, the fury, and the ungovernable temper of maniacs.

Unto strange cities - Unto foreign cities; cities out of Judea. The
principal instance of this was his going to Damascus; but there is no
evidence that he did not intend also to visit other cities out of Judea
and bring the Christians there, of he found any, to Jerusalem.

[Acts 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 26:12</span></span>

See this passage explained in the notes on [Act
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#005.md), etc.

[Acts 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 26:16</span></span>

But rise ... - The particulars mentioned in this verse and the two
following are not recorded in the account of Paul's conversion in Acts
9; but it is not improbable that many circumstances may have occurred
which are not recorded. Paul dwells on them here at length in order
particularly to show his authority for doing what he had done in
preaching to the Gentiles.

To make thee a minister - A minister of the gospel; a preacher of the
truth.

And a witness - See the notes on [Act
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#015.md).

Which thou hast seen - On the road to Damascus; that is, of the Lord
Jesus, and of the fact that he was risen from the dead.

And of those things ... - Of those further manifestations of my person,
purposes, and will, which I will yet make to you. It is evident from
this that the Lord Jesus promised to manifest himself to Paul in his
ministry, and to make to him still further displays of his will and
glory. Compare [Act 22:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#017.md). This was
done by his rescuing him from destruction and danger; by inspiration; by
the growing and expanding view which Paul was permitted to take of the
character and perfections of the Lord Jesus. In this we see that it is
the duty of ministers to bear witness not only to the truth of religion
in general, or of that which they can demonstrate by argument, but more
especially of that which they experience in their own hearts, and which
they understand by having themselves been the subjects of it. No man is
qualified to enter the ministry who has not a personal saving view of
the glory and perfections of the Lord Jesus, and who does not go to his
work as a witness of those things which he has felt; and no man enters
the ministry with these feelings who has not, as Paul had, a promise
that he shall see still brighter displays of the perfections of the
Saviour, and be permitted to advance in the knowledge of him and of his
work. The highest personal consolation in this work is the promise of
being admitted to ever-growing and expanding views of the glory of the
Lord Jesus, and of experiencing his presence, guidance, and protection.

[Acts 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 26:17</span></span>

Delivering thee from the people - From the Jewish people. This implied
that he would be persecuted by them, and that the Lord Jesus would
interpose to rescue him.

And from the Gentiles - This also implied that he would be persecuted
and opposed by them - a prospect which was verified by the whole course
of his ministry. Yet in all he experienced, according to the promise,
the support and the protection of the Lord Jesus. This was expressed in
a summary manner in [Luk 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#016.md).

Unto whom now I send thee - [Act
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#021.md). As the opposition of the Jews
arose mainly from the fact that he had gone among the Gentiles, it was
important to bring this part of his commission into full view before
Agrippa, and to show that the same Saviour who had miraculously
converted him had commanded him to go and preach to them.

[Acts 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 26:18</span></span>

To open their eyes - To enlighten or instruct them. Ignorance is
represented by the eyes being closed, and the instruction of the gospel
by the opening of the eyes. See [Eph
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018.md).

And to turn them from darkness to light - From the darkness of paganism
and sin to the light and purity of the gospel. Darkness is an emblem of
ignorance and of sin, and the pagan nations are often represented as
sitting in darkness. Compare the [Mat
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#016.md) note; [Joh
1:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004.md) notes.

And from the power of Satan - From the dominion of Satan. Compare [Col
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013.md); [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009.md). See the notes on [Joh
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031.md); [Joh
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#011.md). Satan is thus represented as
the prince of this world, the ruler of the darkness of this world, the
prince of the power of the air, etc. The pagan world, lying in sin and
superstition, is represented as under his control; and this passage
teaches, doubtless, that the great mass of the people of this world are
the subjects of the kingdom of Satan, and are led captive by him at his
will.

Unto God - To the obedience of the one living and true God.

That they may receive forgiveness of sins - Through the merits of that
Saviour who died - that thus the partition wall between the Jews and the
Gentiles might be broken down, and all might be admitted to the same
precious privileges of the favor and mercy of God. Compare the notes on
[Act 2:38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038.md).

And inheritance - An heirship, or lot κλῆρον klēron: that they might be
entitled to the privileges and favors of the children of God. See the
notes on [Act 20:32](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#032.md).

Which are sanctified - Among the saints; the children of God. See the
notes on [Act 20:32](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#032.md).

[Acts 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 26:19</span></span>

Whereupon - Whence ὅθεν hothen. Since the proof of his being the
Messiah, of his resurrection, and of his calling me to this work, was so
clear and plain, I deemed it my duty to engage without delay in the
work.

I was not disobedient - I was not incredulous or unbelieving; I yielded
myself to the command, and at once obeyed. See [Act
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#006.md); compare [Gal
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016.md).

Unto the heavenly vision - To the celestial appearance, or to the vision
which appeared to me from heaven. I did not doubt that this splendid
appearance [Act 26:13](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#013.md) was from heaven,
and I did not refuse to obey the command of him who thus appeared to me.
He knew it was the command of God his Saviour, and he gave evidence of
repentance by yielding obedience to it at once.

[Acts 26:20](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 26:20</span></span>

See [Act 9:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#020.md). The 20th verse
contains a summary of his labors in obedience to the command of the Lord
Jesus. His argument is that the Lord Jesus had from heaven commanded him
to do this, and that he had done no more than to obey his injunction.
The word "then" in this verse is supplied by our translators, and is not
necessary to the proper explanation of the passage. It would seem from
that word that he had not preached "to the Gentiles" until after he had
preached "at Jerusalem and throughout all the coasts of Judea," whereas,
in fact, he had, as we have reason to believe (see the notes on [Act
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#023).md), before then "preached" to the
Gentiles in Arabia. The statement here, in the original, is a general
statement that he had preached at Damascus and at Jerusalem, and in all
the coasts of Judea, and also to the Gentiles, but without specifying
the exact order in which it was done.

[Acts 26:21](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 26:21</span></span>

Caught me in the temple - [Act 21:30](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#030.md).

And went about ... - Endeavored to put me to death.

[Acts 26:22](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 26:22</span></span>

Having therefore obtained help of God - Paul had seen and felt his
danger. He had known the determined malice of the Jews, and their
efforts to take his life. He had been rescued by Lysias, and had made
every effort himself to avoid the danger and to save his life; and at
the end of all; he traced his safety entirely to the help of God. It was
not by any power of his own that he had been preserved; it was because
God had interposed and rescued him. Those who have been delivered from
danger, if they have just views, will delight to trace it all to God.
They will recognize his hand, and will feel that whatever wisdom they
may have had, or whatever may have been the kindness of their friends to
them, yet that all this also is to be traced to the superintending
providence of God.

Witnessing - Bearing testimony to what he had seen, according to the
command of Christ, [Act 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#016.md).

To small - To those in humble life; to the poor, the ignorant, and the
obscure. Like his Master, he did not despise them, but regarded it as
his duty and privilege to preach the gospel to them.

And great - The rich and noble; to kings, princes, and governors. He had
thus stood on Mars' Hill at Athens; he had declared the same gospel
before Felix, Festus, and now before Agrippa. He offered salvation to
all. He passed by none because they were poor; and he was not deterred
by the fear of the rich and the great from making known their sins and
calling them to repeatance. What an admirable illustration of the proper
duties of a minister of the gospel!

Saying none other things ... - Delivering no new doctrine, but
maintaining only that the prophecies had been fulfilled. As he had done
this only, there was no reason for the opposition and persecution of the
Jews.

Should come - Should come to pass, or should take place. Paul here
evidently means to say that the doctrine of the atonement, and of the
resurrection of Christ, is taught in the Old Testament.

[Acts 26:23](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 26:23</span></span>

That Christ - That the Messiah expected by the Jews should be a
suffering Messiah.

Should suffer - Should lead a painful life, and be put to death. See the
notes on [Act 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#003.md); compare [Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027.md); [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001.md).

And that he should be the first ... - This declaration contains two
points:

\(1\) That it was taught in the prophets that the Messiah Would rise
from the dead. On this, see the proof alleged in [Act
2:24-32](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024.md); [Act
13:32-37](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#032.md).

\(2\) that he would be the first that should rise. This cannot mean that
the Messiah would be the first dead person who should be restored to
life, for Elijah had raised the son of the Shunammite, and Jesus himself
had raised Lazarus, and the widow's son at Nain. It does not mean that
he would be the first in the order of time that should rise, but first
in eminence; the most distinguished, the chief, the head of those who
should rise from the dead - πρῶτος ἐξ ἀναστάσεως νεκρῶν prōtos ex
anastaseōs nekrōn. In accordance with this he is called [Col
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018.md) "the beginning, the first-born
from the dead," having among all the dead who should be raised up the
pre-eminence of primogeniture, or what pertained to the first-born. In
[Co1 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020.md) he is called "the first
fruits of them that slept. This declaration is therefore made of him by
way of eminence:

\(1\) As being chief, a prince among those raised from the dead;

\(2\) As being raised by his own power [Joh
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018.md);

\(3\) As, by his rising, securing a dominion over death and the grave
[Co1 15:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025.md); and,

\(4\) As bringing, by his rising, life and immortality to light. He rose
to return to death no more. And he thus secured an ascendency over death
and the grave, and was thus, by way of eminence, first among those
raised from the dead.

And should show light unto the people - To the Jews. Would be their
instructor and prophet. This Moses had predicted, [Deu
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015.md).

And to the Gentiles - This had often been foretold by the prophets, and
particularly by Isaiah, [Isa 9:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001.md);
compare [Mat 4:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#014.md); [Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010.md); [Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001.md), [Isa
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#006.md); [Isa
54:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#003.md); [Isa
60:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#003.md), [Isa
60:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#005.md),[Isa
60:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#011.md); [Isa
61:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#006.md); [Isa
62:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#002.md); [Isa
66:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#012.md).

[Acts 26:24](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 26:24</span></span>

Festus said with a loud voice - Amazed at the zeal of Paul. Paul
doubtless evinced deep interest in the subject, and great earnestness in
the delivery of his defense.

Thou art beside thyself - Thou art deranged; thou art insane. The
reasons why Festus thought Paul mad were, probably:

\(1\) His great earnestness and excitement on the subject.

\(2\) his laying such stress on the gospel of the despised Jesus of
Nazareth, as if it were a matter of infinite moment. Festus despised it;
and he regarded it as proof of derangement that so much importance was
attached to it.

\(3\) Festus regarded, probably, the whole story of the vision that Paul
said had appeared to him as the effect of an inflamed and excited
imagination, and as a proof of delirium. This is not an uncommon charge
against those who are Christians, and especially when they evince
unusual zeal. Sinners regard them as under the influence of delirium and
fanaticism; as terrified by imaginary and superstitious fears; or as
misguided by fanatical leaders. Husbands often thus think their wives to
be deranged, and parents perceive their children that, and wicked people
assume the ministers of the gospel to be crazy. The frivolous think it
proof of derangement that others are serious, anxious, and prayerful;
the rich, that others are willing to part with their property to do
good; the ambitious and worldly, that others are willing to leave their
country and home to go among the Gentiles to spend their lives in making
known the unsearchable riches of Christ. The really sober and rational
part of the world they who fear God and keep his commandments; they who
believe that eternity is before them, and who strive to live for it -
are thus charged with insanity by those who are really deluded, and who
are thus living lives of madness and folly. The tenants of a madhouse
often think all others deranged but themselves; but there is no madness
so great, no delirium so awful, as to neglect the eternal interest of
the soul for the sake of the pleasures and honors which this life can
give.

Much learning - It is probable that Festus was acquainted with the fact
that Paul was a learned man. Paul had not, while before him, manifested
particularly his learning. But Festus, acquainted in some way with the
fact that he was well-educated, supposed that his brain had been turned,
and that the effect of it was seen by devotion to a fanatical form of
religion. The tendency of long-continued and intense application to
produce mental derangement is everywhere known.

Doth make thee mad - Impels, drives, or excites thee περιτρέπει
peritrepei to madness.

[Acts 26:25](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 26:25</span></span>

I am not mad - I am not deranged. There are few more happy turns than
what Paul gives to this accusation of Festus. He might have appealed to
the course of his argument; he might have dwelt on the importance of the
subject, and continued to reason; but he makes an appeal at once to
Agrippa, and brings him in for a witness that he was not deranged. This
would be far more likely to make an impression on the mind of Festus
than anything that Paul could say in self-defense. The same reply, "I am
not mad," can be made by all Christians to the charge of derangement
which the world brings against them. They have come, like the prodigal
son [Luk 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#017.md), to their right mind;
and by beginning to act as if there were a God and Saviour, as if they
were to die, as if there were a boundless eternity before them, they are
conducting according to the dictates of reason. And as Paul appealed to
Agrippa, who was not a Christian, for the reasonableness and soberness
of his own views and conduct, so may all Christians appeal to sinners
themselves as witnesses that they are acting as immortal beings should
act. All people know that if there is an eternity, it is right to
prepare for it; if there is a God, it is proper to serve him; if a
Saviour died for us, we should love him; if a hell, we should avoid it;
if a heaven, we should seek it. And even when they charge us with folly
and derangement, we may turn at once upon them, and appeal to their own
consciences, and ask them if all our anxieties, and prayers, and
efforts, and self-denials are not right? One of the best ways of
convicting sinners is to appeal to them just as Paul did to Agrippa.
When so appealed to, they will usually acknowledge the force of the
appeal, and will admit that the solicitude of Christians for their
salvation is according to the dictates of reason.

Most noble Festus - This was the usual title of the Roman governor.
Compare [Act 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#003.md).

Of truth - In accordance with the predictions of Moses and the prophets,
and the facts which have occurred in the death and resurrection of the
Messiah. In proof of this he appeals to Agrippa, [Act
26:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#026.md). Truth here stands opposed to
delusion, imposture, and fraud.

And soberness - Soberness σωφροσύνη sōphrosunē, wisdom) stands opposed
here to madness or derangement, and denotes "sanity of mind." The words
which I speak are those of a sane man, conscious of what he is saying,
and impressed with its truth. They were the words, also, of a man who,
under the charge of derangement, evinced the most perfect
self-possession and command of his feelings, and who uttered sentiments
deep, impressive, and worthy the attention of all mankind.

[Acts 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 26:26</span></span>

For the king - King Agrippa.

Knoweth - He had been many years in that region, and the fame of Jesus
and of Paul's conversion were probably well known to him.

These things - The things pertaining to the early persecutions of
Christians; the spread of the gospel; and the remarkable conversion of
Paul. Though Agrippa might not have been fully informed respecting these
things, yet he had an acquaintance with Moses and the prophets; he knew
the Jewish expectation respecting the Messiah; and he could not be
ignorant respecting the remarkable public events in the life of Jesus of
Nazareth, and of his having been put to death by order of Pontius Pilate
on the cross.

I speak freely - I speak openly - boldly. I use no disguise; and I speak
the more confidently before him, because, from his situation, he must be
acquainted with the truth of what I say. Truth is always bold and free,
and it is an evidence of honesty when a man is willing to declare
everything without reserve before those who are qualified to detect him
if he is an impostor. Such evidence of truth and honesty was given by
Paul.

For I am persuaded - I am convinced; I doubt not that he is well
acquainted with these things.

Are hidden from him - That he is unacquainted with them.

For this thing - The thing to which Paul had mainly referred in this
defense, his own conversion to the Christian religion.

Was not done in a corner - Did not occur secretly and obscurely, but was
public, and was of such a character as to attract attention. The
conversion of a leading persecutor, such as Paul had been, and in the
manner in which that conversion had taken place, could not but attract
attention and remark; and although the Jews would endeavor as much as
possible to conceal it, yet Paul might presume that it could not be
entirely unknown to Agrippa.

[Acts 26:27](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 26:27</span></span>

King Agrippa - This bold personal address is an instance of Paul's happy
manner of appeal. He does it to bring in the testimony of Agrippa to
meet the charge of Festus that he was deranged.

Believest thou the prophets? - The prophecies respecting the character,
the sufferings, and the death of the Messiah.

I know that thou believest - Agrippa was a Jew; and, as such, he of
course believed the prophets. Perhaps, too, from what Paul knew of his
personal character, he might confidently affirm that he professed to be
a believer. Instead, therefore, of waiting for his answer, Paul
anticipated it, and said that he knew that Agrippa professed to believe
all these prophecies respecting the Messiah. His design is evident. It
is:

\(1\) To meet the charge of derangement, and to bring in the testimony
of Agrippa, who well understood the subject, to the importance and the
truth of what he was saying.

\(2\) to press on the conscience of his royal hearer the evidence of the
Christian religion, and to secure, if possible, his conversion. "Since
thou believest the prophecies, and since I have shown that they are
fulfilled in Jesus of Nazareth; that he corresponds in person,
character, and work, with the prophets, it follows that his religion is
true." Paul lost no opportunity in pressing the truth on every class of
people. He had such a conviction of the truth of Christianity that he
was deterred by no rank, station, or office; by no fear of the rich, the
great, and the learned; but everywhere urged the evidence of that
religion as indisputable. In this lay the secret of no small part of his
success. A man who really believes the truth will be ready to defend it.
A man who truly loves religion will not be ashamed of it anywhere.

[Acts 26:28](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 26:28</span></span>

Then Agrippa said unto Paul - He could not deny that he believed the
prophecies in the Old Testament. He could not deny that the argument was
a strong one that they had been fulfilled in Jesus of Nazareth. He could
not deny that the evidence of the miraculous interposition of God in the
conversion of Paul was overwhelming; and instead, therefore, of charging
him, as Festus had done, with derangement, he candidly and honestly
avows the impression which the proof had made on his mind.

Almost - Except a very little - ἐν ὀλίγῳ en oligō. Thou hast nearly
convinced me that Christianity is true, and persuaded me to embrace it.
The arguments of Paul had been so rational; the appeal which he had made
to his belief of the prophets had been so irresistible, that he had been
nearly convinced of the truth of Christianity. We are to remember:

\(1\) That Agrippa was a Jew, and that he would look on this whole
subject in a different manner from the Roman Festus.

\(2\) that he does not appear to have partaken of the violent passions
and prejudices of the Jews who had accused Paul.

\(3\) pits character, as given by Josephus, is that of a mild, candid,
and ingenuous man. He had no particular hostility to Christians; he knew
that they were not justly charged with sedition and crime; and he saw
the conclusion to which a belief of the prophets inevitably tended. Yet,
as in thousands of other cases, he was not quite persuaded to be a
Christian. What was included in the "almost"; what prevented his being
quite persuaded, we know not. It may have been that the evidence was not
so clear to his mind as he would profess to desire; or that he was not
willing to give up his sins; or that he was too proud to rank himself
with the followers of Jesus of Nazareth; or that, like Felix, he was
willing to defer it to a more convenient season. There is every reason
to believe that he was never quite persuaded to embrace the Lord Jesus,
and that he was never nearer the kingdom of heaven than at this moment.
It was the crisis, the turning-point in Agrippa's life, and in his
eternal destiny; and, like thousands of others, he neglected or refused
to allow the full conviction of the truth on his mind, and died in his
sins.

Thou persuadest me - Thou dost convince me of the truth of the Christian
religion, and persuadest me to embrace it.

To be a Christian - On the name Christian, see the notes on [Act
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026.md). On this deeply interesting case
we may observe:

\(1\) That there are many in the same situation as Agrippa- many who are
almost, but not altogether, persuaded to be Christians. They are found
among:

\(a\) Those who have been religiously educated;

\(b\) Those who are convinced by argument of the truth of Christianity;

\(c\) Those whose consciences are awakened, and who feel their guilt,
and the necessity of some better portion than this world can furnish.

\(2\) such persons are deterred from being altogether Christians by the
following, among other causes:

\(a\) By the love of sin - the love of sin in general, or some
particular sin which they are not willing to abandon;

\(b\) By the fear of shame, persecution, or contempt, if they become
Christians;

\(c\) By the temptations of the world - its cares, vanities, and
allurements- which are often presented most strongly in just this state
of mind;

\(d\) By the love of office, the pride of rank and power, as in the case
of Agrippa;

\(e\) By a disposition, like Felix, to delay to a more favorable time
the work of religion, until life has wasted away, and death approaches,
and it is too late, and the unhappy man dies almost a Christian.

\(3\) this state of mind is one of special interest and special danger.
It is not one of safety, and it is not one that implies any certainty
that the "almost Christian" will ever be saved. There is no reason to
believe that Agrippa ever became fully persuaded to become a Christian.
To be almost persuaded to do a thing which we ought to do, and yet not
to do it, is the very position of guilt and danger. And it is no wonder
that many are brought to this point - the turning-point, the crisis of
life - and then lose their anxiety, and die in their sins. May the God
of grace keep us from resting in being almost persuaded to be
Christians! May every one who shall read this account of Agrippa be
admonished by his convictions, and be alarmed by the fact that he then
paused, and that his convictions there ended! And may every one resolve
by the help of God to forsake every thing that prevents his becoming an
entire believer, and without delay embrace the Son of God as his
Saviour!

[Acts 26:29](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 26:29</span></span>

I would to God - I pray to God; I earnestly desire it of God. This
shows:

\(1\) Paul's intense desire that Agrippa, and all who heard him, might
be saved.

\(2\) his steady and constant belief that none but God could incline
people to become altogether Christians. Paul knew well that there was
nothing that would overcome the reluctance of the human heart to be an
entire Christian but the grace and mercy of God. He had addressed to his
hearers the convincing arguments of religion, and he now breathed forth
his earnest prayer to God that those arguments might be effectual. So
prays every faithful minister of the cross.

All that hear me - Festus, and the military and civil officers who had
been assembled to hear his defense, [Act
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#023.md).

Were both almost, and altogether ... - Paul had no higher wish for them
than that they might have the faith and consolations which he himself
enjoyed. He had so firm a conviction of the truth of Christianity, and
had experienced so much of its supports amidst his persecutions and
trials, that his highest desire for them was that they might experience
the same inexpressibly pure and holy consolations. He well knew that
there was neither happiness nor safety in being almost a Christian; and
he desired, therefore, that they would give themselves, as he had done,
entirely and altogether to the service of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Except these bonds - These chains. This is an exceedingly happy and
touching appeal. Probably Paul, when he said this, lifted up his arm
with the chain attached to it. His wish was that in all respects they
might partake of the effects of the gospel, except those chains. Those
he did not wish them to bear. The persecutions, the unjust trials, and
the imprisonments which he had been called to suffer in the cause, he
did not desire them to endure. True Christians wish others to partake of
the full blessings of religion. The trials which they themselves
experienced from without in unjust persecutions, ridicule, and slander,
they do not wish them to endure. The trials which they themselves
experience from an evil heart, from corrupt passions, and from
temptations, they do not wish others to experience. But even with these,
religion confers infinitely more pure joy than the world can give; and
even though others should be called to experience severe trials for
their religion, still Christians wish that all should partake of the
pure consolations which Christianity alone can furnish in this world and
the world to come. Compare [Mar 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#030.md).

[Acts 26:31](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 26:31</span></span>

This man doeth nothing worthy of death - This was the conclusion to
which they had come after hearing all that the Jews had to allege
against him. It was the result of the whole investigation; and we have,
therefore, the concurring testimony of Claudius Lysias [Act
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#029.md), of Felix Acts 24, of Festus
[Act 25:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#026.md), and of Agrippa, as to
the innocence of Paul. More honorable and satisfactory testimony of his
innocence he could not have desired. It was a full acquittal from all
the charges against him; and though he was to be sent to Rome, yet he
went there with every favorable prospect of being acquitted there also.

[Acts 26:32](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 26:32</span></span>

Then said Agrippa unto Festus ... - This is a full declaration of the
conviction of Agrippa, before whom the cause had been heard, that Paul
was innocent. It is an instance, also, where boldness and fidelity will
be attended with happy results. Paul had concealed nothing of the truth.
He had made a bold and faithful appeal [Act
26:27](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#027.md) to Agrippa himself for the truth
of what he was saying. By this appeal Agrippa had not been offended. It
had only served to impress him more with the innocence of Paul. It is an
instance which shows that religion may be so commended to the conscience
and reason of princes, kings, and judges that they will see its truth.
It is an instance which shows that the most bold and faithful appeals
may be made by the ministers of religion to their hearers for the truth
of what they are saying. And it is a full proof that the most faithful
appeals, if respectful, may be made without offending people, and with
the certainty that they will feel and admit their force. All preachers
should be as faithful as Paul; and whatever may be the rank and
character of their auditors, they should never doubt that they have
truth and God on their side, and that their message, when most bold and
faithful, will commend itself to the consciences of mankind.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 27](act027.md)

</div>
