<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act004)  [Next](act006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#001.md)

[Acts 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 5:1</span></span>

But a certain man - In the previous chapter the historian had given an
account of the eminent liberality and sincerity of the mass of early
Christians, in being willing to give up their property to provide for
the poor, and had mentioned the case of Barnabas as worthy of special
attention. In this chapter he proceeds to mention a case, quite as
striking, of insincerity, and hypocrisy, and of the just judgment of God
on those who were guilty of it. The case is a remarkable instance of the
nature of "hypocrisy," and goes to illustrate the art and cunning of the
enemy of souls in attempting to corrupt the church, and to pervert the
religion of the gospel. Hypocrisy consists in an attempt to "imitate"
the people of God, or to assume the "appearance" of religion, in
whatever form it may be manifested. In this case religion had been
manifested by great self-denial and benevolence. The hypocrisy of
Ananias consisted in "attempting" to imitate this in appearance, and to
impose in this way on the early Christians and on God.

With Sapphira his wife - With her concurrence or consent. It was a
matter of "agreement" between them, [Act
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#002.md), [Act
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#009.md).

Sold a possession - The word used here κτῆμα ktēma does not indicate
whether this was "land" or some other property. In [Act
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#003.md), however, we learn that it was
"land" that was sold; and the word here translated "possession" is
translated in the Syriac, Arabic, and the Latin Vulgate as "land." The
pretence for which this was sold was doubtless to have the appearance of
religion. That it was "sold" could be easily known by the Christian
society, but it might not be so easily known for "how much" it was sold.
Hence, the attempt to impose on the apostles. It is clear that they were
not under obligation to sell their property. But, "having" sold it for
the purposes of religion, it became their duty, if they professed to
devote the avails of it to God, to do it entirely, and without any
reservation.

[Acts 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 5:2</span></span>

And kept back - The word used here means properly "to separate, to
part:" and then it means to "separate surreptitiously or clandestinely
for our own use" a part of public property, as taxes, etc. It is used
but three times in the New Testament, [Act
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#003.md), and in [Tit
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#010.md), where it is rendered
"purloining." Here it means that they "secretly" kept back a part, while
"professedly" devoting all to God.

His wife also being privy to it - His wife "knowing it," and evidently
concurring in it.

And laid it at the apostles' feet - This was evidently an act
professedly of devoting all to God. Compare [Act
4:37](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#037.md); also [Act
5:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#008.md). That this was his "profession,"
or "pretence," is further implied in the fact that Peter charges him
with having "lied" unto God, [Act
5:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#003.md).

[Acts 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 5:3</span></span>

But Peter said ... - Peter could have known this only by "revelation."
It was the manifest design of Ananias to deceive; nor was there any way
of detecting him but by its being revealed to him by the Spirit of God.
As it was an instance of enormous wickedness, and as it was very
important to detect and punish the crime, it was made known to Peter
directly by God.

Why hath Satan - Great deeds of wickedness in the Scripture are traced
to the influence of Satan. Compare [Luk
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#003.md); [Joh
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#027.md). Especially is Satan called the
"father of lies," [Joh 8:44-45](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044.md).
Compare [Gen 3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001.md). As this was an act
of "falsehood," or an attempt to deceive, it is with great propriety
traced to the influence of Satan. The sin of Ananias consisted in his
"yielding" to the temptation. Nowhere in the Bible are people supposed
to be free from guilt from the mere fact that they have been "tempted"
to commit it. God requires them to "resist" temptation; and if they
"yield" to it, they must be punished.

Filled thine heart - A man's "heart" or "mind" is "full" of a thing when
he is "intent on it"; when he is strongly "impelled to it"; or when he
is fully occupied with it. The expression here means that he was
"strongly impelled" or "excited" by Satan to this crime.

To lie to - To attempt to deceive. The deception which he meant to
practice was to keep back a "part" of the price, while he "pretended" to
bring the whole of it; thus "tempting" God, and supposing that he could
not detect the fraud.

The Holy Ghost - τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον to pneuma to hagion. The main
inquiry here is, whether the apostle Peter intended to designate in this
place the "third person" of the Trinity; or whether he meant to speak of
God "as God," without any reference to the distinction of persons; or
whether he referred to the "divine influence" which inspired the
apostles, without reference to the special offices which are commonly
ascribed to the Holy Spirit. Or, in other words, is there a
"distinction" here recognized between the Father and the Holy Spirit?
That there "is," will be apparent from the following considerations:

\(1\) If no such distinction is "intended," it is remarkable that Peter
did not use the usual and customary "name" of God. It does not appear
why he guarded it so carefully as to denote that this offence was
committed against the "Holy Spirit," and "the Spirit of the Lord," [Act
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#009.md).

\(2\) the name used here is the one employed in the Scriptures to
designate the third person of the Trinity, as implying a distinction
from the Father. See [Mat 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016.md); [Mat
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#018.md), [Mat
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020.md); [Mat
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011.md); [Mat
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#032.md); [Mat
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019.md); [Mar
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#008.md); [Mar
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#029.md); [Mar
12:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#036.md); [Luk
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#010.md); [Joh
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026.md); [Joh
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039.md); [Joh
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022.md); [Act
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#008.md); [Act
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#032.md), etc.

\(3\) Peter intended, doubtless, to designate an offence as committed
particularly against the person, or influence, by which he and the other
apostles were inspired. Ananias supposed that he could escape detection,
and the offence was one, therefore, against the Inspirer of the
apostles. Yet that was the Holy Spirit as "distinct from the Father."
See [Joh 14:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016.md), [Joh
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026.md); [Joh
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026.md); [Joh
16:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007.md); [Joh
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022.md). Compare [Act
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#032.md). The offence, therefore, being
against him who was "sent" by the Father, and who was appointed to a
particular work, clearly supposes that the Holy Spirit is distinct from
the Father.

\(4\) a further incidental proof of this may be found in the fact that
the sin here committed was one of special magnitude - so great as to be
deemed worthy of the immediate and signal vengeance of God. Yet the sin
against the Holy Spirit is uniformly represented to be of this
description. Compare [Mat 12:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#031.md);
[Mar 3:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#028.md). As these sins evidently
coincide in enormity, it is clear that the same class of sins is
referred to in both places; or, in other words, the sin of Ananias was
against the third person of the Trinity. Two remarks may be made here:

\(1\) The Holy Spirit is a distinct Person from the Father and the Son;
or, in other words, there is a distinction of some kind in the divine
nature that may be designated by the word "person." This is clear from
the fact that sin is said to have been committed against him - a sin
which it was supposed could not be detected. "Sin" cannot be committed
against an "attribute" of God, or an "influence" from God. We cannot
"lie unto" an attribute, or against wisdom, or power, or goodness; nor
can we "lie unto" an "influence," merely, of the Most High. Sin is
committed against a "Being," not against an "attribute"; and as a sin is
here charged on Ananias against "the Holy Spirit," it follows that the
Holy Spirit has a "personal" existence, or that there is such a
distinction in the divine essence that it may be proper to "specify" a
sin as committed especially against him. In the same way sin may be
represented as committed especially against the "Father" when his "name"
is blasphemed; when his "dominion" is denied; when his mercy in sending
his Son is called in question. Sin may be represented as committed
against "the Son" when his atonement is denied; his divinity assailed;
his character derided, or his invitations slighted. And thus sin may be
represented as committed against "the Holy Spirit" when his office of
renewing the heart, or sanctifying the soul, is called in question, or
when "his" work is ascribed to some malign or other influence. See [Mar
3:22-30](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#022.md). And as sin against the Son
proves that he is in some sense distinct from the Father, so does sin
against the Holy Spirit prove that in some sense he is distinct from the
Father and the Son.

\(2\) the Holy Spirit is divine. This is proved, because he is
represented here as being able to search the heart, and to detect
insincerity and hypocrisy. Compare [Jer
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#010.md); [Ch1
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#009.md); [Co1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010.md), "The Spirit searcheth all
things, yea, the deep things of God"; [Rev
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#023.md). And he is expressly "called"
God. See the notes on [Act 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#004.md).

[Acts 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 5:4</span></span>

Whiles it remained - As long as it remained unsold. This place proves
that there was no "obligation" imposed on the disciples to sell their
property. They who did it, did it voluntarily; and it does not appear
that it was done by all, or expected to be done by all.

And after it was sold ... - Even after the property was sold, and
Ananias had the money, still there was no obligation on him to devote it
in this way. He had the disposal of it still. The apostle mentions this
to show him that his offence was especially aggravated. He was not
"compelled" to sell his property - he had not even the poor pretence
that he was "obliged" to dispose of it, and was "tempted" to withhold it
for his own use. It was "all" his, and might have been retained if he
had chosen.

Thou hast not lied unto men - Unto people "only," or, it is not your
"main" and "chief" offence that you have attempted to deceive people. It
is true that Ananias "had" attempted to deceive the apostles, and it is
true, also, that this was a crime; but still, the principal magnitude of
the offence was that he had attempted to deceive "God." So small was his
crime as committed against "men" that it was lost sight of by the
apostles, and the great, crowning sin of attempting to deceive "God" was
brought fully into view. Thus, David also saw his sin as committed
against "God" to be so enormous that he lost sight of it as an offence
to man, and said, "Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done this
evil in thy sight," [Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004.md).

But unto God - It has been "particularly" and "eminently" against God.
This is true, because:

\(1\) He had professedly "devoted" it to God. The act, therefore, had
express and direct reference to him.

\(2\) it was an attempt to deceive him. It implied the belief of Ananias
that God would not detect the crime, or see the motives of the heart.

\(3\) it is the prerogative of God to judge of sincerity and hypocrisy;
and this was a case, therefore, which came under his special notice.
Compare [Psa 139:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#001.md). The word "God"
here is evidently used in its plain and obvious sense as denoting the
"supreme divinity," and the use of the word here shows that the Holy
Spirit is "divine." The whole passage demonstrates, therefore, one of
the important doctrines of the Christian religion, that the Holy Spirit
is distinct from the Father and the Son, and yet is divine.

[Acts 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 5:5</span></span>

And Ananias, hearing these words ... - Seeing that his guilt was known,
and being charged with the enormous crime of attempting to deceive God.
He had not expected to be thus exposed; and it is clear that the
exposure and the charge came upon him unexpectedly and terribly, like a
bolt of thunder.

Fell down - Greek: Having fallen down.

Gave up the ghost - This is an unhappy translation. The original means
simply "he expired," or "he died." Compare the notes on [Mat
27:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#050.md). This remarkable fact may be
accounted for in this way:

\(1\) It is evidently to be regarded as a "judgment" of God for the sin
of Ananias and his wife. It was not the act of Peter, but of God, and
was clearly designed to show his abhorrence of this sin. See remarks on
[Act 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#011.md).

\(2\) though it was the act of God, yet it does not follow that it was
not in connection with the usual laws by which he governs people, or
that he did not make use of natural means to do it. The sin was one of
great aggravation. It was suddenly and unexpectedly detected. The fast
that it was known, and the solemn charge that he had "lied unto God,"
struck him with horror. His conscience would reprove him for the
enormity of his crime, and overwhelm him at the memory of his
wickedness. These circumstances may be sufficient to account for this
remarkable event. It has occurred in other cases that the consciousness
of crime, or the fact of being suddenly detected, has given such a shock
to the frame that it has never recovered from it. The effect "commonly"
is that the memory of guilt preys secretly and silently upon the frame,
until, worn out with the lack of rest and peace, it sinks exhausted into
the grave. But there have not been missing instances where the shock has
been so great as to destroy the vital powers at once, and plunge the
wretched man, like Ananias, into eternity. It is not at all improbable
that the shock in the case of Ananias was so great as at once to take
his life.

Great fear came ... - Such a striking and awful judgment on insincerity
and hypocrisy was suited to excite awful emotions among the people.
Sudden death always does it; but sudden death in immediate connection
with crime is suited much more deeply to affect the mind.

[Acts 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 5:6</span></span>

And the young men - The youth of the congregation; very probably young
men who were in attendance as "servants," or those whose business it was
to attend on the congregation, and perform various offices when
Christians celebrated their worship (Mosheim). The word used here
sometimes denotes a "servant." It is used also, [Act
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#010.md), to denote "soldiers," as they
were commonly enlisted of the vigorous and young. The fact that they
took up Ananias voluntarily implies that they were accustomed to perform
offices of servitude to the congregation.

Wound him up - It was the usual custom with the Jews to wind the body in
many folds of linen before it was buried; commonly also with spices, to
preserve it from putrefaction. See the notes on [Joh
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#044.md). It may be asked "why" he was so
soon buried; and especially why he was hurried away without giving
information to his wife. In reply to this, it may be remarked:

1\. That it does not appear from the narrative that it was "known" that
Sapphira was privy to the transaction, or was near at hand, or even that
he had a wife. Ananias came "himself" and offered the money, and the
judgment fell at once on him.

2\. It was customary among the ancient Persians to bury the body almost
immediately after death (Jahn); and it seems probable that the Jews,
when the body was not embalmed, imitated the custom. It would also
appear that this was an ancient custom among the Jews. See [Gen
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#019.md); [Gen
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#009.md); [Gen
35:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#029.md); [Gen
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#007.md); [Kg1
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#030.md). Different nations differ in
their customs in burying the dead; and there is no impropriety in
committing a body soon after death to the tomb.

3\. There might have been some danger of an excitement and tumult in
regard to this scene if the corpse had not soon been removed; and as no
valuable purpose could be answered by delaying the burial, the body was
decently committed to the dust.

[Acts 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 5:7</span></span>

And it was about the space ... - As Sapphira had been no less guilty
than her husband, so it was ordered in the providence of God that the
same judgment should tome upon both.

[Acts 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 5:8</span></span>

For so much - That is, for the sum which Ananias had presented. This was
true, that this sum had been received for it; but it was also true that
a larger sum had been received. It is as really a falsehood to deceive
in this manner, as it would have been to have affirmed that they
received much "more" than they actually did for the land. Falsehood
consists in making an erroneous representation of a thing in any way for
the purpose of deceiving. And "this" species is much more common than an
open and bold lie, affirming what is in no sense true.

[Acts 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 5:9</span></span>

Agreed together - Conspired, or laid a plan. From this it seems that
Sapphira was as guilty as her husband,

To tempt - To try; to endeavor to impose on, or to deceive; that is, to
act as if the Spirit of the Lord could not detect the crime. They did
this by trying to see whether the Spirit of God could detect hypocrisy.

At the door - Are near at hand. They had not yet returned. The dead were
buried without the walls of cities; and the space of three hours, it
seems, had elapsed before they returned from the burial.

Shall carry thee out - This passage shows that it was by divine
interposition or judgment that their lives were taken. The judgment was
in immediate connection with the crime, and was designed as an
expression of the divine displeasure.

If it be asked here "why" Ananias and Sapphira were punished in this
severe and awful manner, an answer may be found in the following
considerations:

\(1\) This was an atrocious crime - a deep and dreadful act of iniquity.
It was committed knowingly, and without excuse, [Act
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#004.md). It was important that sudden and
exemplary punishment should follow it, because the society of Christians
was just then organized, and it was designed that it should be a "pure"
society, and should be regarded as a body of holy men. Much depended on
making an "impression" on the people that sin could not be allowed in
this new community, but would be detected and punished.

\(2\) God has often, in a most solemn manner, shown his abhorrence of
hypocrisy and insincerity. By awful declarations and fearful judgments
he has declared his displeasure at it. In a particular manner, no small
part of the preaching of the Saviour was employed in detecting the
hypocrisy of the scribes and Pharisees, and denouncing heavy judgments
on them. See Matt. 23 throughout for the most sublime and awful
denunciation of hypocrisy anywhere to be found. Compare [Mar
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#015.md); [Luk
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#001.md); [Ti1
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#002.md); [Job
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#013.md); [Job
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#016.md); [Job
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#034.md); [Job
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#005.md); [Job
36:13](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#013.md); [Mat
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#005.md); [Luk
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#044.md). In the very beginning of the
Christian church it was important, by a decided and awful act, to
impress upon the church and the world the danger and guilt of hypocrisy.
Well did the Saviour know that it would be one of the most insidious and
deadly foes to the purity of the church; and at its very "threshold,"
therefore, he set up this solemn warning to guard it, and laid the
bodies of Ananias and Sapphira in the path of every hypocrite that would
enter the church. If they enter and are destroyed, they cannot plead
that they were not fully warned. If they practice iniquity "in" the
church, they cannot plead ignorance of the fact that God intends to
detect and punish them.

\(3\) the apostles were just then establishing their authority. They
claimed to be under the influence of inspiration. To establish that, it
was necessary to show that they could know the views and motives of
those who became connected with the church. If easily imposed on, it
would go far to destroy their authority and their claim to
infallibility. If they showed that they could detect hypocrisy, even
where most artfully concealed, it would establish the divine authority
of their message. At the "commencement" of their work, therefore, they
gave this decisive and most awful proof that they were under the
guidance of an infallible Teacher.

\(4\) this case does not stand alone in the New Testament. It is clear
from other instances that the apostles had the power of punishing
sinners, and that a violation of the commands of Christ was attended by
sudden and fearful judgments. See [Co1
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030.md), and the case of Elymas the
sorcerer in [Act 13:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#008.md).

\(5\) neither does this event stand alone in the history of the world.
Acts of judgment sometimes occur as sudden and decided, in the
providence of God, as in this case. The profane man, the drunkard, the
profligate offender is sometimes suddenly stricken down, as in this
instance. Cases have not been uncommon where the blasphemer has been
smitten in death with the curse on his lips; and God often thus comes
forth in judgment to slay the wicked, and to show that there is a God
that reigns in the earth. This narrative cannot be objected to as
improbable until "all" such cases are disposed of, nor can this
infliction be regarded as unjust until all the instances where people
die by remorse of conscience, or by the direct judgment of heaven, are
"proved" to be unjust also.

In view of this narrative, we may remark:

\(1\) That God searches the heart, and knows the purposes of the soul.
Compare Ps. 139.

\(2\) God judges the "motives" of people. It is not so much the
"external" act, as it is the views and feelings by which it is prompted,
that determines the character of the act.

\(3\) God will bring forth sin which man may not be able to detect, or
which may elude human justice. The day is coming when the secrets of all
hearts shall be revealed, and God will reward every man according as his
works shall be.

\(4\) Fraud and hypocrisy will be detected. They are often detected in
this life. The providence of God often lays them open to human view, and
overwhelms the soul in shame at the guilt which was long concealed. But
if not in this life, yet the day is coming when they will be disclosed,
and the sinner shall stand "revealed" to an assembled universe.

\(5\) we have here an illustration of the power of conscience. If "such"
was its overwhelming effect "here," what will it be when all the crimes
of the life shall be disclosed in the day of judgment, and when the soul
shall sink to the woes of hell? Through "eternity" the conscience will
do its office; and these terrible inflictions will go on from age to
age, forever and ever, in the dark World of hell.

\(6\) we see here the guilt of attempting to impose on God in regard to
"property." There is no subject in which people are more liable to
hypocrisy; none in which they are more apt to keep back a "part."
Christians professedly devote all that they have to God. They profess to
believe that he has a "right" to the silver and the gold, and the cattle
on a thousand hills, [Psa 1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md). 10.
Their "property," as well as their bodies and their spirits, they have
devoted to him, and they profess to desire to employ it as "he" shall
direct and please. And yet, is it not clear that the sin of Ananias has
not ceased in the church? How many professing Christians there are who
give "nothing" really to God; who contribute nothing for the poor and
needy; who devote nothing, or next to nothing, to any purposes of
benevolence; who would employ "million" for their own gratification, and
their families, "but not a cent for tribute" to God. The case of Ananias
is, to all such, a case of most fearful warning. And on no point should
Christians more faithfully examine themselves than in regard to the
professed devotion of their "property" to God. If God punished this sin
in the beginning of the Christian church, he will do it still in its
progress; and in nothing have professed Christians more to fear his
wrath than on this very subject.

\(7\) sinners should fear and tremble before God. He holds their breath
in his hands. He can cut them down in an instant. The bold blasphemer,
the unjust man, the liar, the scoffer, he can destroy in a moment, and
sink them in all the woes of hell. Nor have they any security that he
will not do it. The profane man has no evidence that he will live to
finish the curse which he has begun; nor the drunkard that he will again
become sober; nor the seducer that God will not arrest him in his act of
wickedness and send him down to hell! The sinner walks over the grave,
and over hell! In an instant he may die, and be summoned to the
judgment-seat of God! How awful it is to sin in a world like this; and
how fearful the doom which "must" soon overtake the ungodly!

[Acts 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 5:12</span></span>

And by the hands ... - By the apostles. This verse should be read in
connection with the 15th, to which it belongs.

Signs and wonders - Miracles. See the notes on [Act
2:43](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#043.md).

With one accord - With one "mind," or intention. See the notes on [Act
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#014.md).

In Solomon's porch - See the [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012.md) note; [Joh
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#023.md) note. They were doubtless there
for the purpose of worship. It does not mean that they were there
constantly, but at the regular periods of worship. Probably they had two
designs in this; one was, to join in the public worship of God in the
usual manner with the people, for they did not design to leave the
temple service; the other, that they might have opportunity to preach to
the people assembled there. In the presence of the great multitudes who
came up to worship, they had an opportunity of making known the
doctrines of Jesus, and of confirming them by miracles, the reality of
which could not be denied, and which could not be resisted, as proofs
that Jesus was the Messiah.

[Acts 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 5:13</span></span>

And of the rest - Different interpretations have been given of this
expression. Lightfoot supposes that by "the rest" are meant the
remainder of the 120 disciples of whom Ananias had been one; and that
they feared to put themselves on an equality with the apostles. But this
interpretation seems to be far-fetched. Kuinoel supposes that by "the
rest" are meant those who had not already joined with the apostles,
whether Christians or Jews, and that they were deterred by the fate of
Ananias. Pricaeus, Morus, Rosenmueller, Schleusner, and others, suppose
that by "the rest" are meant the "rich" men, or the people of authority
and influence among the Jews, of whom Ananias was one, and that they
were deterred from it by the fate of Ananias. This is by far the most
probable opinion, because:

\(1\) There is an evident contrast between them and the people; "the
rest," that is, the others of the rich and great, feared to join with
them; but "the people," the common people, magnified them.

\(2\) the fate of Ananias was suited to have this effect on the rich and
great.

\(3\) Similar instances had occurred before, that the great, though they
believed on Jesus, were afraid to come forth publicly and profess him
before people. See [Joh 12:42-43](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#042.md); [Joh
5:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#044.md).

\(4\) the phrase "the rest" denotes sometimes what is more excellent, or
which is superior in value or importance to something else. See [Luk
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#026.md).

Join himself - Become united to, or associated with. The rich and the
great then, as now, stood aloof from them, and were deterred by fear or
shame from professing attachment to the Lord Jesus.

But the people - The mass of the people; the body of the nation.

Magnified them - Honored them; regarded them with reverence and fear.

[Acts 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 5:14</span></span>

And believers - This is the name by which Christians were designated,
because one of the main things that distinguished them was that they
"believed" that Jesus was the Christ. It is also an incidental proof
that none should join themselves to the church who are not "believers";
that is, who do not profess to be Christians in heart and in life.

Were the more added - The effect of all these things was to increase the
number of converts. Their persecutions, their preaching, and the
judgment of God, "all" tended to impress the minds of the people, and to
lead them to the Lord Jesus Christ. Compare [Act
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#004.md). Though the judgment of God had
the effect of deterring hypocrites from entering the church - though it
produced awe and caution, yet still the number of true converts was
increased. An effort to keep the church pure by wholesome discipline,
and by cutting off unworthy members, however rich or honored, so far
from weakening its true strength, has a tendency greatly to increase its
numbers as well as its purity. People will not seek to enter a corrupt
church, or regard it as worth any effort to be connected with a society
that does not endeavor to be pure.

Multitudes - Compare [Act 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#004.md).

[Acts 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 5:15</span></span>

Insomuch - So that. This should be connected with [Act
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#012.md). Many miracles were performed by
the apostles, "insomuch, etc."

They brought forth - The people, or the friends of the sick, brought
them forth.

Beds - κλινῶν klinōn. This word denotes usually the "soft" and
"valuable" beds on which the rich commonly lay. And it means that the
rich, as well as the poor, were laid in the path of Peter and the other
apostles.

Couches - κραββάτων krabatōn. The coarse and hard couches on which the
poor used to lie, [Mar 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#004.md), [Mar
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#009.md),[Mar
2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#011.md); [Mar
6:55](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#055.md); [Joh
5:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#008.md); [Act
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#033.md).

The shadow of Peter - That is, they were laid in the path so that the
shadow of Peter, as he walked, might pass over them. Perhaps the sun was
near setting, and the lengthened shadow of Peter might be thrown afar
across the way. They were not able to approach him on account of the
crowd, and they "imagined" that if they could "anyhow" come under his
influence they might be healed. The sacred writer does not say, however,
that any "were" healed in this way, nor that they were commanded to do
this. He simply states the "impression" which was on the minds of the
people that it "might be." Whether they were healed by this, it is left
for us merely to conjecture. An instance somewhat similar is recorded in
[Act 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#012.md), where it is expressly
said, however, that the sick were healed by contact with "handkerchiefs"
and "aprons" that were brought from the body of Paul. Compare also [Mat
9:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#021.md), where the woman said
respecting Jesus "If I may but touch his garment I shall be whole."

Might overshadow - That his shadow might pass over them. Though there is
no certain evidence that any were healed in this way, yet it shows the
full belief of the people that Peter had the power of working miracles.
"Peter" was supposed by them to be eminently endowed with this power,
because it was by him that the lame man in the temple had been healed
[Act 3:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#004.md), and because he had been
most prominent in his addresses to the people. The persons who are
specified in this verse were those who dwelt at Jerusalem.

[Acts 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 5:16</span></span>

There came also ... - Attracted by the fame of Peter's miracles, as the
people formerly had been by the miracles of the Lord Jesus.

Vexed - Troubled, afflicted, or tormented.

Unclean spirits - Possessed with devils; called "unclean" because they
prompted to sin and impurity of life. See the notes on [Mat
4:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023.md).

And they were healed - Of these persons it is expressly affirmed that
they were healed. Of those who were so laid as that the shadow of Peter
might pass over them, there is no such direct affirmation.

[Acts 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 5:17</span></span>

Then the high priest - Probably "Caiaphas." Compare [Joh
11:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#049.md). It seems from this place that
he belonged to the sect of the Sadducees. It is certain that he had
signalized himself by opposition to the Lord Jesus and to his cause
constantly.

Rose up - This expression is sometimes "redundant," and at others it
means simply to "begin" to do a thing, or to resolve to do it. Compare
[Luk 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#018.md).

And all they that were with him - That is, all they that coincided with
him in doctrine or opinion; or, in other words, that portion of the
Sanhedrin that was composed of "Sadducees." There was a strong party of
Sadducees in the Sanhedrin; and perhaps at this time it was so strong a
majority as to be able to control its decisions. Compare [Act
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006.md).

Which is the sect - The word translated "sect" here is that from which
we have derived our word "heresy." It means simply "sect" or "party,"
and is not used in a bad sense as implying reproach, or even error. The
idea which "we" attach to it of error, and of denying fundamental
doctrines in religion, is one that does not occur in the New Testament.

Sadducees - See the notes on [Mat 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007.md).
The main doctrine of this sect was the denial of the resurrection of the
dead. The reason why "they" were particularly opposed to the apostles
rather than the Pharisees was that the apostles dwelt much on the
"resurrection of the Lord Jesus," which, if true, completely overthrew
their doctrine. All the converts, therefore, that were made to
Christianity, tended to diminish their numbers and influence, and also
to establish the belief of the "Pharisees" in the doctrine of the
resurrection. So long, therefore, as the effect of the labors of the
apostles was to establish one of the main doctrines of the "Pharisees,"
and to confute the "Sadducees," so long we may suppose that the
"Pharisees" would either favor them or be silent; and so long the
"Sadducees" would be opposed to them, and enraged against them. One sect
will often see with composure the progress of another that it really
hates, if it will humble a rival. Even opposition to the gospel will
sometimes be silent provided the spread of religion will tend to humble
and mortify those against whom we may be opposed.

Were filled with indignation - Greek: "zeal." The word denotes any kind
of "fervor" or "warmth," and may be applied to any warm or violent
affection of the mind, either "envy, wrath, zeal," or "love," [Act
13:45](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#045.md); [Joh
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#017.md); [Rom
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002.md); [Co2
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#007.md); [Co2
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002.md). Here it probably "includes envy"
and "wrath." They were "envious" at the success of the apostles - at the
number of converts that were made to a doctrine that they hated, and
they were envious that the "Pharisees" were deriving such an accession
of strength to their doctrine of the resurrection; and they were
"indignant" that the apostles regarded so little their authority, and
disobeyed the solemn injunction of the Sanhedrin. Compare [Act
4:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#018.md).

[Acts 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 5:18</span></span>

The common prison - The public prison; or the prison for the keeping of
common and notorious offenders.

[Acts 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 5:19</span></span>

But the angel of the Lord - This does not denote any "particular" angel,
but simply an angel. The "article" is not used in the original. The word
"angel" denotes properly a "messenger," and particularly it is applied
to the pure spirits that are sent to this world on errands of mercy. See
the notes on [Mat 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020.md). The case here
was evidently "a miracle." An angel was employed for this special
purpose, and the design might have been:

\(1\) To reprove the Jewish rulers, and to convince them of their guilt
in resisting the gospel of God;

\(2\) To convince the apostles more firmly of the protection and
approbation of God;

\(3\) To encourage them more and more in their work, and in the faithful
discharge of their high duty; and,

\(4\) To give the people a new and impressive proof of the truth of the
message which they bore. That they were "imprisoned" would be known to
the people. That they were made as secure as possible was also known.
When, therefore, the next morning, before they could have been tried or
acquitted, they were found again in the temple, delivering the same
message still, it was a new and striking proof that they were sent by
God.

[Acts 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 5:20</span></span>

In the temple - In a public and conspicuous place. In this way there
would be a most striking exhibition of their boldness; a proof that
"God" had delivered them, and a manifestation of their purpose to obey
God rather than man.

All the words - All the doctrines. Compare [Joh
6:68](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#068.md), "Thou hast the words of eternal
life."

Of this life - Pertaining to life, to the eternal life which they taught
through the resurrection of Jesus. The word "life" is used sometimes to
express "the whole of religion," as opposed to the spiritual "death" of
sin. See [Joh 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004.md); [Joh
3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036.md). Their deliverance from prison
was not that they might be idle, and escape to a place of safety. Again
they were to engage in the toils and perils which they had just before
encountered. God delivers us from dangers sometimes that we may plunge
"into" new dangers; he preserves us from one form of calamity that we
may be tried in some new furnace of affliction; he calls us to encounter
trials simply "because" he demands it, and as an expression of gratitude
to him for his gracious interposition.

[Acts 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 5:21</span></span>

Early in the morning - Greek: at the break of day. Compare [Luk
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#001.md); [Joh
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#002.md).

Called the council together - The Sanhedrin, or the Great Council of the
nation. This was clearly for the purpose of "trying" the apostles for
disregarding their commandments.

And all the senate - Greek: "eldership." Probably these were not a part
of the Sanhedrin, but were people of age and experience, who in [Act
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#008.md); [Act
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#015.md), are called "elders of the
Jews," and who were present for the sake of counsel Canal advice in a
case of emergency.

[Acts 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 5:23</span></span>

Found we shut - It had not been broken open; and there was therefore
clear proof that they had been delivered by the interposition of God.
Nor could they have been released by the guard, for they were keeping
watch, as if unconscious that anything had happened, and the officers
had the only means of entering the prison.

[Acts 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 5:24</span></span>

The captain of the temple - See the notes on [Act
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#001.md).

Doubted of them - They were in "perplexity" about these things. The word
rendered "doubted" denotes "that state of anxiety which arises when a
person has lost his way, or when he does not know what to do to escape
from a difficulty." See [Luk 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#007.md).

Whereunto this would grow - What this "would be"; or, what would be the
result or end of these events. For:

\(1\) Their authority was disregarded.

\(2\) God had opposed them by a miracle.

\(3\) the doctrines of the apostles were gaining ground.

\(4\) their efforts to resist them had been in vain. They need "not"
have doubted; but sinners are not disposed to be convinced of the truth
of religion.

[Acts 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 5:26</span></span>

Without violence - Not by force; not by "binding" them. Compare [Mat
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#002.md). The command of the Sanhedrin was
sufficient to secure their presence, as they did not intend to refuse to
answer for any alleged violation of the laws. Besides, their going
before the council would give them another noble opportunity to bear
witness to the truth of the gospel. Christians, when charged with a
violation of the laws of the land, should not refuse to answer, [Act
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#011.md), "If I be an offender, or have
committed anything worthy of death, I refuse not to die." It is a part
of our religion to yield obedience to all the just laws of the land, and
to evince respect for all that are in authority, [Rom
13:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001.md).

For they feared the people - The people were favorable to the apostles.
If violence had been attempted, or they had been taken in a cruel and
forcible manner, the consequence would have been tumults and bloodshed.
In this way, also, the apostles showed that they were not disposed to
excite tumult. Opposition by them would have excited commotion; and
though "they" would have been rescued, yet they resolved to show that
they were not obstinate, contumacious, or rebellious, but were disposed,
as far as it could be done with a clear conscience, to yield obedience
to the laws of the land,

[Acts 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 5:28</span></span>

Straitly command you - Did we not command you with a "threat?" [Act
4:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#017.md), [Act
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#021.md).

In this name - In the name of Jesus.

Ye have filled Jerusalem - This, though not so desired, was an honorable
tribute to the zeal and fidelity of the apostles. When Chastens are
arraigned or persecuted, it is well if the only charge which their
enemies can bring against them is that they have been distinguished for
zeal and success in propagating their religion. See [Pe1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#016.md), "If any man suffer as a
Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glory God on this
behalf"; also [Act 5:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#013.md).

Intend to bring this man's blood upon us - To bring "one's blood" upon
another is a phrase signifying to hold or to prove him guilty of
murdering the innocent. The expression here charges them with desiring
to prove that they had put Jesus to death when he was innocent; to
convince "the people" of this, and thus to enrage them against the
Sanhedrin; and also to prove that they were guilty, and were exposed to
the divine vengeance for having put the Messiah to death. Compare [Act
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023.md), [Act
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036.md); [Act
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#015.md); [Act
7:52](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#052.md). That the apostles "did" intend
to charge them with being guilty of murder is clear; but it is
observable that on "this occasion" they had said no thing of this, and
it is further observable that they did not charge it on them "except in
their presence." See the places just referred to. They took no pains to
spread this among the people, "except as the people were accessory to
the crime of the rulers," [Act 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023.md),
[Act 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036.md). Their consciences were not
at ease, and the remembrance of the death of Jesus would occur to them
at once at the sight of the apostles.

[Acts 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 5:29</span></span>

We ought to obey ... - See the notes on [Act
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#019.md).

[Acts 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 5:30</span></span>

Raised up Jesus - This refers to his resurrection.

Hanged on a tree - That is, on the "cross," [Gal
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013.md); [Pe1
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024.md); [Act
10:39](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#039.md); [Act
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#029.md). This is the amount of Peter's
defense. He begins with the great principle [Act
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#029.md), which they could not gainsay,
that God ought to be obeyed rather than man. He then proceeds to state
that they were convinced that God had raised up Jesus from the dead, and
as they had such decisive evidence of that, and were commanded by the
authority of the Lord Jesus to be "witnesses of that," they were not "at
liberty" to be silent. They were bound to obey God rather than the
Sanhedrin, and to make known everywhere the fact that the Lord Jesus was
risen. The remark that God had raised up Jesus whom they had "slain,"
does not seem to have been made to irritate or to reproach them, but
merely to "identify" him as the person that had been raised. It was also
a confirmation of the truth and reality of the miracle. Of his "death"
they had no doubt, for they had been at pains to certify it, [Joh
19:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#031.md). It is certain, however, that
Peter did not shrink from charging on them their guilt; nor was he at
any pains to "soften" or "mitigate" the severe charge that they had
murdered their own Messiah.

[Acts 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 5:31</span></span>

Him hath God exalted - See the notes on [Act
2:33](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#033.md).

To be a Prince - ἀρχηγὸν archēgon. See the notes on [Act
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#015.md). In that place he is called the
"Prince of life." Here it means that he is actually in the "exercise" of
the office of a prince or a king, at the right hand of his Father. The
title "Prince," or "King," was one which was well known as applied to
the Messiah. It denotes that he has "dominion" and "power," especially
the power which is needful to give repentance and the pardon of sins.

A Saviour - See the notes on [Mat
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021.md).

To give repentance - The word "repentance" here is equivalent to
"reformation" and "a change of life." The sentiment does not differ from
what is said in [Act 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#026.md).

To Israel - This word properly denotes the "Jews"; but his office was
not to be confined to the Jews. Other passages show that it would be
also extended to the "Gentiles." The reasons why the "Jews" are
particularly specified here are, probably:

\(1\) Because the Messiah was long promised to the Jewish people, and
his first work was there; and,

\(2\) Because Peter was addressing Jews, and was particularly desirous
of leading "them" to repentance.

Forgiveness of sins - Pardon of sin; the act which can be performed by
God only, [Mar 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#007.md).

If it be asked in what sense the Lord Jesus "gives repentance," or how
his "exaltation" is connected with it, we may answer:

\(1\) His exaltation is evidence that his work was accepted, and that
thus a foundation is laid by which repentance is available, and may be
connected with pardon. Unless there was some way of "forgiveness,"
sorrow for sin would be of no value, even if exercised. The relentings
of a culprit condemned for murder will be of no avail unless the
executive can "consistently" pardon him; nor would relentings in hell be
of avail, for there is no promise of forgiveness. But Jesus Christ by
his death has laid a foundation by which repentance "may be" accepted.

\(2\) he is entrusted with all power in heaven and earth with
"reference" to this, to apply his work to people; or, in other words, to
bring them to repentance. See [Joh
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002.md); [Mat
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018.md).

\(3\) his exaltation is immediately connected with the bestowment of the
Holy Spirit, by whose influence people are brought to repentance, [Joh
16:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007.md). The Spirit is represented as
being "sent" by him as well as by the Father, [Joh
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026.md); [Joh
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007.md).

\(4\) Jesus has power in this state of exaltation over all things that
can affect the mind. He sends his ministers; he directs the events of
sickness or disappointment, of health or prosperity, that will influence
the heart. There is no doubt that he can so recall the sins of the past
life, and refresh the memory, as to overwhelm the soul in the
consciousness of guilt. Thus also he can appeal to man by his
"goodness," and by a sense of his mercies; and especially he can so
present a view of "his own" life and death as to affect the heart, and
show the evil of the past life of the sinner. Knowing the heart, he
knows all the avenues by which it can be approached, and in an instant
he can overwhelm the soul with the remembrance of crime.

It was "proper" that the power of pardon should be lodged with the same
being that has the power of producing repentance, because:

1\. The one appropriately follows the other.

2\. They are parts of the same great work - the work which the Saviour
came to do; "to remove sin, with all its effects, from the human soul."
This power of "pardon" Jesus exercised when he was on the earth, and
this he can now dispense in the heavens, [Mar
2:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#009.md).

And from this we may learn:

\(1\) That Christ is "divine." It is a dictate of natural religion that
none can forgive sins against God but God himself. None can pardon but
the Being who has been offended. And this is also the dictate of the
Bible. The power of "pardoning" sin is one that God claims as "his"
prerogative, and it is clear that it can pertain to no other. See [Isa
43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025.md); [Dan
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#009.md); [Psa
130:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#004.md). Yet Jesus Christ exercised this
power when on earth; gave "evidence" that the exercise of that power was
one that was acceptable to God by working a miracle, and removing the
"consequences" of sin with which God had visited upon the sinner [Mat
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#006.md), and exercises it still in heaven.
He must, therefore, be divine.

\(2\) the sinner is dependent on him for the exercise of repentance, and
for forgiveness.

\(3\) the proud sinner must be humbled at his feet. He must be willing
to come and receive eternal life at "his" hands. No step is more
humiliating than this for proud and hardened people; and there is none
which they are more reluctant to do. We always shrink from coming into
the presence of one whom we have offended; we are extremely reluctant to
confess a fault; but it "must be done," or the soul must be lost for
ever.

\(4\) Christ has power to pardon the greatest offender. He is exalted
for this purpose; and he is suited to his work. Even his murderers he
could pardon; and no sinner need fear that he who is "a Prince and a
Saviour at the right hand of God" is unable to pardon his sins. To him
we may come with confidence; and when pressed with the consciousness of
the blackest crimes, and when we feel that we deserve eternal death, we
may confidently roll all on his arm.

[Acts 5:32](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 5:32</span></span>

And we are his witnesses - For this purpose they had been appointed,
[Act 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#008.md), [Act
1:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#021.md); [Act
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#032.md); [Act
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#015.md); [Luk
24:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#048.md).

Of these things - Particularly of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus,
and of the events which had followed it. Perhaps, however, he meant to
include everything pertaining to the life, teachings, and death of the
Lord Jesus.

And so is also ... - The descent of the Holy Spirit to endow them with
remarkable gifts [Act 2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001.md), to awaken
and convert such a multitude [Act
2:41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041.md); [Act
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#004.md); [Act
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#014.md), was an unanswerable attestation
of the truth of these doctrines and of the Christian religion. So
manifest and decided was the presence of God attending them, that "they"
could have no doubt that what they said was true; and so open and public
was this attestation, that it was an evidence to all the people of the
truth of their doctrine.

[Acts 5:33](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 5:33</span></span>

When they heard that - That which the apostle Peter had said, to wit,
that they were guilty of murder; that Jesus was raised up; and that he
still lived as the Messiah.

They were cut to the heart - The word used here properly denotes "to cut
with a saw"; and as applied to the "mind," it means to be agitated with
"rage" and "indignation," as if wrath should seize upon the mind as a
saw does upon wood, and tear it violently, or agitate it severely. When
used in connection with "the heart," it means that the heart is
violently agitated and rent with rage. See [Act
7:54](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#054.md). It is not used elsewhere in the
New Testament. The "reasons" why they were thus indignant were
doubtless:

\(1\) Because the apostles had disregarded their command;

\(2\) Because they charged them with murder;

\(3\) Because they affirmed the doctrine of the resurrection of Jesus,
and thus tended to overthrow the sect of the Sadducees. The effect of
the doctrines of the gospel is often to make people enraged.

Took counsel - The word rendered "took counsel" denotes commonly "to
will"; then, "to deliberate"; and sometimes "to decree" or "to
determine." It doubtless implies here that "their minds "were made up"
to do it; but probably the formal decree was not passed to put them to
death.

[Acts 5:34](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 5:34</span></span>

Then stood there up one - He rose, as is usual in deliberative
assemblies, to speak.

In the council - In the Sanhedrin, [Act
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#015.md).

A Pharisee - The high priest and those who had been most active in
opposing the apostles were Sadducees. The Pharisees were opposed to
them, particularly on the doctrine in regard to which the apostles were
so strenuous, the resurrection of the dead. See the notes on [Mat
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007.md). Compare [Act
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006.md).

Gamaliel - This name was very common among the Jews. Dr. Lightfoot says
that this man was the teacher of Paul [Act
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#003.md), the son of the "Simon" who took
the Saviour in his arms Luke 2, and the grandson of the famous "Hillel,"
and was known among the Jews by the title of "Rabban Gamaliel the
elder." There were other people of this name, who were also eminent
among the Jews. This man is said to have died 18 years after the
destruction of Jerusalem, and he died as he had lived, a Pharisee. There
is not the least evidence that he was a friend of the Christian
religion; but he was evidently a man of far more liberal views than the
other members of the Sanhedrin.

A doctor of the law - That is, "a teacher" of the Jewish Law; one whose
province it was to "interpret" the laws of Moses, and probably to
preserve and transmit the "traditional" laws of the Jews. See the notes
on [Mat 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#003.md). So celebrated was he,
that Saul of Tarsus went to Jerusalem to receive the benefit of his
instructions, [Act 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#003.md).

Had in reputation among all the people - "Honored" by all the people.
His advice was likely, therefore, to be respected.

To put the apostles forth - This was done, doubtless, because, if the
apostles had been suffered to remain, it was apprehended that they would
take fresh courage, and be confirmed in their purposes. It was
customary, besides, when they deliberated, to command those accused to
retire, [Act 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#015.md).

A little space - A little "time," [Luk
22:58](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#058.md).

[Acts 5:36](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 5:36</span></span>

For before those days - The "advice" of Gamaliel was to permit these men
to go on. The "arguments" by which he enforced his advice were:

\(1\) That there were cases or precedents in point [Act
5:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#036.md); and,

\(2\) That if it should turn out to be truly of God, it would be a
solemn affair to be involved in the consequences of opposing him. How
long before "these days" this transaction occurred, cannot now be
determined, as it is not certain to what case Gamaliel refers.

Rose up - That is, commenced or excited an insurrection.

Theudas - This was a name quite common among the Jews. Of this man
nothing more is known than is here recorded. Josephus (Antiq., book 20,
chapter 5) mentions one "Theudas," in the time of "Fadus," the
procurator of Judea, in the reign of the Emperor Claudius (45 or 46
a.d.), who persuaded a great part of the people to take their effects
with them and follow him to the river Jordan. He told them he was a
prophet, and that he would divide the river and lead them over. Fadus,
however, came suddenly upon them, and slew many of them. Theudas was
taken alive and conveyed to Jerusalem, and there beheaded. But this
occurred at least ten or fifteen years after this discourse of Gamaliel.
Many efforts have been made to reconcile Luke and Josephus, on the
supposition that they refer to the same man. Lightfoot supposed that
Josephus had made an error in chronology. But there is no reason to
suppose that there is reference to the same event; and the fact that
Josephus has not recorded the insurrection referred to by Gamaliel does
not militate at all against the account in the Acts . For:

\(1\) Luke, for anything that appears to the contrary, is quite as
credible an historian as Josephus.

\(2\) the name "Theudas" was a common name among the Jews; and there is
no improbability that there were "two" leaders of an insurrection of
this name. If it "is" improbable, the improbability would affect
Josephus' credit as much as that of Luke.

\(3\) it is altogether improbable that "Gamaliel" should refer to a case
which was not well authenticated, and that Luke should record a speech
of this kind unless it was delivered, when it would be so easy to detect
the error.

\(4\) Josephus has recorded many instances of insurrection and revolt.
He has represented the country as in an unsettled state, and by no means
professes to give an account of "all" that occurred. Thus, he says
(Antiq., xvii. 10, section 4) that there were "at this time ten thousand
other disorders in Judea"; and (section 8) that "Judea was full of
robberies." When this "Theudas" lived cannot be ascertained; but as
Gamaliel mentions him before Judas of Galilee, it is probable that he
lived not far from the time that our Saviour was born; at a time when
many false prophets appeared, claiming to be the Messiah.

Boasting himself to be somebody - Claiming to be an eminent prophet
probably, or the Messiah.

Obeyed him - The word used here is the one commonly used to denote
"belief." As many as believed on him, or gave credit to his pretensions.

[Acts 5:37](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 5:37</span></span>

Judas of Galilee - Josephus has given an account of this man (Antiq.,
xvii. 10, section 5), and calls him a "Galilean." He afterward calls him
a "Gaulonite," and says he was of the city of "Gamala" (Antiq., 18:1:1).
He says that the revolt took place under "Cyrenius," a Roman senator,
who came into "Syria to be judge of that nation, and to take account of
their substance." "Moreover," says he, "Cyrenius came himself into
Judea, which was now added to the province of Syria, to take an account
of their substance, and to dispose of Archelaus' money." "Yet Judas,
taking with him Saddouk, a Pharisee, became zealous to draw them to a
revolt, who both said that this taxation was no better than an
introduction to slavery, and exhorted the nation to assert their
liberty, etc." "This" revolt, he says, was the commencement of the
series of revolts and calamities that terminated in the destruction of
the city, temple, and nation.

In the days of the taxing - Or, rather, the "enrolling," or "the
census." Josephus says it was designed to take an account of their
substance. Compare [Luk 2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001.md).

[Acts 5:38](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 5:38</span></span>

Refrain from these men - Cease to oppose them or to threaten them. The
"reason" why he advised this he immediately adds, that if it were of
human origin, it would come to nothing; if of God, they could not
overthrow it.

This counsel or this work be of men - This plan or purpose. If the
apostles had originated it for the purposes of imposture.

It will come to nought - Gamaliel "inferred" that from the two instances
which he specified. They had been suppressed without the interference of
the Sanhedrin; and he inferred that "this" would also die away if it was
a human device. It will be remembered that this is the mere advice of
Gamaliel, who was not inspired, and that this opinion should not be
adduced to guide us, except as it was an instance of great shrewdness
and prudence. It is doubtless right to oppose error in the proper way
and with the proper temper, not with arms, or vituperation, or with the
civil power, but with argument and kind entreaty. But the sentiment of
Gamaliel is full of wisdom in regard to error. For:

\(1\) The very way to exalt error into notice, and to confirm people in
it, is to oppose it in a harsh, authoritative, and unkind manner.

\(2\) Error, if left alone, will often die away itself. The interest of
people in it will often cease as soon as it ceases to be opposed; and,
having nothing to fan the flame, it will expire. It is not so with
truth.

\(3\) in this respect the remark may be applied to the Christian
religion. It has stood too long, and in too many circumstances of
prosperity and adversity, to be of human origin. It has been subjected
to all trials from its pretended friends and real foes; and it still
lives as vigorous and flourishing as ever. Kingdoms have changed;
empires have risen and fallen since Gamaliel spoke this; systems of
opinion and belief have had their day, and expired; but the preservation
of the Christian religion, unchanged through so many revolutions, and in
so many fiery trials, shows that it is not of men, but of God. The
argument for the divine origin of the Christian religion from its
perpetuity is one that can be applied to no other system that has been,
or that now exists. For Christianity has been opposed in every form. It
confers no temporal conquests, and appeals to no base and strong native
passions. The Muslim faith is supported by the sword and the state;
paganism relies on the arm of the civil power and the terrors of
superstition, and is sustained by all the corrupt passions of people;
atheism and infidelity have been short-lived, varying in their forms,
dying today, and tomorrow starting up in a new form; never organized,
consolidated, or pure; and never tending to promote the peace or
happiness of people. Christianity, without arms or human power, has
lived, keeping on its steady and triumphant movement among people,
regardless alike of the opposition of its foes, and of the treachery of
its pretended friends. If the opinion of Gamaliel was just, it is from
God; and the Jews particularly should regard as important an argument
derived from the opinion of one of the wisest of their ancient rabbis.

[Acts 5:39](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 5:39</span></span>

But if it be of God - If God is the "author" of this religion. From this
it seems that Gamaliel supposed that it was at least possible that this
religion was divine. He evinced a far more candid mind than did the rest
of the Jews; but still it does not appear that he was entirely
convinced. The arguments which could not but stagger the Jewish
Sanhedrin were those drawn from the resurrection of Jesus, the miracle
on the day of Pentecost, the healing of the lame man in the temple, and
the release of the apostles from the prison.

Ye cannot overthrow it - Because:

\(1\) God has almighty power, and can execute his purposes;

\(2\) Because he is unchanging, and will not be diverted from his plans,
[Job 23:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#013.md).

The plan which God forms "must" be accomplished. All the devices of man
are feebleness when opposed to him, and he can dash them in pieces in an
instant. The prediction of Gamaliel has been fulfilled. People have
opposed Christianity in every way, but in vain. They have reviled it;
have persecuted it; have resorted to argument and to ridicule; to fire,
and faggot, and sword; they have called in the aid of science; but all
has been in vain. The more it has been crushed, the more it has risen,
and it still exists with as much life and power as ever. The
"preservation" of this religion amidst so much and so varied opposition
proves that it is of God. No severer trial "can" await it than it has
already experienced; and as it has survived so many storms and trials,
we have every evidence that, according to the predictions, it is
destined to live and to fill the world. See the [Mat
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018.md); [Isa
54:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#017.md); [Isa
55:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#011.md) notes; [Dan
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#035.md) note.

Lest - That is, if you continue to oppose it, you may be found to have
been opposing God.

Haply - Perhaps. In the Greek this is "lest at any time"; that is, at
some future time, when too late to retract your doings, etc.

Ye be found - It shall appear that you have been opposing God.

Even to fight against God - Greek Θεομάχοι Theomachoi, "those who
contend with God." The word occurs nowhere else in the New Testament. To
fight against God is to oppose him, or to maintain an attitude of
hostility against him. It is an attitude that is most fearful in its
character, and will most certainly be attended with an overthrow. No
condition can be more awful than such an opposition to the Almighty; no
overthrow more terrible than what must follow such opposition. Compare
[Act 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#005.md); [Act
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#009.md). Opposition to the "gospel" in
the Scriptures is uniformly regarded as opposition to God, [Mat
12:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#030.md); [Luk
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#023.md). People may be said to "fight
against" God in the following ways, or on the following subjects:

\(1\) When they oppose his "gospel," its preaching, its plans, its
influence among people; when they endeavor to prevent its diffusion, or
to withdraw their families and friends from its influence.

\(2\) when they oppose the "doctrines" of the Bible. When they become
angry that the real truths of religion are preached, and suffer
themselves to be irritated and excited by an "unwillingness" that those
doctrines should be true, and should be presented to people. Yet this is
no uncommon thing. People by nature do not love those doctrines, and
they are often indignant that they are preached. Some of the most angry
feelings which people ever have arise from this source; and man can
never find peace until he is "willing" that God's truth should exert its
influence on his own soul, and rejoice that it is believed and loved by
others.

\(3\) people oppose the "Law" of God. It seems to them too "stern" and
"harsh." It condemns them; and they are unwilling that it should be
applied to them. There is nothing which a sinner likes "less" than he
does the pure and holy Law of God.

\(4\) sinners fight against the "providence" of God. When he afflicts
them they rebel. When he takes away their health, or property, or
friends, they complain. They esteem him harsh and cruel; and instead of
finding peace by "submission," they greatly aggravate their sufferings,
and infuse a mixture of wormwood and gall into the cup by complaining
and repining. There is no peace in affliction but in the feeling that
God is "right." And until this belief is cherished, the wicked will be
like the troubled sea which cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and
dirt, [Isa 57:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#020.md). Such opposition to
God is as wicked as it is foolish. The Lord gave, and has a right to
remove our comforts; and we should be still, and know that he is God.

\(5\) sinners fight against God when they resist the influences of his
Spirit; when they "oppose" serious thoughts; when they seek evil or
frivolous companions and pleasures rather than submit to God; and when
they spurn all the entreaties of their friends to become Christians. All
these may be the appeals which God is making to people to be prepared to
meet him. And yet it is common for sinners thus to stifle conviction,
and refuse even to think of their eternal welfare. Nothing can be an act
of more direct and deliberate wickedness and folly than this. Without
the aid of the Holy Spirit none can be saved; and to resist his
influences is to put away the only prospect of eternal life. To do it is
to do it over the grave; not knowing that another hour of life may be
granted; and not knowing that "if" life is prolonged, the Spirit will
ever strive again with the heart. In view of this verse, we may remark:

1\. That the path of wisdom is to submit at once to the requirements of
God. Without this, we must expect conflicts with him, and peril and
ruin. No man can be "opposed" to God without endangering himself every
minute.

2\. Submission to God should be entire. It should extend to every
doctrine and demand; every law, and every act of the Almighty. In all
his requirements, and in all afflictions, we should submit to him, for
thus only shall we find peace.

3\. Infidels and scoffers will gain nothing by opposing God. They have
thus far been thwarted, and unsuccessful; and they will be still. None
of their plans have succeeded; and the hope of destroying the Christian
religion, after the efforts of almost two thousand years, must be vain,
and will recoil with tremendous vengeance on those who make them.

[Acts 5:40](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">act 5:40</span></span>

And to him they agreed - Greek: They were "persuaded" by him; or they
trusted to him. They agreed only so far as their design of putting them
to death was concerned. They abandoned that design. But they did "not"
comply with his advice to let them entirely alone.

And beaten them - The usual amount of "lashes" which were inflicted on
offenders was 39, [Co2 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#024.md).
"Beating," or "whipping," was a common mode of punishing minor offences
among the Jews. It was expressly foretold by the Saviour that the
apostles would be subjected to this, [Mat
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#017.md). The reason why they did not
adopt the advice of Gamaliel altogether doubtless was, that if they did,
they feared that their "authority" would be despised by the people. They
had commanded them not to preach; they had threatened them [Act
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#018.md); [Act
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#028.md); they had imprisoned them [Act
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#018.md); and now, if they suffered them
to go without even the "appearance" of punishment, their authority, they
feared, would be despised by the nation, and it would be supposed that
the apostles had triumphed over the Sanhedrin. It is probable, also,
that they were so indignant, that they could not suffer them to go
without the gratification of subjecting them to the public odium of a
"whipping." People, if they cannot accomplish their full purposes of
malignity against the gospel, will take up with even some petty
annoyance and malignity rather than let it alone.

[Acts 5:41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">act 5:41</span></span>

Rejoicing - Nothing to most people would seem more disgraceful than a
public whipping. It is a punishment inflicted usually not so much
because it gives "pain," as because it is esteemed to be attended with
disgrace. The Jewish rulers doubtless desired that the apostles might be
so affected with the sense of this disgrace as to be unwilling to appear
again in public, or to preach the gospel anymore. Yet in this they were
disappointed. The effect was just the reverse. If it be asked why they
rejoiced in this manner, we may reply:

\(1\) Because they were permitted thus to imitate the example of the
Lord Jesus. He had been scourged and reviled, and they were glad that
they were permitted to be treated as he was. Compare [Phi
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010.md); [Col
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024.md); [Pe1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#013.md), "Rejoice inasmuch as ye are
partakers of Christ's sufferings."

\(2\) because, by this, they had evidence that they were the friends and
followers of Christ. It was clear they were engaged in the same cause
that he was. They were enduring the same sufferings, and striving to
advance the same interests. As they loved the "cause," they would
rejoice in enduring even the shame and sufferings which the cause, of
necessity, involved. The kingdom of the Redeemer was an object so
transcendently important, that for it they were willing to endure all
the afflictions and disgrace which it might involve.

\(3\) they had been told to "expect" this, and they now rejoiced that
they had This evidence that they were engaged in the cause of truth.
[Mat 5:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#011.md); [Mat
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#017.md), [Mat
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#022.md); [Co2
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#010.md); [Phi
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#029.md); [Jam
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#002.md).

\(4\) Religion appears to a Christian so excellent and lovely, that he
is willing, for its sake, to endure trial, persecution, and death. With
"all" this, it is infinite gain; and we should be willing to endure
these trials, if, by them, we may gain a crown of glory. Compare [Mar
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#030.md).

\(5\) Christians are the professed friends of Christ. We show attachment
for friends by being willing to suffer for them; to bear contempt and
reproach on their account; and to share "their" persecutions, sorrows,
and calamities.

\(6\) the apostles were engaged in a cause of innocence, truth, and
benevolence. They had "done" nothing of which to be ashamed; and they
rejoiced, therefore, in a conscience void of offence, and in the
consciousness of integrity and benevolence. When other people "disgrace"
themselves by harsh, or vile, or opprobrious language or conduct toward
"us," we should not feel that the disgrace belongs to "us." It is
"theirs"; and we should not be ashamed or distressed, though their rage
should fall on us. See [Pe1 4:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#014.md).

Counted worthy - Esteemed to be deserving. That is, esteemed "fit" for
it "by the Sanhedrin." It does not mean that "God" esteemed them worthy,
but that the Jewish council judged them fit to suffer shame in this
cause. They evinced so much zeal and determination of purpose that they
were judged fit objects to be treated as the Lord Jesus had himself
been.

To suffer shame - To be "dishonored" or "disgraced" in the estimation of
the Jewish rulers. The "particular" disgrace to which reference is made
here was "whipping." To various other kinds of shame they were also
exposed. They were persecuted, reviled, and finally put to death. Here
we may remark that a profession of the Christian religion has been in
all ages esteemed by many to be a "disgrace." The "reasons" are:

\(1\) That Jesus is himself despised;

\(2\) That his precepts are opposed to the gaiety and follies of the
world;

\(3\) That it attacks that on which the people of the world pride
themselves;

\(4\) That it requires a "spirit" which the world esteems mean and
grovelling - meekness, humility, self-denial, patience, forgiveness of
injuries; and,

\(5\) That it requires "duties" - prayer, praise, seriousness,
benevolence. All these things the people of the world esteem degrading
and mean, and hence, they endeavor to subject those who practice them to
disgrace. The "kinds" of disgrace to which Christians have been
subjected are too numerous to be mentioned here. In former times they
were subjected to the loss of property, of reputation, and to all the
shame of public punishment, and to the terrors of the dungeon, the
stake, or the rack. One main design of persecution was to select a kind
of punishment so "disgraceful" as to deter others from professing
religion. Disgrace even yet may attend it. It may subject one to the
ridicule of friends - of even a father, mother, or brother. Christians
hear their opinions abused; their names vilified; their Bible
travestied; the name of their God profaned, and of their Redeemer
blasphemed. Their feelings are often wantonly and rudely torn by the
cutting sarcasm or the bitter sneer. Books and songs revile them; their
specialties are made the occasion of indecent merriment on the stage and
in novels; and in this way they are still subjected to shame for the
name of Jesus. Every one who becomes a Christian should remember that
this is a part of his inheritance, and should not esteem it dishonorable
to be treated as his Master was before him, [Joh
15:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#018.md); [Mat
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#025.md).

For his name - For attachment to him.

[Acts 5:42](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">act 5:42</span></span>

And daily ... - Compare [Ti2 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#002.md). See
also notes on [Act 2:46](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#046.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 6](act006.md)

</div>
