<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act002)  [Next](act004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001)

[Acts 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 3:1</span></span>

Peter and John went up ... - In [Luk
24:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#053), it is said that the apostles
were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. From [Act
2:46](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#046), it is clear that all the
disciples were accustomed daily to resort to the temple for devotion.
Whether they joined in the sacrifices of the temple-service is not said;
but the thing is not improbable. This was the place and the manner in
which they and their fathers had worshipped. They came slowly to the
conclusion that they were to leave the temple, and they would naturally
resort there with their countrymen to worship the God of their fathers.
In the previous chapter [Act 2:43](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#043) we
are told in general that many wonders and signs were done by the hands
of the apostles. From the many miracles which were performed, Luke
selects one of which he gives a more full account, and especially as it
gives him occasion to record another of the addresses of Peter to the
Jews. An impostor would have been satisfied with the general statement
that many miracles were performed. The sacred writers descend to
particulars, and tell us where, and in relation to whom, they were
performed. This is a proof that they were honest people, and did not
intend to deceive.

Into the temple - Not into the edifice properly called the temple, but
into the court of the temple, where prayer was accustomed to be made.
See the notes on [Mat 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012).

At the hour of prayer ... - The Jewish day was divided into twelve equal
parts; of course, the ninth hour would be about three o'clock p. m. This
was the hour of evening prayer. Morning prayer was offered at nine
o'clock. Compare [Psa 55:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#017); [Dan
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#010).

[Acts 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 3:2</span></span>

Lame from his mother's womb - The mention of this shows that there was
no deception in the case. The man had been always lame; he was obliged
to be carried; and he was well known to the Jews.

Whom they laid daily - That is, his friends laid him there daily. He
would therefore be well known to those who were in the habit of entering
the temple. Among the ancients there were no hospitals for the sick, and
no alms-houses for the poor. The poor were dependent, therefore, on the
Charity of those who were in better circumstances. It became an
important matter for them to be placed where they would see many people.
Hence, it was customary to place them at the gates of rich men [Luk
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#020); and they also sat by the
highway to beg where many persons would pass, [Mar
10:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#046); [Luk
18:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#035); [Joh
9:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#001). The entrance to the temple
would be a favorable place for begging; for:

\(1\) great multitudes were accustomed to enter there; and,

\(2\) when going up for the purposes of religion, they would be more
inclined to give alms than at other times; and especially was this true
of the Pharisees, who were particularly desirous of publicity in
bestowing charity. It is recorded by Martial (i. 112) that the custom
prevailed among the Romans of placing the poor by the gates of the
temples; and the custom was also observed a long time in the Christian
churches.

At the gate of the temple which is called Beautiful - In regard to this
gate there have been two opinions, one of which supposes that it was the
gate commonly called Nicanor, which led from the court of the Gentiles
to the court of the women (see Plan in notes on [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012)), and the other that it was the
gate at the eastern entrance of the temple, commonly called Susan. It is
not easy to determine which is intended; though from the fact that what
is here recorded occurred near Solomon's porch ([Act
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#011); compare the Plan of the Temple,
[Mat 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012)), it seems probable that
the latter was intended. This gate was large and splendid. It was made
of Corinthian brass, a most valuable metal, and made a magnificent
appearance (Josephus, Jewish Wars, book 5, chapter 5, section 3).

To ask alms - Charity.

[Acts 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 3:3</span></span>

Who, seeing Peter ... - There is no evidence that he was acquainted with
them or knew who they were. He asked of them as he was accustomed to do
of the multitude that entered the temple.

[Acts 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 3:4</span></span>

Fastening his eyes - The word used here denotes "to look intently, or
with fixed attention." It is one of the special words which Luke uses
([Luk 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#020); [Luk
22:56](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#056); [Act
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#010); [Act
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#012); [Act
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#015); [Act
7:55](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#055); [Act
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#004); etc.) 12 times in all. It is
used by no other writer in the New Testament, except twice by Paul, [Co2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007), [Co2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013).

Look on us - All this Was done to fix the attention. He wished to call
the attention of the man distinctly to himself, and to what he was about
to do. It was also done that the man might be fully apprised that his
restoration to health came from him.

[Acts 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 3:6</span></span>

Silver and gold have I none - The man had asked for money; Peter assures
him that he had not that to give; what he did was done, however, in such
a way as to show his willingness to aid him if he had possessed money.

Such as I have - Such as is in my power. It is not to be supposed that
he meant to say that he originated this power himself, but only that it
was entrusted to him. He immediately adds that it was derived solely
from the Lord Jesus Christ.

In the name - Compare [Act 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#010). In
[Mar 16:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#017), it is said, "These
signs shall follow them that the sick, and they shall recover." The
expression means "by his authority," or "in virtue of power derived from
him." We are here struck with a remarkable difference between the manner
in which the Lord Jesus performed miracles and that in which it was done
by his apostles. He did it in his own name and by virtue of his own
power. The apostles never attempted to perform a miracle by their own
power. It was only in the name of Jesus; and this circumstance alone
shows that there was a radical difference between Christ and all other
prophets and teachers.

Of Nazareth - This was the name by which he was commonly known. By the
name he had been designated among the Jews and on the cross. It is by no
means improbable that the man had heard of him by this name, and it was
important that he should understand that it was by the authority of him
who had been crucified as an impostor.

Rise up and walk - To do this would be evidence of signal power. It is
remarkable that in cases like this they were commanded to do the thing
at once. See similar cases in [Joh
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#008); [Mat
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#006); [Mat
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#013). It would have been easy to
allege that they had no power; that they were lame, or sick, or palsied,
and could do nothing until God should give them strength. But the
command was to do the thing; nor did the Saviour or the apostles stop to
convince them that they could do nothing. They did not doubt that if it
were done they would ascribe the power to God. Precisely like this is
the condition of the sinner. God commands him to do the thing; to
repent, and believe, and lead a holy life. It is not merely to attempt
to do it, to make use of means, or to wait on him, but it is actually to
repent and believe the gospel. Where he may obtain power to do it is
another question. It is easy for him to involve himself in difficulty,
as it would have been in these cases. But the command of God is
positive, and must be obeyed. If not obeyed, people must perish, just as
this man would have been always lame if he had put forth no effort of
his own. When done, a convicted sinner will do just as this man did,
instinctively give all the praise to God, [Act
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#008).

[Acts 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 3:7</span></span>

And he took him - He took hold of his hand. To take hold of the hand in
such a ease was an offer of aid, an indication that Peter was sincere,
and was an inducement to him to make an effort. This may be employed as
a beautiful illustration of the manner of God when he commands people to
repent and believe. He does not leave them alone; he extends help, and
aids their efforts. If they tremble, and feel that they are weak, and
needy, and helpless, his hand is stretched out and his power exerted to
impart strength and grace.

His feet and ankle-bones - The fact that strength was immediately
imparted; that the feet, long lame, were now made strong, was a full and
clear proof of miraculous power.

[Acts 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 3:8</span></span>

And he, leaping up - This was a natural expression of joy, and it was a
striking fulfillment of the prophecy in [Isa
35:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#006); "Then shall the lame man leap as
an hart." The account here given is one that is perfectly natural. The
man would be filled with joy, and would express it in this manner. He
had been lame from a child; he had never walked; and there was more in
the miracle than merely giving strength. The art of "walking" is one
that is acquired by long practice. Children learn slowly. Caspar Hauser,
discovered in one of the cities of Germany, who had been confined in
prison from a child, was unable to walk in an easy way when released,
but stumbled in a very awkward manner (see his Life). When, therefore,
this man was able at once to walk, it was clear proof of a miracle.

Praising God - This was the natural and appropriate expression of his
feelings on this occasion. His heart would be full; and he could have no
doubt that this blessing had come from God alone. It is remarkable that
he did not even express his gratitude to Peter and John. They had not
pretended to restore him in their own name, and he would feel that man
could not do it. It is remarkable that he praised God without being
taught or entreated to do it. It was instinctive - the natural feeling
of the heart. So a sinner. His first feelings, when he is converted,
will be to ascribe the praise to God. While he may and will feel regard
for the ministry by whose instrumentality he has received the blessing,
yet his main expression of gratitude will be to God. And this he will do
instinctively. He needs no prompter; he knows that no power of man is
equal to the work of converting the soul, and will rejoice, and give all
the praise to the God of grace.

[Acts 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 3:9</span></span>

And all the people ... - The people who had been accustomed to see him
sit in a public place.

And they knew ... - In this they could not be deceived; they had seen
him a long time, and now they saw the same man expressing his praise to
God for complete recovery. The particulars in this miracle are the
following, and they are as far as possible from any appearance of
imposture:

1\. The man had been afficated from a child. This was known to all the
people. At this time he was 40 years of age, [Act
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#022).

2\. He was not an impostor. If he had pretended lameness, it is
wonderful that he had not been detected before, and not have been
suffered to occupy a place thus in the temple.

3\. The apostles had no agency in placing him there. They had not seen
him before. There was manifestly no collusion or agreement with him to
attempt to impose on the people.

4\. The man himself was convinced of the miracle, and did not doubt that
the power by which he had been healed was of God.

5\. The people were convinced of the same thing. They saw the effects;
they had known him well; they had had every opportunity to know that he
was diseased, and they were now satisfied that he was restored. There
was no possibility of deception in the case. It was not merely the
friends of Jesus that saw this; not those who had an interest in the
miracle, but those who had been his enemies, and who had just before
been engaged in putting him to death. Let this miracle be compared, in
these particulars, with those pretended miracles which have been
affirmed to have been performed in defense of other systems of religion,
and it will be seen at once that in these there is every appearance of
sincerity, honesty, and truth; in them, every mark of deception, fraud,
and imposition. (See Paley's "Evidences of Christianity," proposition
ii. chapter ii.)

[Acts 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 3:11</span></span>

Held Peter and John - The word "held" means that he "adhered" to them;
he "joined himself" to them; he was desirous of "remaining" with them
and "participating" with them. "He clung to his benefactors, and would
not be separated from them" (Prof. Hackett).

All the people ... - Excited by curiosity, they came together. The fact
of the cure and the conduct of the man would soon draw together a crowd,
and thus furnish a favorable opportunity for preaching to them the
gospel.

In the porch ... - This "porch" was a covered way or passage on the east
side of the temple. It was distinguished for its magnificence. See the
plan and description of the temple, notes on [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012).

[Acts 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 3:12</span></span>

When Peter saw it - Saw the people assembling in such multitudes and
wondering at the miracle.

He answered - The word "answer," with us, implies that a question had
been asked, or that some subject had been proposed for consideration.
But the word is used in a different sense in the Bible. It is often used
when no question was asked, but when an occasion was offered for
remarks, or when an opportunity was presented to make a statement. It is
the same as replying to a thing, or making a statement in regard to some
subject, [Dan 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#026); [Act
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#008).

Ye men of Israel - Jews. Compare [Act
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#014).

Why marvel ye at this? - The particular thing which he intended to
reprove here was not that they wondered, for that was proper; but that
they looked on himself and John as if they had been the authors of this
healing. They ought to have understood it. The Jews were sufficiently
acquainted with miracles to interpret them and to know whence they
proceeded; and they ought not, therefore, to ascribe them to man, but to
inquire why they had been performed by God.

Why look ye ... - Why do ye fix the eyes with amazement on us, as though
we could do this? Why not look at once to God?

By our own power - By any art of healing or by any medicine we had done
this.

Or holiness - Piety. As if God had bestowed this on us on account of our
personal and eminent piety. It may be remarked that here was ample
opportunity for them to establish a reputation of their own. The people
were disposed to pay them honor; they might at once have laid claim to
vast authority over them; but they refused all such personal honor, and
ascribed all to the Lord Jesus. Whatever success may attend the
ministers of the gospel, or however much the world may be disposed to do
them honor, they should disclaim all power in themselves, and ascribe it
to the Lord Jesus Christ. It is not by the talents or personal holiness
of ministers, valuable as these are, that people are saved; it is only
by the power of God, designed to honor his Son. See [Co2
3:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#005).

[Acts 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 3:13</span></span>

The God of Abraham - He is called the God of Abraham because Abraham
acknowledged him as his God, and because God showed himself to be his
friend. Compare [Mat 22:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#032); [Exo
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006), [Exo
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#015); [Gen
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#013); [Gen
26:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#024). It was important to show that
it was the same God who had done this that had been acknowledged by
their fathers, and that they were not about to introduce the worship of
any other God. And it was especially important, because the promise had
been made to Abraham that in his seed all the families of the earth
would be blessed, [Gen 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003). Compare
[Gal 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016).

Hath glorified - Has honored. You denied, despised, and murdered him,
but God has exalted and honored him. This miracle was done in the "name"
of Jesus, [Act 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006). It was the "power
of God" that had restored the man; and by putting forth this power, God
had shown that he approved the work of his Son, and was disposed to
honor him in the view of people. Compare [Joh
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001); [Eph
1:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020); [Phi
2:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009); [Heb
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009); [Rev
1:5-18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005).

Ye delivered up - That is, you delivered him to the omans to be put to
death. See the notes on [Act 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023).

And denied him in the presence of Pilate - Denied that he was the
Messiah. Were unwilling to own him as your long-expected King, [Joh
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#015).

When he was determined ... - [Mat
27:17-25](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#017); [Luk
23:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#016). Pilate was satisfied of his
innocence; but he was weak, timid, and irresolute, and he yielded to
their wishes. The fact that Pilate regarded him as innocent was a strong
aggravation of their crime. They should have regarded him as innocent;
but they urged on his condemnation against the deliberate judgment of
him before whom they had arraigned him, and thus showed how obstinately
they were resolved on his death.

[Acts 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 3:14</span></span>

The Holy One ... - See [Psa 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010).
Compare the notes on [Act 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#027).

And the Just - The word "just" here denotes "innocent," or "one who was
free from crime." It is properly used in reference to law, and denotes
"one who stands upright in the view of the law, or who is not chargeable
with crime." In this sense, the Lord Jesus was not only personally
innocent, but even before his judges he stood unconvicted of any crime.
The crime charged on him at first was blasphemy [Mat
26:65](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#065), and on this charge the
Sanhedrin had condemned him without proof. But of this charge Pilate
would not take cognizance, and hence, before him they charged him with
sedition, [Luk 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#002). Neither of these
charges were made out, and of course, in the eye of the law, he was
innocent and just. It greatly aggravated their crime that they demanded
his death still, even after it was ascertained that they could prove
nothing against him, thus showing that it was mere hatred and malice
that led them to seek his death.

And desired a murderer - [Mat 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#021).

[Acts 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 3:15</span></span>

And killed the Prince of life - The word rendered "prince" denotes
properly "a military leader or commander." Hence, in [Heb
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010), it is translated "captain:" "It
became him ...to make the "Captain of their salvation" perfect through
sufferings." As a captain or commander leads on to victory and is said
to obtain it, so the word comes to denote one who is the "cause," the
"author," the "procurer," etc. In this sense it is used, [Act
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#031), "Him hath God exalted to be a
Prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel," etc. In [Heb
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002) it is properly rendered author,
"Looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith." The word
"author," or "giver," would express the meaning of the word here. It
also implies that he has dominion over life; an idea, indeed, which is
essentially connected with that of his being the author of it. The word
"life" here is used in a large sense, as denoting "all manner of life."
In this sense it is used in reference to Christ in [Joh
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004), "In him was life." Compare [Joh
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026); [Jo1
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#011); [Co1
15:45](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#045). Jesus is here called the Prince
of life in contrast with him whom the Jews demanded in his place,
Barabbas. He was a murderer [Luk
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#019); [Mar
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#007), one who had destroyed life, and
yet they demanded that he whose character it was to destroy life should
be released, and the Author of life be put to death.

Whom God hath raised ... - [Act 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024),
[Act 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#032).

[Acts 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 3:16</span></span>

And his name - The "name" of Jesus is here put for Jesus himself, and it
is the same as saying "and he," etc. In this way the word name is often
used by the Hebrews, especially when speaking of God, [Act
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#015); [Act
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#012); [Eph
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021); [Rev
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004). It does not mean that there was
any efficacy in the mere name of Jesus that would heal the man, but that
it was done by his authority and power.

Through faith in his name - By means of faith in him; that is, by the
faith which Peter and John had in Jesus. It does not refer to any faith
that the man had himself, for there is no evidence that he believed in
him. But it was by means of the faith which the apostles exercised in
him that the miracle was performed, and was thus a fulfillment of the
declaration in [Mat 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#020), "If ye have
faith ...ye shall to this mountain, remove hence," etc. This truth Peter
repeats two or three times in the verse to impress it more distinctly on
the minds of his hearers.

Whom ye see and know - There could therefore, be no mistake. He was well
known to them. There was no doubt about the truth of the miracle [Act
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#016), and the only inquiry was in what
way it had been done. This Peter affirms to have been accomplished only
by the power of the Lord Jesus.

Perfect soundness - ὁλοκληρίαν holoklērian. This word is not used
elsewhere in the New Testament. It denotes "integrity of parts, freedom
from any defect"; and it here means that the cure was perfect and
entire, or that he was completely restored to the use of his limbs.

In the presence of you all - You are all witnesses of it, and can judge
for yourselves. This shows how confident the apostles were that a real
miracle had been performed. They were willing that it should be
examined; and this is conclusive proof that there was no attempt at
imposture. A deceiver, or one who pretended to work miracles, would have
been cautious of exposing the subject to the danger of detection.

[Acts 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 3:17</span></span>

And now, brethren - Though they had been guilty of a crime so enormous,
yet Peter shows the tenderness of his heart in addressing them still as
his brethren. He regarded them as of the same nation with himself; as
having the same hopes, and as being entitled to the same privileges. The
expression also shows that he was not disposed to exalt himself as being
by nature more holy than they. This verse is a remarkable instance of
tenderness in appealing to sinners. It would have been easy to have
reproached them for their enormous crimes; but that was not the way to
reach the heart. He had indeed stated and proved their wickedness. The
object now was to bring them to repentance for it; and this was to be
done by tenderness, kindness, and love. People are melted to contrition,
not by reproaches, but by love.

I wot - I know; am well apprised of it. I know you will affirm it, and I
admit that it was so. Still the enormous deed has been done. It cannot
be recalled, and it cam not be innocent. It remains, therefore, that you
should repent of it, and seek for pardon.

That through ignorance ... - Peter does not mean to affirm that they
were innocent in having put him to death, for he had just proved the
contrary, and he immediately proceeds to exhort them to repentance. But
he means to say that their offence was mitigated by the fact that they
were ignorant that he was the Messiah. The same thing the Saviour
himself affirmed when dying, [Luk
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034); "Father, forgive them, for they
know not what they do." Compare [Act
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#027); [Co1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008). The same thing the apostle Paul
affirmed in relation to himself, as one of the reasons why he obtained
pardon from the enormous crime of persecution, [Ti1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013). In cases like these, though
crime might be mitigated, yet it was not taken entirely away. They were
guilty of demanding that a man should be put to death who was declared
innocent; they were urged on with ungovernable fury; they did it from
contempt and malice; and the crime of murder remained, though they were
ignorant that he was the Messiah. It is plainly implied that if they had
put him to death knowing that he was the Messiah, and as the Messiah,
there would have been no forgiveness. Compare [Heb
10:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#026). Ignorance, therefore, is a
circumstance which must always be taken into view in an estimate of
crime. It is at the same time true that they had opportunity to know
that he was the Messiah, but the mere fact that they were ignorant of it
was still a mitigating circumstance in the estimate of their crime.
There can be no doubt that the mass of the people had no fixed belief
that he was the Messiah.

As did also your rulers - Compare [Co1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008), where the apostle says that none
of the princes of this world knew the wisdom of the gospel, for had they
known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. It is certain
that the leading scribes and Pharisees were urged on by the most
ungovernable fury and rage to put Jesus to death, even when they had
abundant opportunity to know his true character. This was particularly
the case with the high priest. But yet it was true that they did not
believe that he was the Messiah. Their minds had been prejudiced. They
had expected a prince and a conqueror. All their views of the Messiah
were different from the character which Jesus manifested. And though
they might have known that he was the Messiah; though he had given
abundant proof of the fact, yet it is clear that they did not believe
it. It is not credible that they would have put to death one whom they
really believed to be the Christ. He was the hope, the only hope of
their nation; and they would not have dared to imbrue their hands in the
blood of him whom they really believed to be the illustrious personage
so long promised and expected by their fathers. It was also probably
true that no small part of the Sanhedrin was urged on by the zeal and
fury of the chief priests. They had not courage to resist them; and yet
they might not have entered heartily into this work of persecution and
death. Compare [Joh 7:50-53](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#050). The
speech of Peter, however, is not intended to free them entirely from
blame; nor should it be pressed to show that they were innocent. It is a
mitigating circumstance thrown in to show them that there was still hope
of mercy.

[Acts 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 3:18</span></span>

But those things - To wit, those things that did actually occur,
pertaining to the life and death of the Messiah.

Had showed - Had announced, or foretold.

By the mouth of all his prophets - That is, by the prophets in general,
without affirming that each individual prophet had uttered a distinct
prediction respecting this. The prophets "taken together," or the
prophecies "as a whole," had declared this. The word "all" is not
infrequently used in this somewhat limited sense, [Mar
1:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#037); [Joh
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#026). In regard to the prophecies
respecting Christ, see the notes on [Luk
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#027).

Hath so fulfilled - He has caused to be fulfilled in this manner; that
is, by the rejection, the denial, and the wickedness of the rulers. It
has turned out to be in strict accordance with the prophecy. This fact
Peter uses in exhorting them to repentance; but it is not to be regarded
as an excuse for their sins. The mere fact that all this was foretold;
that it was in accordance with the purposes and predictions of God, does
not take away the quilt of it, or constitute an excuse for it. In regard
to this, we may remark:

\(1\) The prediction did not change the nature of the act. The mere fact
that it was foretold, or foreknown, did not change its character. See
notes on [Act 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#023).

\(2\) Peter still regarded them as guilty. He did not urge the fact that
this was foreknown as an excuse for their sin, but to show them that
since all this happened according to the prediction and the purpose of
God, they might hope in his mercy. The plan was that the Messiah should
die to make a way for pardon, and, therefore, they might hope in his
mercy.

\(3\) this was a signal instance of the power and mercy of God in
overruling the wicked conduct of people to further his own purposes and
plans.

\(4\) all the other sins of people may thus be overruled, and thus the
wrath of man may be made to praise him. But,

\(5\) This will constitute no excuse for the sinner. It is no part of
his intention to honor God, or to advance his purposes; and there is no
direct tendency in his crimes to advance his glory. The direct tendency
of his deeds is counteracted and overruled, and God brings good out of
the evil. But this surely constitutes no excuse for the sinner.

If it be asked why Peter insisted on this if he did not mean that it
should be regarded as an excuse for their sin, I reply, that it was his
design to prove "that Jesus was the Messiah," and having proved this, he
could assure them that there was mercy. Not that they had not been
guilty; not that they deserved favor; but that tire fact that the
Messiah had come was an argument which proved that any sinners might
obtain mercy, as he immediately proceeds to show them.

[Acts 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 3:19</span></span>

Repent ye - See the notes on [Mat 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002).

Therefore - Because of your sin in putting Jesus to death, and "because"
he is the Messiah, and God through him is willing to show mercy to the
chief of sinners.

And be converted - This expression conveys an idea not at all to be
found in the original. It conveys the idea of "passivity," be
"converted," as if they were to yield to some foreign influence I that
they were now resisting. But the idea of being "passive" in this is not
conveyed by the original word. The word means properly to "turn; to
return to a path from which one has gone astray; and then to turn away
from sins, or to forsake them." It is a word used in a general sense to
denote "the whole turning to God." That the form of the word here
ἐπιστρέψατε epistrepsate does not denote passivity may be clearly seen
by referring to the following places where the same form of the word is
used: [Mat 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#018); [Mar
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#016); [Luk
17:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#031); [Th1
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#009). The expression, therefore, would
have been more appropriately rendered "repent and turn, that your sins,"
etc. "To be converted" cannot be a matter of obligation, but to "turn to
God" is the duty of every sinner. The crimes of which he exhorted them
to repent were those pertaining to the death of the Lord Jesus, as well
as all the past sins of their lives. They were to turn from the course
of wickedness in which they and the nation had been so long walking.
That your sins, etc. In order that your sins may be forgiven. Sin cannot
be pardoned before man repents of it. In the order of the work of grace,
repentance must always precede pardon. Of course, no man can have
evidence that his sin is pardoned until he repents. Compare [Isa
1:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016); [Joe
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013).

May be blotted out - May be forgiven, or pardoned. The expression "to
blot out sins" occurs also in [Isa
43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025); [Psa
51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001), [Psa
51:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#009); [Jer
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#023); [Neh
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#005); [Isa
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#022). The expression "to blot out a
name" is applied to expunging it from a "roll," or "catalog," or "list,"
as of an army, etc. [Exo 32:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032);
[Deu 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#014); [Deu
25:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#019); [Deu
29:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#029), etc. The expression to "blot
out sins" is taken from the practice of creditors charging their
debtors, and when the debt is paid, cancelling it, or wholly removing
the record. The word used here properly refers to the practice of
writing on tables covered with wax, and then by inverting the stylus, or
instrument of writing, smoothing the wax again, and thus removing every
trace of the record. This more entirely expresses the idea of pardoning
than blotting does. It means wholly to remove the record, the charge,
and every trace of the account against us. In this way God forgives
sins.

When the times ... - The word ὅπως hopōs, rendered "when," is commonly
rendered that, and denotes the "final cause," or the "reason" why a
thing is done, [Mat 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#023); [Mat
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016), [Mat
5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045), etc. By many it has been
supposed to have this sense here, and to mean, "repent ...in order that
the times of refreshing may come," etc. Thus, Kuinoel, Grotius,
Lightfoot, the Syriac version, etc. If used in this sense, it means that
their repentance and forgiveness would be the means of introducing peace
and joy. Others have rendered it, in accordance with our translation,
"when," meaning that they might find peace in the day when Christ should
return to judgment, which return would be to them a day of rest, though
of terror to the wicked. Thus, Calvin, Beza, the Latin Vulgate,
Schleusner, etc. The grammatical construction will admit of either,
though the former is more in accordance with the usual use of the word.

The objection to the former is, that it is not easy to see how their
repenting, etc., would be the means of introducing the times of
refreshing. And this, also, corresponds very little with the design of
Peter in this discourse. That was to encourage them to repentance; to
adduce arguments why they should repent, and why they might hope in his
mercy. To do this, it was needful only to assure them that they were
living under the times graciously promised by God the times of
refreshing, when pardon might be obtained. The main inquiry, therefore,
is, What did Peter refer to by the times of refreshing, and by the
restitution of all things? Did he refer to any particular manifestation
to be made then, or to the influence of the gospel on the earth, or to
the future state, when the Lord Jesus shall come to judgment? The idea
which I suppose Peter intended to convey was this: "Repent, and be
converted. You have been great sinners, and are in danger. Turn from
your ways, that your sins may be forgiven."

But then, what encouragement would there be for this? or why should it
be done? Answer: "You are living under the times of the gospel, the
reign of the Messiah, the times of refreshing. This happy, glorious
period has been long anticipated, and is to continue to the close of the
world. The period which will include the restitution of all things, and
the return of Christ to judgment, has come, and is, therefore, the
period when you may find mercy, and when you should seek it, to be
prepared for his return." In this sense the passage refers to the fact
that this time, this dispensation, this economy, including all this, had
come, and they were living under it, and might and should seek for
mercy. It expresses, therefore, the common belief of the Yews that such
a time would come, and the comment of Peter about its nature and
continuance. The belief of the Jews was that such times would come.

Peter affirms that the belief of such a period was well founded a time
when mercy may be obtained. That time has come. The doctrine that it
would come was well founded, and has been fulfilled. This was a reason
why they should repent, and hope in the mercy of God. Peter goes on,
then, to state further characteristics of that period. It would include
the restitution of all things, the return of Christ to judgment, etc.
And all this was an additional consideration why they should repent, and
turn from their sins, and seek for forgiveness. The meaning of the
passage may therefore be thus summed up: "Repent, since it is a true
doctrine that such times would come: they are clearly predicted; they
were to be expected; and you are now living under them. In these times;
in this dispensation, also, God shall send his Son again to judge the
world, and all things shall be closed and settled forever. Since you
live under this period, you may seek for mercy, and you should seek to
avoid the vengeance due to the wicked, and to be admitted to heaven when
the Lord Jesus shall return."

Times of refreshing - The word rendered "refreshing," ἀνάψυξις
anapsuxis, means properly "breathing," or "refreshment," after being
heated with labor, running, etc. It hence denotes "any kind of
refreshment, as rest, or deliverance from evils of any kind." It is used
nowhere else in the New Testament, except that the verb is used in [Ti2
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#016), "Onesiphorus ...oft refreshed
me, and was not ashamed of my chain." He administered comfort to me in
my trials. It is used by the Septuagint in the Old Testament nine times:
[Exo 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#015), "But when Pharaoh saw that
there was respite"; that is, cessation or rest from the plagues, [Hos
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#008); [Jer
49:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#031); [Psa
69:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#011), etc. In no place in the Old
Testament is the word applied to the terms of the gospel. The idea,
however, that the times of the Messiah would be times of rest, ease, and
prosperity, was a favorite one among the Jews, and was countenanced in
the Old Testament. See [Isa 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#012), "To
whom he said, This is the rest wherewith ye may cause the weary to rest;
and this is the refreshing," etc. They anticipated the times of the
gospel as a period when they would have rest from their enemies, a
respite from the evils of oppression and war, and great national
prosperity and peace. Under the idea that the happy times of the Messiah
had come, Peter now addresses them, and assures them that they might
obtain pardon and peace.

Shall come - This does not mean that this period was still future, for
it had come; but that the expectation of the Jews that such a Messiah
would come was well founded. A remarkably similar construction we have
concerning Elijah [Mat 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#011), "And
Jesus answered and said, Elias truly shall first come, and restore,"
etc.; that is, the doctrine that Elijah would come was true, though he
immediately adds that it had already taken place, [Act
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#012). See the notes on that place.

From the presence of the Lord - Greek: "From the face of the Lord." The
expression means that God was "its author." From the face of the Lord
means "from the Lord himself:" [Mar
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#002), "I send thy messenger before thy
face," that is, before thee. Compare [Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001); [Luk
1:76](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#076); [Luk
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#031).

[Acts 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 3:20</span></span>

And he shall send ... - [Act 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001) l.
Under this economy of things, he shall send Jesus Christ, that is, the
Messiah, to teach people; to redeem them; to save them; to judge the
world; to gather his people to himself; and to condemn the wicked. Under
this economy they were then. This, therefore, was an argument why they
should repent and turn to God, that they might escape in the day of
judgment.

Which before was preached ... - Who has been proclaimed as the Messiah.
The name "Jesus Christ" is equivalent here to "the Messiah." The Messiah
had been proclaimed to the Jews as about to come. In his time was to be
the period of refreshing. He had come; and they were under the economy
in which the blessings of the Messiah were to be enjoyed. This does not
refer to his personal ministry, or to the preaching of the apostles, but
to the fact that the Messiah had been a long time announced to them by
the prophets as about to come. All the prophets had preached him as the
hope of the nation. It may be remarked, however, that there is here a
difference in the manuscripts. A large majority of them read
προκεχειρισμενον prokecheirismenon, who was designated or appointed,
instead of who was preached. This reading is approved by Griesbach,
Knapp, Bengel, etc. It was followed in the ancient Syriac, the Arabic,
etc., and is undoubtedly the true reading.

[Acts 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 3:21</span></span>

Whom the heavens must receive - The common belief of the Jews was, that
the Messiah would reign on the earth forever, [Joh
12:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#034). On this account they would
object that Jesus could not be the Messiah, and hence, it became so
important for the apostles to establish the fact that he had ascended to
heaven. The evidence which they adduced was the fact that they saw him
ascend, [Act 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009). The meaning of the
expression "whom the heavens must receive," is that it was "fit" or
"proper" δεῖ dei that he should ascend. One reason of that fitness or
propriety he himself stated in [Joh
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007); compare [Joh
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002). It was also fit or expedient
that he should do it, to direct the affairs of the universe for the
welfare of the church [Eph 1:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020),
and that he should exercise there his office as a priest in interceding
for his people, [Jo1 2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001); [Heb
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025); [Heb
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024); [Rom
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034), etc. It is remarkable that Peter
did not adduce any passage of Scripture on this subject; but it was one
of the points on which there was no clear revelation. Obscure
intimations of it might be found in [Psa
110:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001); [Psa
16:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001); etc., but the fact that he
would ascend to heaven was not made prominent in the Old Testament. 'The
words "whom the heaven must receive" also convey the idea of
"exaltation" and "power"; and Peter doubtless intended to say that he
was clothed with power, and exalted to honor in the presence of God. See
[Psa 115:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#003). Compare [Pe1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#022), "Who is gone into heaven, and is
on the right banal of God; angels, and authorities, and powers being
made subject unto him." See the notes on [Act
2:33](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#033).

Until - This word implies that he would then return to the earth, but it
does not imply that he would not again ascend to heaven.

The times of the restitution of all things - The noun rendered
restitution ἀποκαταστάσεως apokatastaseōs, does not elsewhere occur in
the New Testament. The verb from which it is derived occurs eight times.
It means properly "to restore a thing to its former situation," as
restoring a "strained" or "dislocated" limb to its former soundness.
Hence, it is used to restore, or to heal, in the New Testament: [Mat
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#013), "And it (the hand) was restored
whole as the other"; [Mar 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#005); [Luk
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#010). And hence, it is applied to the
preparation or fitness for the coming of the Messiah which was to attend
the preaching of John in the character of Elias, [Mat
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#011); [Mar
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#012). Thus, in Josephus (Antiq., [Mar
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#003), [Mar
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#008)), the word is used to denote the
return of the Jews from the captivity of Babylon, and their restoration
to their former state and privileges. The word has also the idea of
"consummation, completion, or filling up." Thus, it is used in Philo,
Hesychius, Phavorinus, and by the Greek Classics. (See Lightfoot and
Kuinoel.) Thus, it is used here by the Syriac: "Until the complement or
filling up of the times"; that is, of all the events foretold by the
prophets, etc. Thus, the Arabic: "Until the times which shall establish
the perfection or completion of all the predictions of the prophets,"
etc. In this sense the passage means that the heavens must receive the
Lord Jesus until all thrums spoken by the prophets in relation to his
work, his reign, the spread of the gospel, the triumph of religion,
etc., shall have been fulfilled. It also conveys the idea of the
predicted recovery of the world from sin, and the restoration of peace
and order; the con. summation of the work of the Messiah, now begun, but
not yet complete; slow it may be in its advances, but triumphant and
certain in its progress and its close.

All things - All things which have been foretold by the prophets. The
expression is limited by the connection to this; and of course it does
not mean that all people will be saved, or that all the evils of sin can
be repaired or remedied. This can never be, for the mischief is done and
cannot be undone; but everything which the prophets have foretold shall
receive their completion and fulfillment.

Which God hath spoken - Which have been revealed, and are recorded in
the Old Testament.

Of all his holy prophets - This does not mean that each one of the
prophets had spoken of these things, but that all which had been spoken
would be fulfilled.

Since the world began - This is an expression denoting the same as from
the beginning, meaning to affirm with emphasis that all the prophecies
would be fulfilled. The apostles were desirous to show that they, as
well as the Jews, held entirely to the prophets, and taught no doctrine
which they had not taught before them.

[Acts 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 3:22</span></span>

For Moses truly said - The authority of Moses among the Jews was
absolute and final. It was of great importance, therefore, to show not
only that they were not departing from his Law, but that he had actually
foretold these very things. The object of the passage is not to prove
that the heavens must receive him, but that he was truly the Messiah.

Unto the fathers - To their ancestors, or the founders of the nation.
See [Deu 18:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015).

A Prophet - Literally, one who foretells future events. But it is also
used to denote a religious teacher in general. See [Rom
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006). In the passage in Deuteronomy it
is evidently used in a large sense, to denote one who would infallibly
guide and direct the nation in its religious affairs; one who would be
commissioned by God to do this, in opposition to the diviners [Act
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#014) on which other nations relied.
The meaning of this passage in Deuteronomy is apparent from the
connection. Moses is stating to the Hebrews [Act
3:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001) the duty and office of the
priests and Levites. He then cautions them against conforming to the
surrounding nations, particularly on the subject of religious
instruction and guidance. They, said he, consult, in times of
perplexity, with enchanters, and charmers, and necromancers, and
wizards, etc. [Act 3:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#011), but it
shall not be so with you. You shall not be left to this false and
uncertain guidance in times of perplexity and danger, for the Lord will
raise up, from time to time, a prophet, a man directly commissioned in
an extraordinary manner from heaven, like me, who shall direct and
counsel you. The promise, therefore, pertains to the serges or, prophets
which God would raise up; or it is a promise that God would send his
prophets, as occasion might demand, to instruct and counsel the nation.
The design was to keep them from consulting with diviners, etc., and to
preserve them from following the pretended and false religious teachers
of surrounding idolatrous people. In this interpretation most
commentators agree. See particularly "Calvin" on this place. Thus
explained, the prophecy had no "exclusive" or even "direct" reference to
the Messiah, and there is no evidence that the Jews understood it to
have any such reference, except as one of the series of prophets that
God would raise up and send to instruct the nation. If, then, it be
asked on what principle Peter appealed to this, we may reply:

\(1\) That the Messiah was to sustain the character of a prophet, and
the prophecy had reference to him as one of the teachers that God would
raise up to instruct the nation.

\(2\) it would apply to him by way of eminence, as the greatest of the
messengers that God would send to instruct the people. In this sense it
is probable that the Jews would understand it.

\(3\) this was one of those emergencies in the history of the nation
when they might expect such an intervention. The prophecy implied that
in times of perplexity and danger God would raise up such a prophet.
Such a time then existed. The nation was corrupt, distracted, subjected
to a foreign power, and needed such a teacher and guide. If it be asked
why Peter appealed to this rather than to explicit prophecies of the
Messiah, we may remark:

\(1\) That his main object was to show their guilt in having rejected
him and put him to death, [Act
3:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#014).

\(2\) that in order to do this, he sets before them clearly the
obligation to obey him; and in doing this, appeals to the express
command of Moses. He shows them that, according to Moses, whoever would
not obey such a prophet should be cut off from among the people. In
refusing, therefore, to hear this great prophet, and putting him to
death, they had violated the express command of their own Lawgiver. But
it was possible still to obey him, for he still lived in heaven; and all
the authority of Moses, therefore, made it a matter of obligation for
them still to hear and obey him. The Jews were accustomed to apply the
name prophet to the Messiah [Joh 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#021);
[Joh 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#014); [Joh
7:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#040); [Mat
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#011); [Luk
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#024), and it has been shown from the
writings of the Jewish rabbis that they believed the Messiah would be
the greatest of the prophets, even greater than Moses. See the notes on
[Joh 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#021).

The Lord your God - In the Hebrew, "Yahweh, thy God. "Raise up unto
you." Appoint, or commission to come to you.

Of your brethren - Among yourselves; of your own countrymen; so that you
shall not be dependent on foreigners, or on teachers of other nations.
All the prophets were native-born Jews. And it was particularly true of
the Messiah that he was to be a Jew, descended from Abraham, and raised
up from the midst of his brethren, [Heb
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#011), [Heb
2:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#016). On this account it was to be
presumed that they would feel a deeper interest in him, and listen more
attentively to his instructions.

Like unto me - Not in all things, but only in the point which was under
discussion. He was to resemble him in being able to make known to them
the will of God, and thus preventing the necessity of looking to other
teachers. The idea of resemblance between Moses and the prophet is not
very strictly expressed in the Greek, except in the mere circumstance of
being raised up. God shall raise up to you a prophet as he has raised up
me - ὡς hōs ἐμέ eme. The resemblance between Moses and the Messiah
should not be pressed too far. The Scriptures have not traced it further
than to the fact that both were raised up by God to communicate his will
to the Jewish people, and therefore one should be heard as well as the
other.

Him shall ye hear - That is, him shall you obey, or you shall receive
his instructions as a communication from God.

In all things, whatsoever ... - These words are not quoted literally
from the Hebrew, but they express the sense of what is said in [Deu
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015), [Deu
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#018).

[Acts 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 3:23</span></span>

And it shall come to pass - It shall be, or shall occur. This is not the
usual word rendered "it shall come to pass." It is a word commonly
expressing "futurity," but here it conveys the notion of "obligation."
In this verse Peter has not quoted the passage in Deuteronomy literally,
but he has given the sense.

Every soul - Every "person" or "individual." Soul is often put for the
whole man by the Hebrews, [Act 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#014);
[Jos 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#028).

Hear that Prophet - That is, obey his instructions. He shall have
authority to declare the will of God; and he that does not obey him
refuses to obey God. Compare [Luk
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016); [Joh
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#020).

Shall be destroyed - This quotation is made according to the sense, and
not literally. In the Hebrew the expression is [Deu
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#019), "I will require it of him,"
that is, I will hold him answerable or responsible for it; I will punish
him. This expression the Septuagint has rendered by "I will take
vengeance on him." The idea of the passage is, therefore, that God would
publish the man that would not hear the prophet, without specifying the
particular way in which it should be done. The usual mode of punishing
such offences was by cutting the offender off from among the people,
[Exo 30:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#033); [Exo
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015); [Exo
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#015); [Num
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#031); [Num
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#013); [Lev
7:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#020), [Lev
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#025), [Lev
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#027), etc. The sense is, that he
should be punished in the usual manner; that is, by excision, or by
being destroyed from among the people. The word translated "shall be
destroyed" means properly "to exterminate, wholly to devote to ruin," as
of a wicked people, a wicked man whose life is taken, etc.

To be destroyed from among the people means, however, to be
excommunicated, or to be deprived of the privileges of a people. Among
the Jews this was probably the most severe punishment that could be
inflicted. It involved the idea of being cut off from the privileges of
sacrifice and worship in the temple and in the synagogue, etc., and of
being regarded as a pagan and an outcast. The idea which Peter expressed
here was, that the Jews had exposed themselves to the severest
punishment in rejecting and crucifying the Lord Jesus, and that they
should, therefore, repent of this great sin, and seek for mercy. The
same remark is applicable still to people. The Scriptures abundantly
declare the truth, that if sinners will not hear the Lord Jesus, they
shall be destroyed. And it becomes each individual to inquire with
honesty whether he listens to his instructions and obeys his Law, or
whether he is rejecting him and following the devices and desires of his
own heart. It will be a solemn day when the sinner shall be called to
render a reason why he has rejected the teachings and laws of the Son of
God!

[Acts 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 3:24</span></span>

All the prophets - That is, the prophets in general. It may be said of
the prophets generally, or of all of them, that they have foretold these
things. This expression is not to be pressed as if we were to look for
distinct predictions of the Messiah in each one of the prophets. The use
of language does not require so strict an interpretation.

From Samuel - In the previous verse (22) Moses was mentioned as the
first in order. The next in order was Samuel. The same mention of Moses
and Samuel occurs in [Psa 99:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#006). The
reason why Samuel is mentioned here is probably that he was the first
prophet after Moses who recorded a prediction respecting the times of
the Messiah. The Jews, in their divisions of the books of the Old
Testament, reckoned the book of Joshua as the first of the prophets. But
in Joshua and Judges there does not occur any distinct prediction of the
Messiah. The prophecy in Samuel, to which Peter probably had reference,
is in [Sa2 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#016). From the time of
Moses to Samuel, also, it is probable that no prophet arose. God was
consulted by Urim, and Thummim [Exo
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#030); [Num
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#021), and consequently no
extraordinary messenger was sent to instruct the nation.

As many as have spoken - Whosoever has declared the will of God. This is
to be taken in a general sense. The meaning is, that the prophets had
concurred in foretelling these days. They not merely concurred in
foretelling a happy future period, but they foretold distinctly the very
things which had actually occurred respecting Jesus of Nazareth; and the
Jews, therefore, should listen to the voice of their own prophets.

[Acts 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 3:25</span></span>

Ye are the children of the prophets - Greek: "Ye are the sons of the
prophets." The meaning is, not that they were literally the
"descendants" of the prophets, but that they were their "disciples,"
"pupils," "followers." They professed to follow the prophets as their
teachers and guides. Teachers among the Jews were often spoken of under
the appellation of fathers, and disciples as sons, [Mat
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#027). See notes on [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001). As they were the professed
disciples of the prophets, they should listen to them. As they lived
among the people to whom the prophets were sent, and to whom the
promises were made, they should avail themselves of the offer of mercy,
and embrace the Messiah.

And of the covenant - Ye are the sons of the covenant; that is, you are
of the posterity of Abraham, with whom the covenant was made. The word
"sons" was often thus used to denote those to whom any favor pertained.
whether by inheritance or in any other way. Thus, [Mat
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012), "The children (sons) of the
kingdom"; [Joh 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012), "the son of
perdition." The word "covenant" denotes properly "a compact or agreement
between equals, or those who have a right to make such a compact, and to
choose or refuse the terms." When applied to God and man, it denotes a
firm promise on the part of God; a pledge to be regarded with all the
sacredness of a compact, that he will do certain things on certain
conditions. It is called a covenant only to designate its sacredness and
the certainty of its fulfillment, not that man had any right to reject
any of the terms or stipulations. As man has no such right, as he is
bound to receive all that his Maker proposes, so, strictly and
literally, there has been no compact or covenant between God and man.
The promise to which Peter refers in the passage before us is in [Gen
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018); [Gen
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003).

In thy seed - Thy posterity. See [Rom
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#013), [Rom
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#016). This promise the apostle Paul
affirms had express reference to the Messiah, [Gal
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016). The word "seed" is used
sometimes to denote an individual [Gen
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#025); and the apostle [Gal
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016) affirms that there was special
reference to Christ in the promise made to Abraham.

All the kindreds - The word translated "kindreds" πατριαὶ patriai
denotes "those who have a common father or ancestor," and is applied to
families. It is also referred to those larger communities which were
descended from the same ancestor, and thus refers to nations, [Eph
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#015). Here it evidently refers to "all
nations."

Be blessed - Be made happy.

[Acts 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 3:26</span></span>

Unto you first - To you who are Jews. This was the direction, that the
gospel should be first preached to the Jews, beginning at Jerusalem,
[Luk 24:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047). Jesus himself also
confined his ministry entirely to the Jews.

Having raised up - This expression does not refer to his having raised
him from the dead, but is used in the same sense as in [Act
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#022), where God promised that he would
raise up a prophet, and send him to teach the people. Peter means that
God had appointed his Son Jesus, or had commissioned him to go and
preach to the people to turn them away from their sins.

To bless you - To make you happy; to fulfill the promise made to
Abraham.

In turning away - That is, by his preaching, example, death, etc. The
highest blessing that can be conferred upon people is to be turned from
sin. Sin is the source of all woes, and if people are turned from that,
they will be happy. Christ blesses no one in sin, or while loving sin,
but by turning them from sin. This was the object which he had in view
in coming, [Isa 59:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#020); [Mat
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021). The design of Peter in these
remarks was to show them that the Messiah had come, and that now they
might look for happiness, pardon, and mercy through him. As the Jews
might, so may all; and as Jesus, while living, sought to turn away
people from their sins, so he does still, and still designs to bless all
nations by the gospel which he had himself preached, and to establish
which he died. All may therefore come and be blessed; and all may
rejoice in the prospect that these blessings will yet be bestowed on all
the kindreds of the earth. May the happy day soon come!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 4](act004)

</div>
