<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act006)  [Next](act008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 7:0</span></span>

This chapter Acts 7 contains the defense of Stephen before the
Sanhedrin, or Great Council of the Jews. There has been great diversity
of opinion about the object which Stephen had in view in this defense,
and about the reason why he introduced at such length the history of the
Jewish people. But a few remarks may perhaps show his design. He was
accused of "blasphemy in speaking against the institutions of Moses and
the temple, that is, against everything held sacred among the Jews." To
meet this charge, he gives a statement, at length, of his belief in the
Mosaic religion, in the great points of their history, and in the fact
that God had interposed in a remarkable manner in defending them from
dangers. By this historical statement he avows his full belief in the
divine origin of the Jewish religion, and thus "indirectly" repels the
charge of blasphemy. It is further to be remembered that this was the
best way of securing the "attention" of the Council. If he had entered
upon an abstract defense, he might expect to be stopped by their cavils
or their clamor.

But the history of their own nation was a favorite topic among the Jews.
They were always ready to listen to an account of their ancestors; and
to secure their attention, nothing more was necessary than to refer to
their illustrious lives and deeds. Compare Ps. 78; Ps. 105; Ps. 106; Ps.
135; Ezek. 20: In this way, Stephen secured their attention, and
practically repelled the charge of speaking reproachfully of Moses and
the temple. He showed them that he had as firm a belief as they in the
great historical facts of their nation. It is to be remembered, also,
that this speech was broken off in the midst [Act
7:53-54](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#053), and it is therefore difficult
to state fully what the design of Stephen was. It seems clear, however,
that he intended to convict them of guilt, by showing that they
sustained the same character as their forefathers had manifested [Act
7:51-52](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051); and there is some probability
that he intended to show that the acceptable worship of God was not to
be confined to any place particularly, from the fact that the worship of
Abraham, and the patriarchs, and Moses, was acceptable before the temple
was raised ([Act 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#002), etc.), and from
the declaration in [Act 7:48](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#048), that God
does not dwell in temples made with hands. All that can be said here is:

\(1\) That Stephen showed his full belief in the divine appointment of
Moses and the historical facts of their religion;

\(2\) That he laid "the foundation" of an argument to show that those
things were not perpetually binding, and that acceptable worship might
be offered in other places and in another manner than at the temple.

It has been asked in what way Luke became acquainted with this speech so
as to repeat it. The Scripture has not informed us. But we may remark:

\(1\) That Stephen was the first martyr. His death and the incidents
connected with it could not but be a matter of interest to the first
Christians, and the substance of his defense, at least, would be
familiar to the disciples. There is no improbability in supposing that
imperfect copies might be preserved by writing, and circulated among
them.

\(2\) Luke was the companion of Paul. (See the introduction to the
Gospel by Luke.) Paul was present when this defense was delivered, and
was a man who would be likely to remember what was said on such an
occasion. From him Luke might have derived the account of this defense.
In regard to this discourse, it may be further remarked, that it is not
necessary to suppose that Stephen was inspired. Even if there should be
found inaccuracies, as some critics have pretended, in the address, it
would not militate against its genuineness. It is the defense of a man
on trial under a serious charge; not a man of whom there is evidence
that he was "inspired," but a pious, devoted, heavenly-minded man. All
that the sacred narrative is responsible for is the correctness of the
report. Luke alleges only that such a speech was in fact delivered,
without affirming that every particular in it is correct.

[Acts 7:33](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 7:33</span></span>

Then said the Lord ... - In Exo. 3 this is introduced in a different
order, as being spoken "before" God said "I am the God," etc.

Put off thy shoes ... - [Exo 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#005). To
put off the shoes; or sandals, was an act of reverence. The ancients
were especially not permitted to enter a temple or holy place with their
shoes on. Indeed, it was customary for the Jews to remove their shoes
whenever they entered any house as a mere matter of civility. Compare
the notes on [Joh 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#005). See [Jos
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#015). "The same custom, growing out of
the same feeling," says Prof. Hackett (Illustrations of Scripture, pp.
74, 75), "is observed among the Eastern nations at the present day. The
Arabs and Turks never enter the mosques without putting off their shoes.
They exact a compliance with this rule from those of a different faith
who visit these sacred places. Though, until a recent period, the
Muslims excluded Christians entirely from the mosques, they now permit
foreigners to enter some of them, provided they leave their shoes at the
door, or exchange them for others which have not been defiled by common
use.

"A Samaritan from Nablus, who conducted Mr. Robinson and Mr. Smith to
the summit of Gerizim, when he came within a certain distance of the
spot, took off his shoes, saying it was unlawful for his people to tread
with shoes upon this ground, it being holy."

Is holy ground - Is rendered sacred by the symbol of the divine
presence. We should enter the sanctuary, the place set apart for divine
worship, not only with reverence in our hearts, but with every
"external" indication of veneration. Solemn awe and deep seriousness
become the place set apart to the service of God. Compare [Ecc
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#001).

[Acts 7:34](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 7:34</span></span>

I have seen ... - The repetition of this word is in accordance with the
usage of the Hebrew writers when they wish to represent anything
emphatically.

Their groaning - Under their oppressions.

Am come down - This is spoken in accordance with human conceptions. It
means that God was about to deliver them.

I will send thee ... - This is a mere summary of what is expressed at
much greater length in [Exo 3:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#007).

[Acts 7:35](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 7:35</span></span>

Whom they refused - That is, when he first presented himself to them,
[Exo 2:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#013). Stephen introduces and
dwells upon this refusal in order, perhaps, to remind them that this had
been the character of their nation, and to prepare the way for the
charge which he intended to bring against those whom he addressed, as
being stiff-necked and rebellious. See [Act
7:51-52](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051), etc.

A ruler - A military leader, or a governor in civil matters.

A deliverer - A Redeemer - λυτρωτὴν lutrōtēn. It properly means one who
redeems a captive or a prisoner by paying a "price" or "ransom." It is
applied thus to the Lord Jesus, as having redeemed or purchased sinners
by his blood as a price, [Tit 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#014);
[Pe1 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#018); [Heb
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012). It is used here, however, in a
more "general" sense to denote "the deliverance," without specifying the
manner. Compare [Exo 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006); [Luk
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#021); [Luk
1:68](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#068); [Luk
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#038).

By the hand of the angel - Under the direction and by the "help" of the
angel, [Num 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#016). See on [Act
7:30](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#030).

[Acts 7:36](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 7:36</span></span>

Wonders and signs - Miracles, and remarkable interpositions of God. See
the notes on [Act 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022).

In the land of Egypt - By the ten plagues. Exo. 4-12.

In the Red sea - Dividing it, and conducting the Israelites in safety,
and overthrowing the Egyptians, Exo. 14.

In the wilderness - During their forty years' journey to the promised
land. The wonders or miracles were, providing them with manna daily;
with flesh in a miraculous manner; with water from the rock, etc., Exo.
16; Exo. 17; etc.

[Acts 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 7:37</span></span>

Which said ... - [Deu 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015), [Deu
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#018). See this explained, [Act
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#022). Stephen introduced this to
remind them of the promise of a Messiah; to show his faith in that
promise; and "particularly" to remind them of their obligation to hear
and obey him.

[Acts 7:38](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 7:38</span></span>

In the church - The word "church" means literally "the people called
out," and is applied with great propriety to the assembly or multitude
called out of Egypt, and separated from the world. It has not, however,
of necessity our idea of a church, but means the "assembly," or people
called out of Egypt and placed under the conduct of Moses.

With the angel - In this place there is undoubted reference to the
giving of the Law on Mount Sinai. Yet that was done by God himself, Exo.
20: It is clear, therefore, that by "the angel" here, Stephen intends to
designate him who was God. It may be observed, however, that "the Law"
is represented as having been given by the ministry of an angel (in this
place) and by the ministry of "angels," [Act
7:53](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#053); [Heb
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#002). The essential idea is, that God
did it by a messenger, or by mediators. The "character" and "rank" of
the messengers, or of the "principal" messenger, must be learned by
looking at all the circumstances of the case.

The lively oracles - See [Rom 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#002). The
word "oracles" here means "commands" or "laws" of God. The word
"lively," or "living" ζῶντα zōnta, stands in opposition to what is dead,
or useless, and means what is vigorous, efficacious; and in this place
it means that the commands were of such a nature, and given in such
circumstances, as to secure attention; to produce obedience; to excite
them to act for God - in opposition to laws which would fall powerless,
and produce no effect.

[Acts 7:39](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 7:39</span></span>

Would not obey ... - This refers to what they said of him when he was in
the mount, [Exo 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001), [Exo
32:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#023).

In their hearts turned ... - They wished to return to Egypt. They
regretted that they had come out of Egypt, and desired again the things
which they had there, as preferable to what they had in the desert, [Num
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#005). Perhaps, however, the expression
means, not that they desired literally to "return" to Egypt, but that
"their hearts inclined to the habits and morals of the Egyptians." They
forsook God, and imitated the idolatries of the Egyptians.

[Acts 7:40](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">act 7:40</span></span>

Saying unto Aaron - [Exo 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001).

Make us gods - That is, idols.

[Acts 7:41](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">act 7:41</span></span>

And they made a calf - This was made of the ear-rings and ornaments
which they had brought from Egypt, [Exo
32:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#002). Stephen introduces this to
remind them how prone the nation had been to reject God, and to walk in
the ways of sin.

[Acts 7:42](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">act 7:42</span></span>

Then God turned - That is, turned away from them; abandoned them to
their own desires.

The host of heaven - The stars, or heavenly bodies. The word "host"
means "armies." It is applied to the heavenly bodies because they are
very numerous, and appear to be "marshalled" or arrayed in military
order. It is from this that God is called Yahweh "of hosts," as being
the ruler of these well-arranged heavenly bodies. See the notes on [Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009). The proof that they did this
Stephen proceeds to allege by a question from the prophets.

In the book of the prophets - [Amo
5:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#025). The twelve minor prophets
were commonly written in one volume, and were called the Book of the
Prophets; that is, the book containing these several prophecies, Daniel,
Hosea, Micah, etc. They were small "tracts" separately, and were bound
up together to preserve them from being lost. This passage is not quoted
literally; it is evidently made from memory; and though in its main
spirit it coincides with the passage in Amos, yet in some important
respects it varies from it.

O ye house of Israel - Ye people of Israel.

Have ye offered ... - That is, ye have not offered. The interrogative
form is often an emphatic way of saying that the thing had "not" been
done. But it is certain that the Jews did offer sacrifices to God in the
wilderness, though it is also certain that they did not do it with a
pure and upright heart. They kept up the form of worship generally, but
they frequently forsook God, and offered worship to idols. through the
continuous space of forty years they did "not" honor God, but often
departed from him, and worshipped idols.

[Acts 7:43](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">act 7:43</span></span>

Yea, ye took up - That is, you bore, or you carried with you, for
purposes of idolatrous worship.

The tabernacle - This word properly means a "tent"; but it is also
applied to the small tent or house in which was contained the image of
the god; the shrine, box, or tent in which the idol was placed. It is
customary for idolatrous nations to bear their idols about with them,
enclosed in cases or boxes of various sizes, usually very small, as
their idols are commonly small. Probably they were made in the shape of
small "temples" or tabernacles; and such appear to have been the "silver
shrines" for Diana, made at Ephesus, [Act
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#024). These shrines, or images, were
borne with them as a species of amulet, charm, or talisman to defend
them from evil. Such images the Jews seem to have carried with them.

Moloch - This word comes from the Hebrew word signifying "king." This
was a god of the Ammonites, to whom human sacrifices were offered. Moses
in several places forbids the Israelites, under penalty of death, to
dedicate their children to Moloch, by making them pass through the fire,
[Lev 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#021); [Lev
20:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#002). There is great probability
that the Hebrews were addicted to the worship of this deity after they
entered the land of Canaan. Solomon built a temple to Moloch on the
Mount of Olives [Kg1 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007); and
Manasseh made his son pass through the fire in honor of this idol, [Kg2
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#003), [Kg2
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#006). The image of this idol was made
of brass, and his arms extended so as to embrace anyone; and when they
offered children to him, they heated the statue, and when it was burning
hot, they placed the child in his arms, where it was soon destroyed by
heat. It is not certain what this god was supposed to represent. Some
suppose it was in honor of the planet Saturn; others, the sun; others,
Mercury, Venus, etc. What particular god it was is not material. It was
the most cutting reproof that could be made to the Jews, that their
fathers had been guilty of worshipping this idol.

And the star - The Hebrew in this place is, "Chiun your images, the star
of your god." The expression used here leads us to suppose that this was
a star which was worshipped, but what star it is not easy to ascertain;
nor is it easy to determine why it is called both "Chiun" and "Remphan."
Stephen quotes from the Septuagint translation. In that translation the
word "Chiun" is rendered by the word "Raiphan," or "Rephan," easily
changed into "Remphan." Why the authors of that version adopted this is
not known. It was probably, however, from one of two causes:

\(1\) Either because the word "Chiun" in Hebrew meant the same as
"Remphan" in the language of Egypt, where the translation was made; or,

\(2\) Because the "object" of worship called "Chiun" in Hebrew was
called "Remphan" in the language of Egypt. It is generally agreed that
the object of their worship was the planet "Saturn," or "Mars," both of
which planets were worshipped as gods of evil influence. In Arabic, the
word "Chevan" denotes the planet Saturn. Probably "Rephan," or
"Remphan," is the Coptic name for the same planet, and the Septuagint
adopted this because that translation was made in Egypt, where the
Coptic language was spoken.

Figures which ye made - Images of the god which they made. See the
article "Chiun" in Robinson's Calmet.

And I will carry you away ... - This is simply expressing in few words
what is stated at greater length in [Amo
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#027). In Hebrew it is "Damascus"; but
this evidently denotes the Eastern region, in which also Babylon was
situated.

[Acts 7:44](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">act 7:44</span></span>

The tabernacle of witness - The "tent" or "tabernacle" which Moses was
commanded to make. It was called a tabernacle of "witness," or of
"testimony," because it was the visible witness or proof of God's
presence with them; the evidence that he to whom it was devoted was
their protector and guide. The name is given either to the "tent," to
the two tables of stone, or to the ark; all of which were "witnesses,"
or "evidences" of God's relation to them as their Lawgiver and guide,
[Exo 16:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#034); [Exo
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#016), [Exo
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#021); [Exo
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#021); [Exo
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#006), [Exo
30:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#036); [Exo
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#018), etc.; [Num
1:50](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#050), [Num
1:53](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#053). The two charges against Stephen
were, that he had spoken blasphemy against Moses or his Law, and against
the temple, [Act 6:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#013). In the
previous part of this defense he had shown his respect for Moses and his
Law. He now proceeds to show that he did not design to speak with
disrespect of the temple, or the holy places of their worship. He
therefore expresses his belief in the divine appointment of both the
tabernacle [Act 7:44-46](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#044) and of the
temple [Act 7:47](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#047).

According to the fashion ... - According to the pattern that was shown
to him, by which it was to be made, [Exo
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#009), [Exo
25:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#040); [Exo
26:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#030). As God showed him "a pattern,"
it proved that the tabernacle had his sanction. Against that Stephen did
not intend to speak.

[Acts 7:45](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">act 7:45</span></span>

Our fathers that came after - None of the generation that came out of
Egypt were permitted to enter into the and of Canaan except Caleb and
Joshua, [Num 14:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#022); [Num
32:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#011). Hence, it is said that their
fathers who "came after," that is, after the generation when the
tabernacle was built. The Greek, however, here means, properly, "which
also our fathers, having "received," brought," etc. The sense is not
materially different. Stephen means that it was not brought in by that
generation, but by the next.

With Jesus - This should have been rendered "with Joshua." Jesus is the
Greek mode of writing the name "Joshua." But the Hebrew name should by
all means have been retained here, as also in [Heb
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#008).

Into the possession of the Gentiles - Into the land possessed by the
Gentiles, that is, into the promised land then occupied by the
Canaanites, etc.

Whom God ... - That is, he continued to drive them out until the time of
David, when they were completely expelled. Or it may mean that the
tabernacle was in the possession of the Jews, and was the appointed
place of worship, until the time of David, who desired to build him a
temple. The Greek is ambiguous. The "connection" favors the latter
interpretation.

[Acts 7:46](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">act 7:46</span></span>

Who found favour ... - That is, God granted him great prosperity, and
delivered him from his enemies.

To find a tabernacle - To prepare a permanent dwelling-place for the
"ark," and for the visible symbols of the divine presence. Hitherto the
ark had been kept in the tabernacle, and had been borne about from place
to place. David sought to build a house that would be permanent, where
the ark might be deposited, 2 Sam. 7; [Ch1
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#007).

[Acts 7:47](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">act 7:47</span></span>

But Solomon ... - Built the temple. David was not permitted to do it
because he had been a man of war, [Ch1
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#008). He prepared the principal
materials for the temple, but Solomon built it, 1 Chr. 22: Compare 1
Kings 6.

[Acts 7:48](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">act 7:48</span></span>

Howbeit - But. Stephen was charged with speaking against the temple. He
had now shown that he had due veneration for it, by his declaring that
it had been built by the command of God. But he "now" adds that God does
not need such a temple. Heaven is his throne; the universe his
dwelling-place; and "therefore" this temple might be destroyed. A new,
glorious truth was to be revealed to mankind, that God was not
"confined" in his worship to any age, or people, or nation. In entire
consistency, therefore, with all proper respect for the temple at
Jerusalem, it might be maintained that the time would come when that
temple would be destroyed, and when God might be worshipped by all
nations.

The Most High - God. This sentiment was expressed by Solomon when the
temple was dedicated, [Kg1 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#027).

As saith the prophet - [Isa 66:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001).
The place is not literally quoted, but the sense is given.

[Acts 7:49](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">act 7:49</span></span>

Heaven is my throne - See the notes on [Mat
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034).

Earth is my footstool - See the notes on [Mat
5:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#035).

What house ... - What house or temple can be large or magnificent enough
for the dwelling of Him who made all things?

The place of my rest - My home, my abode, my fixed seat or habitation.
Compare [Psa 95:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#011).

[Acts 7:51](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">act 7:51</span></span>

Ye stiff-necked - The discourse of Stephen has every appearance of
having been interrupted by the clamors and opposition of the Sanhedrin.
This verse has no immediate connection with what precedes, and appears
to have been spoken in the midst of opposition and clamor. If we may
conjecture in this case, it would seem that the Jews saw the drift of
his argument; that they interrupted him; and that when the tumult had
somewhat subsided, he addressed them in the language of this verse,
showing them that they sustained a character precisely similar to their
rebellious fathers. The word "stiff-necked" is often used in the Old
Testament, [Exo 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#009); [Exo
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#003), [Exo
33:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#005); [Exo
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#009); [Deu
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#006), [Deu
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#013); [Deu
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#016), etc. It is a figurative
expression taken from oxen that are refractory, and that will not submit
to be yoked. Applied to people, it means that they are stubborn,
contumacious, and unwilling to submit to the restraints of Law.

Uncircumcised in heart - Circumcision was a sign of being a Jew - of
acknowledging the authority of the laws of Moses. It was also emblematic
of purity, and of submission to the Law of God. The expression
"uncircumcised in heart" denotes those who were not willing to
acknowledge that Law, and submit to it. They had hearts filled with
vicious and unsubdued affections and desires.

And ears - That is, who are unwilling to "hear" what God says. Compare
[Lev 26:41](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#041); [Jer
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#026). See the notes on [Rom
2:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#028).

Resist the Holy Ghost - You oppose the message which is brought to you
by the authority of God and the inspiration of his Spirit. The message
brought by Moses; by the prophets; by the Saviour; and by the apostles -
all by the infallible direction of the Holy Spirit - they and their
fathers opposed.

As your fathers did ... - As he had specified in [Act
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#027), [Act
7:35](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#035), [Act
7:39-43](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#039).

[Acts 7:52](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">act 7:52</span></span>

Which of the prophets ... - The interrogative form here is a strong mode
of saying that they had persecuted "all" the prophets. It was "the
characteristic of the nation" to persecute the messengers of God. This
is not to be taken as literally and universally true; but it was a
general truth; it was the national characteristic. See the notes on [Mat
21:33-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#033); [Mat
23:29-35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#029).

And they have slain them ... - That is, they have slain the prophets,
whose main message was that the Messiah was to come. It was a great
aggravation of their offence that they put to death the messengers which
foretold the greatest blessing that the nation could receive.

The Just One - The Messiah. See the notes on [Act
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#014).

Of whom ye ... - You thus show that you resemble those who rejected and
put to death the prophets. You have even gone beyond them in guilt,
because you have put the Messiah himself to death.

The betrayers - They are called "betrayers" here because they employed
Judas to betray him - agreeable to the maxim in law, "He who does
anything by another is held to have done it himself."

[Acts 7:53](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">act 7:53</span></span>

Who have received the law - The Law of Moses, given on Mount Sinai.

By the disposition of angels - There has been much diversity of opinion
in regard to this phrase, εἰς διαταγὰς ἀγγέλων eis diatagas angelōn. The
word translated "disposition" does not occur elsewhere in the New
Testament. It properly means the "constituting" or "arranging" of an
army; disposing it into ranks and proper divisions. Hence, it has been
supposed to mean that the Law was given "amidst" the various ranks of
angels, being present to witness its promulgation. Others suppose that
the angels were employed as agents or instruments to communicate the
Law. All that the expression fairly implies is the former; that the Law
was given amidst the attending ranks of angels, as if they were summoned
to witness the pomp and ceremony of giving "law" to an entire people,
and through them to an entire world. It should be added, moreover, that
the Jews applied the word "angels" to any messengers of God; to fire,
and tempest, and wind, etc. And all that Stephen means here may be to
express the common Jewish opinion that God was attended on this occasion
by the heavenly hosts, and by the symbols of his presence, fire, and
smoke, and tempest. Compare [Psa
104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004); [Psa
68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017). Other places declare that the
Law was spoken by an angel, one eminent above all attending angels, the
special messenger of God. See the notes on [Act
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#038). It is plain that Stephen spoke
only the common sentiment of the Jews. Thus, Herod is introduced by
Josephus (Antiq., book 15, chapter 5, section 3) as saying, "We have
learned in God the most excellent of our doctrines, and the most holy
part of our Law by angels," etc. In the eyes of the Jews, it justly gave
increased majesty and solemnity to the Law, that it had been given in so
grand and imposing circumstances. It greatly aggravated their guilt
that, notwithstanding this, they had not kept it.

[Acts 7:54](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">act 7:54</span></span>

They were cut to the heart - They were exceedingly enraged and
indignant. The whole course of the speech had been such as to excite
their anger, and now they could restrain themselves no longer.

They gnashed on him ... - Expressive of the bitterness and malignity of
their feeling.

[Acts 7:55](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">act 7:55</span></span>

Full of the Holy Ghost - See the notes on [Act
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004).

Looked up stedfastly - Fixed his eyes intently on heaven. Foreseeing his
danger, and the effect his speech had produced; seeing that there was no
safety in the Great Council of the nation, and no prospect of justice at
their hands, he cast his eyes to heaven and sought protection there.
When dangers threaten us, our hope of safety lies in heaven. When people
threaten our persons, reputation, or lives, it becomes us to fix our
eyes on the heavenly world; and we shall not look in vain.

And saw the glory of God - This phrase is commonly used to denote the
visible symbols of God. It means some magnificent representation; a
splendor, or light, that is the appropriate exhibition of the presence
of God, [Mat 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#027); [Mat
24:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030). See the notes on [Luk
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#009). In the case of Stephen there is
every indication of a vision or supernatural representation of the
heavenly objects; something in advance of mere "faith" such as dying
Christians now have. What was its precise nature we have no means of
ascertaining. Objects were often represented to prophets by "visions";
and probably something similar is intended here. It was such an
elevation of view - such a representation of truth and of the glory of
God, as to be denoted by the word "see"; though it is not to be
maintained that Stephen really saw the Saviour with the bodily eye.

On the right hand of God - That is, exalted to a place of honor and
power in the heavens. See the [Mat
26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064) note; [Act
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#025) note.

[Acts 7:56](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">act 7:56</span></span>

I see the heavens opened - A figurative expression, denoting that he was
permitted to see "into" heaven, or to see what was there, as if the
firmament was divided, and the eye was permitted to penetrate the
eternal world. Compare [Eze 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001).

[Acts 7:57](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">act 7:57</span></span>

Then they cried out - That is, probably, "the people," not the members
of the council It is evident he was put to death in a popular tumult.
They had charged him with blasphemy; and they regarded what he had now
said as full proof of it.

And stopped their ears - That they might hear no more blasphemy.

With one accord - In a tumult; unitedly.

[Acts 7:58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">act 7:58</span></span>

And cast him out of the city - This was in accordance with the usual
custom. In [Lev 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#014), it was directed
to bring forth him that had cursed without the camp; and it was not
usual, the Jewish writers inform us, to stone in the presence of the
Sanhedrin. Though this was a popular tumult, and Stephen was condemned
without the regular process of trial, yet some of the "forms" of law
were observed, and he was stoned in the manner directed in the case of
blasphemers.

And stoned him - This was the punishment appointed in the case of
blasphemy, [Lev 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#016). See the notes
on [Joh 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#031).

And the witnesses - That is, the false witnesses who bore testimony
against him, [Act 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#013). It was
directed in the Law [Deu 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#007) that the
"witnesses" in the case should be first in executing the sentence of the
Law. This was done to prevent false accusations by the prospect that
they must be employed as executioners. After they had commenced the
process of execution, all the people joined in it, [Deu
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#007); [Lev
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#016).

Laid down their clothes - Their "outer garments." They were accustomed
to lay these aside when they ran or worked. See the notes on [Mat
5:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#040).

At a young man's feet ... - That is, they procured him to take care of
their garments. This is mentioned solely because Saul, or Paul,
afterward became so celebrated, first as a persecutor, and then an
apostle. His whole heart was in this persecution of Stephen; and he
himself afterward alluded to this circumstance as an evidence of his
sinfulness in persecuting the Lord Jesus, [Act
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#020).

[Acts 7:59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#059)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_059">act 7:59</span></span>

Calling upon God - The word God is not in the original, and should not
have been in the translation. It is in none of the ancient mss. or
versions. It should have been rendered, "They stoned Stephen, invoking,
or calling upon, and saying, Lord Jesus," etc. That is, he was engaged
"in prayer" to the Lord Jesus. The word is used to express "prayer" in
the following, among other places: [Co2
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#023), "I call God to witness"; [Pe1
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#017), "And if ye call on the Father,"
etc.; [Act 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#021), "whosoever shall call
on the name of the Lord," etc.; [Act
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#014); [Act
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#016); [Rom
10:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#012). This was, therefore, an act
of worship; a solemn invocation of the Lord Jesus, in the most
interesting circumstances in which a man can be placed - in his dying
moments. And this shows that it is right to worship the Lord Jesus, and
to pray to him. For if Stephen was inspired, it settles the question.
The example of an inspired man in such circumstances is a safe and
correct example. If it should be said that the inspiration of Stephen
cannot be made out, yet the inspiration of Luke, who has recorded it,
will not be called into question. Then the following circumstances show
that he, an inspired man, regarded it as right, and as a proper example
to be followed:

\(1\) He has recorded it without the slightest expression of an opinion
that it was improper. On the contrary, there is every evidence that he
regarded the conduct of Stephen in this case as right and praiseworthy.
There is, therefore, this attestation to its propriety.

\(2\) the Spirit who inspired Luke knew what use would be made of this
case. He knew that it would be used as an example, and as an evidence
that it was right to worship the Lord Jesus. It is one of the cases
which has been used to perpetuate the worship of the Lord Jesus in every
age. If it was wrong, it is inconceivable that it should be recorded
without some expression of disapprobation.

\(3\) the case is strikingly similar to that recorded in [Joh
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028), where Thomas offered worship to
the Lord Jesus "as his God," without reproof. If Thomas did it in the
presence of the Saviour without reproof, it was right. If Stephen did it
without any expression of disapprobation from the inspired historian, it
was right.

\(4\) these examples were used to encourage Christians and Christian
martyrs to offer homage to Jesus Christ. Thus, Pliny, writing to the
Emperor Trajan, and giving an account of the Christians in Bithynia,
says that they were accustomed to meet and "sing hymns to Christ as to
God" (Latriner).

\(5\) it is worthy of remark that Stephen, in his death, offered the
same act of homage to Christ that Christ himself did to the Father when
he died, [Luk 23:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046). From all these
considerations, it follows that the Lord Jesus is a proper object of
worship; that in most solemn circumstances it is right to call upon him,
to worship him, and to commit our dearest interests to his hands. If
this may be done, he is divine.

Receive my spirit - That is, receive it to thyself; take it to thine
abode in heaven.

[Acts 7:60](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">act 7:60</span></span>

And he kneeled down - This seems to have been a "voluntary" kneeling; a
placing himself in this position for the purpose of "prayer," choosing
to die in this attitude.

Lord - That is, Lord Jesus. See the notes on [Act
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#024).

Lay not ... - Forgive them. This passage strikingly resembles the dying
prayer of the Lord Jesus, [Luk 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034).
Nothing but the Christian religion will enable a man to utter such
sentiments in his dying moments.

He fell asleep - This is the usual mode of describing the death of
saints in the Bible. It is an expression indicating:

\(1\) The "peacefulness" of their death, compared with the alarm of
sinners;

\(2\) The hope of a resurrection; as we retire to sleep with the hope of
again awaking to the duties and enjoyments of life. See [Joh
11:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#011); [Co1
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030); [Co1
15:51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051); [Th1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#014); [Th1
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#010); [Mat
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#024).

In view of the death of this first Christian martyr, we may remark:

\(1\) That it is right to address to the Lord Jesus the language of
prayer.

\(2\) it is especially proper to do it in afflictions, and in the
prospect of death, [Heb 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015).

\(3\) sustaining grace will be derived in trials chiefly from a view of
the Lord Jesus. If we can look to him as our Saviour; see him to be
exalted to deliver us; and truly commit our souls to him, we shall find
the grace which we need in our afflictions.

\(4\) we should have such confidence in him as to enable us to commit
ourselves to him at any time. To do this, we should live a life of
faith. In health, and youth, and strength, we should seek him as our
first and best friend.

\(5\) while we are in health we should prepare to die. What an unfit
place for preparation for death would have been the situation of
Stephen! How impossible then would it have been to have made
preparation! Yet the dying bed is often a place as unfit to prepare as
were the circumstances of Stephen. When racked with pain; when faint and
feeble; when the mind is indisposed to thought, or when it raves in the
wildness of delirium, what an unfit place is this to prepare to die! I
have seen many dying beds; I have seen many persons in all stages of
their last sickness; but never have I yet seen a dying bed which seemed
to me to be a proper place to make preparation for eternity.

\(6\) how peaceful and calm is a death like that of Stephen, when
compared with the alarms and anguish of a sinner! One moment of such
peace in that trying time is better than all the pleasures and honors
which the world can bestow; and to obtain such peace then, the dying
sinner would be willing to give all the wealth of the Indies, and all
the crowns of the earth. So may I die and so may all my readers -
enabled, like this dying martyr, to commit my departing spirit to the
sure keeping of the great Redeemer! When we take a parting view of the
world; when our eyes shall be turned for the last time to take a look of
friends and relatives; when the darkness of death shall begin to come
around us, then may we be enabled to cast the eye of faith to the
heavens, and say, "Lord Jesus, receive our spirits." Thus, may we fall
asleep, peaceful in death, in the hope of the resurrection of the just.

[Acts 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 7:1</span></span>

Then said the high priest - See the notes on [Mat
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#004). In this case the high priest
seems to have presided in the council.

Are these things so? - To wit, the charge alleged against him of
blasphemy against Moses and the temple, [Act
6:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#013).

[Acts 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 7:2</span></span>

Men, brethren, and fathers - These were the usual titles by which the
Sanhedrin was addressed. In all this Stephen was perfectly respectful,
and showed that he was disposed to render due honor to the institutions
of the nation.

The God of glory - This is a Hebrew form of expression denoting "the
glorious God." It properly denotes His "majesty, or splendor, or
magnificence"; and the word "glory" is often applied to the splendid
appearances in which God has manifested Himself to people, [Deu
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#024); [Exo
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#018); [Exo
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#007), [Exo
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#010); [Lev
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#023); [Num
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#010). Perhaps Stephen meant to affirm
that God appeared to Abraham in some such glorious or splendid
manifestation, by which he would know that he was addressed by God.
Stephen, moreover, evidently uses the word "glory" to repel the charge
of "blasphemy" against God, and to show that he regarded him as worthy
of honor and praise.

Appeared ... - In what manner he appeared is not said. In [Gen
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001), it is simply recorded that God
"had said" unto Abraham, etc.

Unto our father - The Jews valued themselves much on being the children
of Abraham. See the notes on [Mat 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009).
The expression was therefore well calculated to conciliate their minds.

When he was in Mesopotamia - In [Gen
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031), it is said that Abraham dwelt
"in Ur of the Chaldees." The word "Mesopotamia" properly denotes the
region between the two rivers, the Euphrates and the Tigris. See notes
on [Act 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009). The name is Greek, and
the region had also other names before the Greek name was given to it.
In [Gen 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031); [Gen
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#007), it is called Ur of the Chaldees.
Mesopotamia and Chaldea might not exactly coincide; but it is evident
that Stephen meant to say that "Ur" was in the country afterward called
Mesopotamia. Its precise situation is unknown. A Persian fortress of
this name is mentioned by Ammianus [Gen
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#008) between Nisibis and the Tigris.

Before he dwelt in Charran - From [Gen
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031), it would seem that Terah took
his son Abraham of his own accord, and removed to Haran. But from [Gen
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001); [Gen
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#007), it appears that God had
commanded "Abraham" to remove, and so he ordered it in his providence
that "Terah" was disposed to remove his family with an intention of
going into the land of Canaan. The word "Charran" is the Greek form of
the Hebrew "Haran," [Gen 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031). This
place was also in Mesopotamia, in 36 degrees 52 minutes north latitude
and 39 degrees 5 minutes east longitude. Here Terah died [Gen
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#032); and to this place Jacob retired
when he fled from his brother Esau, [Gen
27:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#043). It is situated "in a flat and
sandy plain, and is inhabited by a few wandering Arabs, who select it
for the delicious water which it contains" (Robinson's Calmet).

[Acts 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 7:3</span></span>

And said unto him - How long this was said before he went is not
recorded. Moses simply says that God had commanded him to go, [Gen
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001).

Thy kindred - Thy relatives, or family connections. It seems that
"Terah" went with him as far as to Haran; but Abraham was apprised that
he was to leave his family and to go almost alone.

Into the land ... - The country was yet unknown. The place was to be
shown him. This is presented in the New Testament as a strong instance
of faith, [Heb 11:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#008). It was an act
of "simple confidence" in God. And to leave his country and home; to go
into a land of strangers, not knowing whither he went, required strong
confidence in God. It is a simple illustration of what man is always
required to do at the command of God. Thus, the gospel requires him to
commit all to God; to yield body and soul to his disposal; to be ready
at his command to forsake father, and mother, and friends, and houses,
and lands, for the sake of the Lord Jesus, [Luk
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#033); [Mat
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#027), [Mat
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029). The trials which Abraham might
have anticipated may be readily conceived. He was going, in a rude and
barbarous age of the world, into a land of strangers. He was without
arms or armies, and almost alone. He did not even know the nature or
situation of the land, or the character of its inhabitants.

He had no title to it; no claim to urge; and he went depending on the
simple promise of God that he would give it to him. He went, therefore,
trusting simply to the promise of God. Thus, his conduct illustrated
precisely what we are to do in reference to all our coming life, and to
the eternity before us: We are to trust simply to the promise of God,
and do what he requires. This is faith. In Abraham it was as simple and
intelligible an operation of mind as ever occurs in any instance. Nor is
faith in the Scriptures regarded as more mysterious than any other
mental operation. If Abraham had seen all that was to result from his
going into that land, it would have been a sufficient reason to induce
him to do as he did. But God saw it; and Abraham was required to act
just as if he had seen it all, and all the reasons why he was called.
Upon the strength of God's promises, Abraham was called to act. This was
faith. It did not require him to act where there was "no reason" for his
so acting, but where he did not see the reason. So in all cases of
faith. If man could see all that God sees, he would perceive reasons for
acting as God requires. But the reasons of things are often concealed,
and man is required to act on the belief that God sees reasons why he
should so act. To act under the proper impression of that truth which
God presents is faith; as simple and intelligible as any other act or
operation of the mind. See the notes on [Mar
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016).

[Acts 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 7:4</span></span>

Land of the Chaldeans - From Ur of the Chaldees, [Gen
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031).

When his father was dead - This passage has given rise to no small
difficulty in the interpretation. The difficulty is this: From [Gen
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#026), it would seem that Abraham was
born when Terah was 70 years of age. "And Terah lived seventy years, and
begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran." From [Gen
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#004), it seems that Abraham was 75
years of age when he departed from Haran to Canaan. The age of Terah was
therefore but 145 years. Yet in [Gen
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#032), it is said that Terah was 205
old when he died, thus leaving 60 years of Terah's life beyond the time
when Abraham left Haran. Various modes have been proposed of explaining
this difficulty:

\(1\) Errors in "numbers" are more likely to occur than any other. In
the "Samaritan" copy of the Pentateuch, it is said that Terah died in
Haran at the age of 105 years, which would suppose that his death
occurred 40 years before Abraham left Haran. But the Hebrew, Latin,
Vulgate, Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic read it as 205 years.

\(2\) it is not affirmed that Abraham was born just at the time when
Terah was 70 years of age. All that the passage in [Gen
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#026) proves, according to the usual
meaning of similar expressions, is, that Terah was 70 years old before
he had any sons, and that the three were born subsequently to that. But
which was born first or what intervals intervened between their birth
does not appear. Assuredly, it does not mean that all were born
precisely at the time when Terah was 70 years of age. Neither does it
appear that Abraham was the oldest of the three. The sons of Noah are
said to have been Shem, Ham, and Japheth [Gen
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#032); yet Japheth, though mentioned
last, was the oldest, [Gen 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021). As
Abraham afterward became much the most distinguished, and as he was the
father of the Jewish people, of whom Moses was writing, it was natural
that he should be mentioned first if it cannot be proveD that Abraham
was the oldest, as assuredly it cannot be, then there is no
improbability in supposing that his birth might have occurred many years
after Terah was 70 years of age.

\(3\) the Jews unanimously affirm that Terah relapsed into idolatry
before Abraham left Haran; and this they denominate "death," or a moral
death (Kuinoel). It is certain, therefore, that, from some cause, they
were accustomed to speak of Terah as "dead" before Abraham left him.
Stephen only used language which was customary among the Jews, and would
employ it, doubtless, correctly, though we may not be able to see
precisely how it can be reconciled with the account in Genesis.

[Acts 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 7:5</span></span>

And he gave him none inheritance - Abraham led a wandering life; and
this passage means that he did not himself receive a permanent
possession or residence in that land. The only land which he owned was
the field which he "purchased" of the children of Heth for a burial
place, Gen. 23: As this was obtained by "purchase," and not by the
direct gift of God, and as it was not designed for a "residence," it is
said that God gave him no "inheritance." It is mentioned as a strong
instance of his faith that he should remain there without a permanent
residence himself, with only the prospect that his children, at some
distant period, would inherit it.

Not so much as to set his foot on - This is a proverbial expression,
denoting in an emphatic manner that he had no land, [Deu
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#005).

Would give it to him - [Gen 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#015).
Abraham did not himself possess all that land; and the promise is
evidently equivalent to saying that it would be conferred on the family
of Abraham, or the family of which he was the father, without affirming
that "he" would himself personally possess it. It is true, however, that
Abraham himself afterward dwelt many years in that land as his home,
Gen. 13, etc.

For a possession - To be held as his own property.

When as yet he had no child - When there was no human probability that
he would have any posterity. Compare [Gen
15:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#002); [Gen
18:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#011). This is mentioned as a
strong instance of his faith; "who against hope believed in hope," [Rom
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#018).

[Acts 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 7:6</span></span>

And God spake on this wise - In this manner, [Gen
15:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013).

His seed - His posterity; his descendants.

Should sojourn - This means that they would have a "temporary residence
there." The word is used in opposition to a fixed, permanent home, and
is applied to travelers, or foreigners.

In a strange land - In the Hebrew [Gen
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013), "Shall be a stranger in a land
that is not theirs." The land of Canaan and the land of Egypt were
strange lands to them, though the obvious reference here is to the
latter.

Should bring them into bondage - Or, would make them slaves, [Exo
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#011).

And entreat them evil - Would oppress or afflict them.

Four hundred years - This is the precise time which is mentioned by
Moses, [Gen 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013). Great perplexity
has been experienced in explaining this passage, or reconciling it with
other statements. In [Exo 12:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#040), it is
said that their sojourning in Egypt was 430 years. Josephus (Antiq.,
book 2, chapter 9, section 1) also says that the time in which they were
in Egypt was 400 years; though in another place (Antiq., book 2, chapter
15, section 2) he says that they left Egypt f 430 years after their
forefather, Abraham, came to Canaan, but 215 years after Jacob removed
to Egypt. Paul also [Gal 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#017) says
that it was 430 years from the time when the promise was given to
Abraham to the time when the Law was given on Mount Sinai. The Samaritan
Pentateuch also says [Exo 12:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#040) that
the "dwelling of the sons of Israel, and of their fathers, which they
dwelt "in the land of Canaan," and in the land of Egypt, was four
hundred and thirty years."

The same is the version of the Septuagint. "A part" of this perplexity
is removed by the fact that Stephen and Moses use, in accordance with a
very common custom, "round numbers" in speaking of it, and thus speak of
400 years when the literal time was 430. The other perplexities are not
so easily removed. From the account which Moses has given of the lives
of certain persons, it would seem clear that the time which they spent
in "Egypt" was not 400 years. From [Gen
46:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#008), [Gen
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#011), it appears that "Kohath" was
born when Jacob went into Egypt. He lived 133 years, [Exo
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#018). Amram, his son, and the father
of Moses lived 137 years, [Exo 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#020).
Moses was 80 years old when he was sent to Pharaoh, [Exo
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#007). The whole time thus mentioned,
including the time in which the father lived after his son was born, was
only 350 years. Exclusive of that, it is reasonable to suppose that the
actual time of their being in Egypt could not have been but about 200
years, according to one account of Josephus. The question then is, how
can these accounts be reconciled? The only satisfactory way is by
supposing that the 430 years includes the whole time from the calling of
Abraham to the departure from Egypt. And that this was the fact is
probable from the following circumstances:

\(1\) The purpose of all the narratives on this subject is to trace the
period before they became finally settled in the land of Canaan. During
all this period from the calling of Abraham, they were in a wandering,
unfixed situation. This constituted substantially one period, including
all their oppressions, hardships, and dangers; and it was natural to
have reference to this "entire" period in any account which was given.

\(2\) all this period was properly the period of "promise," not of
"possession." In this respect the wanderings of Abraham and the
oppressions of Egypt came under the same general description.

\(3\) Abraham was himself occasionally in Egypt. He was unsettled; and
since Egypt was so pre-eminent in all their troubles, it was natural to
speak of all their oppressions as having occurred in that country. The
phrase "residence in Egypt," or "in a strange land," would come to be
synonymous, and would denote all their oppressions and trials. They
would speak of their sufferings as having been endured in Egypt, because
their afflictions there were so much more prominent than before.

\(4\) all this receives countenance from the version of the Septuagint,
and from the Samaritan text, showing the manner in which the ancient
Jews were accustomed to understand it.

\(5\) it should be added, that difficulties of chronology are more
likely to occur than any others; and it should not be deemed strange if
there are perplexities of this kind found in ancient writings which we
cannot explain. It is so in all ancient records; and all that is usually
expected in relation to such difficulties is that we should be able to
present a "probable" explanation.

[Acts 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 7:7</span></span>

And the nation ... - Referring particularly to the Egyptians.

Will I judge - The word "judge," in the Bible, often means to "execute
judgment" as well as to pronounce it; that is, "to punish." See [Joh
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#031); [Joh
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#017); [Joh
8:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#050); [Joh
12:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#047); [Act
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#006); [Co1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#013), etc. It has this meaning here.
God regarded their oppressive acts as deserving His indignation, and He
evinced it in the plagues with which He visited upon them, and in their
overthrow at the Red Sea.

Shall serve me - Shall worship me, or be regarded as my people.

In this place - That is, in the place where God made this promise to
Abraham. These words are not found in Genesis, but similar words are
found in [Exo 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#012), and it was a
practice, in making quotations, to quote the sense only, or to connect
two or more promises having relation to the same thing.

[Acts 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 7:8</span></span>

And he gave him - That is, God appointed or commanded this, [Gen
17:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#009).

The covenant - The word "covenant" denotes properly "a compact or
agreement between two or more persons," usually attended with seals,
pledges, or sanctions. In [Gen 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007),
and elsewhere, it is said that God would establish his "covenant" with
Abraham; that is, he made him certain definite promises, attended with
pledges and seals, etc. The idea of a strict "compact" or "agreement"
between God and man, as between "equal parties"; is not found in the
Bible. The word is commonly used, as here, to denote "a promise on the
part of God," attended with pledges, and demanding, on the part of man,
in order to avail himself of its benefits, a specified course of
conduct. The "covenant" is therefore another name for denoting two
things on the part of God:

\(1\) A "command," which man is not at liberty to reject, as he would be
if it were a literal covenant; and,

\(2\) A "promise," which is to be fulfilled only on the condition of
obedience. The covenant with Abraham was simply a "promise" to give him
the land, and to make him a great nation, etc. It was never proposed to
Abraham with the supposition that he was at liberty to reject it, or to
refuse to comply with its conditions. Circumcision was appointed as the
mark or indication that Abraham and those thus designated were the
persons included in the gracious purpose and promise. It served to
separate them as a special people; a people whose unique characteristic
it was that they obeyed and served the God who had made the promise to
Abraham. The phrase "covenant of circumcision" means, therefore, the
covenant or promise which God made to Abraham, of which circumcision was
the distinguishing "mark" or "sign."

The twelve patriarchs - The word "patriarch" properly denotes "the
father and ruler of a family." But it is commonly applied, by way of
eminence, to "the progenitors" of the Jewish race, particularly to "the
twelve sons of Jacob." See the notes on [Act
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#029).

[Acts 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 7:9</span></span>

Moved with envy - That is, dissatisfied with the favor which their
father Jacob showed Joseph, and envious at the dreams which indicated
that he was to be raised to remarkable honor above his parents and
brethren, [Gen 37:3-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#003).

Sold Joseph into Egypt - Sold him, that he might be taken to Egypt. This
was done at the suggestion of "Judah," who advised it that Joseph might
not be put to death by his brethren, [Gen
37:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#028). It is possible that Stephen, by
this fact, might have designed to prepare the way for a severe rebuke of
the Jews for having dealt in a similar manner with their Messiah.

But God was with him - God protected him, and overruled all these wicked
doings, so that he was raised to extraordinary honors.

[Acts 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 7:10</span></span>

And delivered him ... - That is, restored him to liberty from his
servitude and humiliation, and raised him up to high honors and offices
in Egypt.

Favour and wisdom - The favor was the result of his wisdom. His wisdom
was particularly evinced in interpreting the dreams of Pharaoh, Gen. 41.

And he made him governor ... - [Gen
41:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#040).

All his house - All the family, or all the court and government of the
nation.

[Acts 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 7:11</span></span>

Now there came a dearth - A famine, [Gen
41:54](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#054).

And Chanaan - Jacob was living at that time in Canaan.

Found no sustenance - No food; no means of living.

[Acts 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 7:12</span></span>

Was corn in Egypt - The word "corn" here rather denotes "wheat." See the
notes on [Mat 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#001).

Our fathers - His ten sons; all his sons except Joseph and Benjamin,
Gen. 42: Stephen here "refers" only to the history, without entering
into details. By this general reference he sufficiently showed that he
believed what Moses had spoken, and did not intend to show him
disrespect.

[Acts 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 7:13</span></span>

Joseph was made known - [Gen 45:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#004).

Joseph's kindred ... - His relatives; his family, [Gen
45:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#016).

[Acts 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 7:14</span></span>

All his kindred - His father and family, [Gen
45:17-28](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#017); 46:1-26.

Threescore and fifteen souls - Seventy-five persons. There has been much
perplexity felt in the explanation of this passage. In [Gen
46:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#026), [Exo
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#005), and [Deu
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#022), it is expressly said that the
number which went down to Egypt consisted of 70 persons. The question
is, in what way these accounts can be reconciled? It is evident that
Stephen has followed the account which is given by the Septuagint. In
[Gen 46:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#027), that version reads, "But
the sons of Joseph who were with him in Egypt were nine souls; all the
souls of the house of Jacob which came with Jacob into Egypt were
seventy-five souls." This number is made out by adding these nine souls
to the 66 mentioned in [Gen 46:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#026). The
difference between the Septuagint and Moses is, that the former mentions
five descendants of Joseph who are not recorded by the latter. The
"names" of the sons of Ephraim and Manasseh are recorded in [Ch1
7:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#014). Their names were Ashriel,
Machir, Zelophehad, Peresh, sons of Manasseh; and Shuthelah, son of
Ephraim. Why the Septuagint inserted these, it may not be easy to see.
But such was evidently the fact; and the fact accords accurately with
the historic record, though Moses did not insert their names. The
solution of difficulties in regard to chronology is always difficult;
and what might be entirely apparent to a Jew in the time of Stephen, may
be wholly inexplicable to us.

[Acts 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 7:15</span></span>

And died - [Gen 49:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#033).

He and our fathers - The time which the Israelites remained in Egypt was
215 years, so that all the sons of Jacob were deceased before the Jews
went out to go to the land of Canaan.

And were carried over - Jacob himself was buried in the field of
Macpelah by Joseph and his brethren, Gen. 1, 13. It is expressly said
that the bones of Joseph were carried by the Israelites when they went
into the land of Canaan, and buried in Shechem, [Jos
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032); compare [Gen
50:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#025). No mention is made in the Old
Testament of their carrying the bones of any of the other patriarchs,
but the thing is highly probable in itself. If the descendants of Joseph
carried his bones, it would naturally occur to them to take also the
bones of each of the patriarchs, and give them an honorable sepulchre
together in the land of promise. Josephus (Antiq., book 2, chapter 8,
section 2) says that "the posterity and sons of these men (of the
brethren of Joseph), after some time, carried their bodies and buried
them in Hebron; but as to the bones of Joseph, they carried them into
the land of Canaan afterward, when the Hebrews went out of Egypt." This
is in accordance with the common opinion of the Jewish writers, that
they were buried in Hebron. Yet the tradition is not uniform. Some of
the Jews affirm that they were buried in Sychem (Kuinoel). As the
Scriptures do not anywhere deny that the patriarchs were buried in
Sychem, it cannot be proved that Stephen was in error. There is one
circumstance of strong probability to show that he was correct. At the
time when this defense was delivered, "Sychem" was in the hands of the
Samaritans, between whom and the Jews there was a violent hostility. Of
course, the Jews would not be willing to concede that the Samaritans had
the bones of their ancestors, and hence, perhaps the opinion had been
maintained that they were buried in Hebron.

Into Sychem - This was a town or village near to Samaria. It was called
Sichar (see the notes on [Joh 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#005)),
"Shechem," and "Sychem." It is now called "Naplous" or "Napolose," and
is ten miles from Shiloh, and about forty from Jerusalem, toward the
north.

That Abraham bought - The word "Abraham" here has given rise to
considerable perplexity, and it is now pretty generally conceded that it
is a mistake. It is certain, from [Gen
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#019) and [Jos
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032), that this piece of land was
bought, not by Abraham, but by "Jacob," of the sons of Hamor, the father
of Shechem. The land which "Abraham" purchased was the cave of Macpelah,
of the sons of Heth, in Hebron, Gen. 23. Various solutions have been
proposed of this difficulty, which it is not necessary to detail. It may
be remarked, however:

\(1\) That as the text now stands, it is an evident error. This is clear
from the passages cited from the Old Testament above.

\(2\) it is not at all probable that either Stephen or Luke would have
committed such an error. Every consideration must lead us to the
conclusion that they were too well acquainted with such prominent points
of the Jewish history to commit an error like this.

\(3\) the "probability," therefore, is, that the error has arisen since;
but how, is not known, nor is there any way of ascertaining. All the
ancient versions agree in reading "Abraham." Only one manuscript reads
"Abraham our father." Some have supposed, therefore, that it was written
"which our father bought," and that some early transcriber inserted the
name of Abraham. Others, that the name was omitted entirely by Stephen;
and then the antecedent to the verb "bought" will be "Jacob," in verse
15, according with the fact. Other modes have been proposed also, but
none are entirely satisfactory. If there was positive proof of Stephen's
inspiration, or if it were necessary to make that out, the difficulty
would be much greater. But it has already been remarked that there is no
decisive evidence of that, and it is not necessary to make out that
point to defend the Scriptures. All that can be demanded of the
historian is, that he should give a fair account of the defense as it
was delivered; and though the probability is that Stephen would not
commit Such an error, yet, admitting that he did, it by no means proves
that "Luke" was not inspired, or that Luke has committed any error in
recording "what was actually said."

Of the sons of Emmor - In the Hebrew [Gen
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#019), "the children of Hamor" - but
different ways of rendering the same word.

[Acts 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 7:17</span></span>

The time of the promise - The time of the "fulfillment" of the promise.

The people grew ... - [Exo 1:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#007).

[Acts 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 7:18</span></span>

Till another king arose - This is quoted from [Exo
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#008). What was the "name" of this king
is not certainly known. The "common" name of all the kings of Egypt was
"Pharaoh," as "Caesar" became the common name of the emperors of Rome
after the time of Julius Caesar: thus we say, Augustus Caesar, Tiberius
Caesar, etc. It has commonly been supposed to have been the celebrated
Rameses, the sixth king of the eighteenth dynasty, and the event is
supposed to have occurred about 1559 years before the Christian era. M.
Champollion supposes that his name was Mandonei, whose reign commenced
in 1585 b.c., and ended 1565 years before Christ (Essay on the
Hieroglyphic System, p. 94, 95). Sir Jas. G. Wilkinson supposes that it
was Amosis, or Ames, the "first" king of the eighteenth dynasty (Manners
and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, vol. 1, pp. 42, 2nd ed.). "The
present knowledge of Egyptian history is too imperfect to enable us to
determine this point" (Prof. Hackett).

Which knew not Joseph - It can hardly be supposed that he would be
ignorant of the name and deeds of Joseph; and this expression,
therefore, probably means that he did not favour the designs of Joseph;
he did not remember the benefits which he had conferred on the nation;
or furnish the patronage for the kindred of Joseph which had been
secured for them by Joseph under a former reign. National ingratitude
has not been uncommon in the world, and a change of dynasty has often
obliterated all memory of former obligations and compacts.

[Acts 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 7:19</span></span>

Dealt subtilly - He acted deceitfully; he used fraud. The cunning or
deceitful attempt which is referred to, is his endeavour to weaken and
destroy the Jewish people by causing their male children to be put to
death, [Exo 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#022).

Our kindred - Our nation, or our ancestors.

And evil-entreated - Was unjust and cruel toward them.

So that ... - For that purpose, or to "cause" them to cast them out. He
dealt with them in this cruel manner, hoping that the Israelites
themselves would destroy their own sons, that they might not grow up to
experience the same sufferings as their fathers had. The cunning or
subtilty of Pharaoh extended to everything that he did to oppress, to
keep under, and to destroy the children of Israel.

[Acts 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 7:20</span></span>

In which time ... - During this period of oppression. See [Exo
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#002), etc.

Was exceeding fair - Greek: "was fair to God"; properly rendered, "was
very handsome." The word "God" in the Greek here in accordance with the
Hebrew usage, by which anything that is "very handsome, lofty, or grand"
is thus designated. Thus, [Psa 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#007),
"mountains of God," mean lofty mountains; [Psa
80:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#011), "cedars of God," mean lofty,
beautiful cedars. Thus, Nineveh is called "a great city to God" ([Jon
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#003), Greek), meaning a very great
city. The expression here simply means that Moses was "very fair," or
handsome. Compare [Heb 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#023), where he
is called "a proper child"; that is, a "handsome child." It would seem
from this that Moses was preserved by his mother on account of his
"beauty"; and this is hinted at in [Exo
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#002). And it would also seem from this
that Pharaoh had succeeded by his oppressions in what he had attempted;
and that it was not unusual for parents among the Jews to expose their
children, or to put them to death.

[Acts 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 7:21</span></span>

Was cast out - When he was exposed on the banks of the Nile, [Exo
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#003).

And nourished him - Adopted him, and treated him as her own son, [Exo
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#010). It is implied in this that he
was educated by her. An adopted son in the family of Pharaoh would be
favored with all the advantages which the land could furnish for an
education.

[Acts 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 7:22</span></span>

Moses was learned - Or, was "instructed." It does not mean that he had
that learning, but that he was carefully "trained" or educated in that
wisdom. The passage does not express the fact that Moses was
distinguished for "learning," but that he was carefully "educated," or
that pains were taken to make him learned.

In all the wisdom ... - The learning of the Egyptians was confined
chiefly to astrology, to the interpretation of dreams, to medicine, to
mathematics, and to their sacred science or traditionary doctrines about
religion, which were concealed chiefly under their hieroglyphics. Their
learning is not infrequently spoken of in the Scriptures, [Kg1
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#030); compare [Isa
19:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#011). Their knowledge is equally
celebrated in the pagan world. It is known that science was carried from
Egypt to Phoenicia, and thence to Greece; and not a few of the Grecian
philosophers traveled to Egypt in pursuit of knowledge. Herodotus
himself frankly concedes that the Greeks derived very much of their
knowledge from Egypt. (See Rawlinson's Herodotus, vol. 2, pp. 80, 81;
Herodotus, bk. 2, pp. 50, 51.)

And was mighty - Was powerful, or was distinguished. This means that he
was eminent in Egypt before he conducted the children of Israel forth.
It refers to his addresses to Pharaoh, and to the miracles which he
performed "before" their departure.

In words - From [Exo 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#010), it seems
that Moses was "slow of speech, and of a slow tongue." When it is said
that he was mighty in words, it means that he was mighty in his
communications to Pharaoh, though they were spoken by his brother Aaron.
Aaron was in his place, and "Moses" addressed Pharaoh through him, who
was appointed to deliver the message, [Exo
4:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#011).

Deeds - Miracles, Exo. 7, etc.

[Acts 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 7:23</span></span>

Full forty years old - This is not recorded in the Old Testament; but it
is a constant tradition of the Jews that Moses was 40 years of age when
he undertook to deliver them. Thus, it is said, "Moses lived in the
palace of Pharaoh forty years; he was forty years in Midian; and he
ministered to Israel forty years" (Kuinoel).

To visit ... - Probably with a view of delivering them from their
oppressive bondage. Compare [Act 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#025).

[Acts 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 7:24</span></span>

Suffer wrong - The wrong or injury was, that the Egyptian was smiting
the Hebrew, [Exo 2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#011).

Smote the Egyptian - He slew him, and buried him in the sand,

[Acts 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 7:25</span></span>

For he supposed - This is not mentioned by Moses; but it is not at all
improbable. When they saw him "alone" contending with the Egyptian; when
it was understood that he had come and taken vengeance on one of their
oppressors, it might have been presumed that he regarded himself as
directed by God to interpose, and save the people.

[Acts 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 7:26</span></span>

And the next day - [Exo 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#013).

He showed himself - He appeared in a sudden and unexpected manner to
them.

Unto them - That is, to "two" of the Hebrews, [Exo
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#013).

As they strove - As they were engaged in a quarrel.

Have set them at one - Greek: "would have urged them to peace." This he
did by remonstrating with the man that did the wrong.

Saying - What follows is not quoted literally from the account which
Moses gives, but it is substantially the same.

Sirs - Greek: "Men."

Ye are brethren - You belong not only to the same nation, but you are
brethren and companions in affliction, and should not, therefore,
contend with each other. One of the most melancholy scenes in the world
is that, where those who are poor, and afflicted, and oppressed, add to
all their other calamities altercations and strifes among themselves.
Yet it is from this class that contentions and lawsuits usually arise.
The address which Moses here makes to the contending Jews might be
applied to the whole human family in view of the contentions and wars of
nations: "Ye are "brethren," members of the same great family, and why
do you contend with each other?"

[Acts 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 7:27</span></span>

But he that did ... - Intent on his purpose, filled with rage and
passion, he rejected all interference, and all attempts at peace. It is
usually the man that does the injury that is unwilling to be reconciled;
and when we find a man that regards the entreaties of his friends as
improper interference, when he becomes increasingly angry when we exhort
him to peace, it is usually a strong evidence that he is conscious that
he has been at fault. If we wish to reconcile parties, we should go
first to the man that has been injured. In the controversy between God
and man, it is the "sinner" who has done the wrong that is unwilling to
be reconciled, and not God.

His neighbour - The Jew with whom he was contending.

Who made thee ... - What right have you to interfere in this matter? The
usual salutation with which a man is greeted who attempts to prevent
quarrels.

[Acts 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 7:28</span></span>

Wilt thou kill me ... - How it was known that he had killed the Egyptian
does not appear. It was probably communicated by the man who was rescued
from the hands of the Egyptian, [Exo
2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#011).

[Acts 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 7:29</span></span>

Then fled Moses ... - Moses fled because he now ascertained that what he
had done was known. He supposed that it had been unobserved, [Exo
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#012). But he now thought that the
knowledge of it might reach Pharaoh, and that his life might thus be
endangered. Nor did he judge incorrectly; for as soon as Pharaoh heard
of it, he sought to take his life, [Exo
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#015).

Was a stranger - Or became a sojourner πάροικος paroikos, one who had a
temporary abode in the land. The use of this word implies that he did
not expect to make that his permanent dwelling.

In the land of Madian - This was a part of Arabia. "This would seem,"
says Gesenius, "to have been a tract of country extending from the
eastern shore of the Elanitic Gulf to the region of Moab on the one
hand, and to the vicinity of Mount Sinai on the, other. The people were
nomadic in their habits, and moved often from place to place." This was
extensively a desert region, an unknown land; and Moses expected there
to be safe from Pharaoh.

Where he begat two sons - He married Zipporah, the daughter of "Reuel"
[Exo 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#018), or "Jethro" [Num
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#029); [Exo
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001), a "priest" of Midian. The names
of the two sons were Gershom and Eliezer, [Exo
18:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#003).

[Acts 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 7:30</span></span>

And when forty years ... - At the age of 80 years. This, however, was
known by tradition. It is not expressly mentioned by Moses. It is said,
however, to have been after the king of Egypt had died [Exo
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#023); and the tradition is not
improbable.

In the wilderness of mount Sina - In the desert adjacent to, or that
surrounded Mount Sinai. In [Exo 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001),
it is said that this occurred at Mount "Horeb." But there is no
contradiction; Horeb and Sinai are different peaks or elevations of the
same mountain. They are represented as springing from the same base, and
branching out in different elevations. The mountains, according to
Burckhardt, are a prodigious pile, comprehending many peaks, and about
thirty miles in diameter. From one part of this mountain, Sinai, the Law
was given to the children of Israel.

An angel of the Lord - The word "angel" means properly a "messenger"
(see the notes on [Mat 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020)), and is
applied to the invisible spirits in heaven, to people, to the winds, to
the pestilence, or to whatever is appointed as a messenger "to make
known" or to execute the will of God. The mere "name," therefore, can
determine nothing about the "nature" of the messenger. That "name" might
be applied to any messenger, even an inanimate object. The nature and
character of this messenger are to be determined by other
considerations. The word may denote that the "bush on fire" was the
messenger. But a comparison with the other places where this occurs will
show that it was a celestial messenger, and perhaps that it was the
Messiah who was yet to come, appearing to take the people of Israel
under his own charge and direction. Compare [Joh
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#011), where the Jews are called "his
own." In [Exo 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002), it is said that the
angel of the Lord appeared in a flame of fire; in [Exo
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#004) it is said that Yahweh spake to
him out of the midst of the bush; language which implies that God was
there, and which is strongly expressive of the doctrine that the angel
was Yahweh. In [Exo 23:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020), God
says, "I send an angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to
bring thee into the place which I have prepared. Beware of him, and obey
"his" voice," etc., [Exo 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#023); [Exo
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#034); [Exo
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#002). In all these places this angel
is mentioned as an extraordinary messenger sent to conduct them to the
land of Canaan. He was to guide them, to defend them, and to drive out
the nations before them. All these circumstances seem to point to the
conclusion that this was no other than the future deliverer of the
world, who came then to take his people under his own guidance, as
emblematic of the redemption of his people.

In a flame of fire - That is, in what "appeared" to be a flame of fire.
The "bush" or clump of trees seemed to be on fire, or to be illuminated
with a special splendor. God is often represented as encompassed with
this splendor, or glory, [Luk 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#009);
[Mat 17:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001); [Act
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003); [Act
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#007).

In a bush - In a grove, or clump of trees. Probably the light was seen
issuing from the "midst" of such a grove.

[Acts 7:31](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 7:31</span></span>

He wondered ... - What particularly attracted his attention was the fact
that the bush was not consumed, [Exo
3:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002).

The voice of the Lord - Yahweh spake to him from the midst of the bush.
He did not see him. He merely heard a voice.

[Acts 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 7:32</span></span>

Saying, I am the God ... - See this explained in the notes on [Mat
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#032).

Then Moses trembled - [Exo 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 8](act008)

</div>
