<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act013)  [Next](act015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#001)

[Acts 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 14:1</span></span>

In Iconium - See the notes on [Act
13:51](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#051). In this place, and in Antioch
and Lystra, Timothy became acquainted with Paul and his manner of life,
[Ti2 3:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#010).

So spake - Spake with such power - their preaching was attended so much
with the influence of the Spirit.

And also of the Greeks - Probably proselytes from the Greeks, who were
in the habit of attending the synagogue.

[Acts 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 14:2</span></span>

But the unbelieving Jews ... - See the notes on [Act
13:50](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#050).

And made their minds evil-affected - Irritated, or exasperated them.

Against the brethren - One of the common appellations by which
Christians were known.

[Acts 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 14:3</span></span>

Long time therefore - It seems probable that there were here no forcible
or public measures to expel them, as there had been at Antioch [Act
13:50](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#050), and they therefore regarded it
as their duty to remain. God granted them here also great success, which
was the main reason for their continuing a long time. Persecution and
opposition may be attended often with signal success to the gospel.

Spake boldly in the Lord - In the cause of the Lord Jesus, or in his
name and by his authority. Perhaps, also, the expression includes the
idea of their trusting in the Lord.

Which gave testimony - Bore witness to the truth of their message by
working miracles, etc. Compare [Mar
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#020). This was evidently the Lord
Jesus to whom reference is here made, and it shows that he was still,
though bodily absent from them, clothed with power, and still displayed
that power in the advancement of his cause. The conversion of sinners
accomplished by him is always a testimony as decided as it is cheering
to the labors and messages of his servants.

Unto the word of his grace - His gracious word, or message.

And granted signs ... - Miracles. See the notes on [Act
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022).

[Acts 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 14:4</span></span>

Was divided - Into parties. Greek: there was a schism - Ἐσχίσθη
Eschisthē.

And part held with the Jews - Held to the doctrines of the Jews, in
opposition to the apostles. A revival of religion often produces
excitement by the bad passions of opposers. The enemies of the truth
form parties, and organize opposition. It is no uncommon thing even now
for such parties to be formed; but the fault is not in Christianity. It
lies with those who form a party against religion, and who confederate
themselves, as was done here, to oppose it.

[Acts 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 14:5</span></span>

An assault made - Greek: a "rush" - ὁρμή hormē. It denotes "an impetuous
excitement and aggression; a rush to put them to death." It rather
describes a popular tumult than a calm and deliberate purpose. There was
a violent, tumultuous excitement.

Both of the Gentiles ... - Of that part of them which was opposed to the
apostles.

To use them despitefully - See the notes on [Mat
5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044). To reproach them; to bring
contempt upon them; to injure them.

And to stone them - To put them to death by stoning; probably as
blasphemers, [Act 7:57-59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#057).

[Acts 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 14:6</span></span>

They were ware of it - They were in some way informed of the excitement
and of their danger.

And fled unto Lystra and Derbe, cities of Lycaonia - Lycaonia was one of
the provinces of Asia Minor. It had Galatia north, Pisidia south,
Cappadocia east, and Phrygia west. It was formerly within the limits of
Phrygia, but was erected into a separate province by Augustus. "The
district of Lycaonia extends from the ridges of Mount Taurus and the
borders of Cilicia on the south, to the Cappadocian hills on the north.
It is a bare and dreary region, unwatered by streams, though in parts
liable to occasional inundations. Strabo mentions one place where water
was even sold for money. Across some portion of this plain Paul and
Barnabas traveled both before and after their residence in Iconium.
After leaving the high land to the northwest, during a journey of
several hours before arriving at the city, the eye ranges freely over a
vast expanse of level ground to the south and the east, The two most
eminent objects in the view are the snowy summits of Mount Argaeus,
rising high above all the intervening hills in the direction of Armenia,
and the singular mountain mass called the 'Kara-Dagh,' or 'Black Mount,'
southeastward in the direction of Cilicia. And still these features
continue to be conspicuous after Iconium is left behind, and the
traveler moves on over the plain toward Lystra and Derbe. Mount Argaeus
still rises far to the northeast, at the distance of 150 miles.

The Black Mountain is gradually approached, and discovered to be an
isolated mass, with reaches of the plain extending round it like
channels of the sea. The cities of Lystra and Derbe were somewhere about
the bases of the Black Mountain." The exact position of Lystra and Derbe
is still subject to some uncertainty. In 1824, Col. Leake wrote thus:
"Nothing can more strongly show the little progress that has hitherto
been made in a knowledge of the ancient geography of Asia Minor, than
that, of the cities which the journey of Paul has made so interesting to
us, the site of one only (Iconium) is yet certainly known. Perga,
Antioch of Pisidia, Lystra, and Derbe, remain to be discovered." The
situation of the first two of these towns has been since that fully
identified, and some ruins have been found which have been supposed to
mark the place of Lystra and Derbe, though not with entire certainty.

And unto the region ... - The adjacent country. Though persecuted, they
still preached; and though driven from one city, they fled into another.
This was the direction of the Saviour, [Mat
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023).

[Acts 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 14:8</span></span>

And there sat - There dwelt, [Mat
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#016); [Act
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#011) (margin). The word "sat,"
however, indicates his usual posture, his helpless condition. Such
persons commonly sat by the wayside, or in some public place, to ask for
alms, [Mar 10:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#046).

Impotent in his feet - ἀδύνατος adunatos. Without any power. Entirely
deprived of the use of his feet.

Being a cripple - Lame.

Who never had walked - The miracle, therefore, would be more remarkable,
as the man would be well known. As they were persecuted from place to
place, and opposed in every manner, it was desirable that a signal
miracle should be performed to carry forward and establish the work of
the gospel.

[Acts 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 14:9</span></span>

Who stedfastly beholding him - Fixing his eyes intently on him. See the
notes on [Act 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#010).

And perceiving - How he perceived this is not said. Perhaps it was
indicated by the ardor, humility, and strong desire depicted in his
countenance. He had heard Paul, and perhaps the apostle had dwelt
particularly on the miracles with which the gospel had been attested.
The miracles performed also in Icontium had doubtless also been heard of
in Lystra.

Had faith to be healed - Compare [Mat
9:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#021), [Mat
9:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#028); [Luk
7:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#050); [Luk
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#019); [Luk
18:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#042).

[Acts 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 14:10</span></span>

Said with a loud voice - See the notes on [Joh
11:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043).

And he leaped - See the notes on [Act
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#008). Compare [Isa
35:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#006).

[Acts 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 14:11</span></span>

They lifted up their voices - They spoke with astonishment, such as
might be expected when it was supposed that the gods had come down.

In the speech of Lycaonia - What this language was has much perplexed
commentators. It was probably a mixture of the Greek and Syriac. In that
region generally the Greek was usually spoken with more or less purity;
and from the fact that it was not far from the regions of Syria, it is
probable that the Greek language was corrupted with this foreign
admixture.

The gods ... - All the region was idolatrous. The gods which were
worshipped there were those which were worshipped throughout Greece.

Are come down - The miracle which Paul had performed led them to suppose
this. It was evidently beyond human ability, and they had no other way
of accounting for it than by supposing that their gods had personally
appeared.

In the likeness of men - Many of their gods were heroes, whom they
worshipped after they were dead. It was a common belief among them that
the gods appeared to people in human form. The poems of Homer, of
Virgil, etc., are filled with accounts of such appearances, and the only
way in which they supposed the gods to take knowledge of human affairs,
and to help people, was by their personally appearing in this form. See
Homer's Odyssey, xvii. 485; Catullus, 64, 384; Ovid's Metamorph., i. 212
(Kuinoel). Thus, Homer says:

"For in similitude of strangers oft.

The gods, who can with ease all shapes assume,

Repair to populous cities, where they mark.

Th' outrageous and the righteous deeds of men."

Cowper.

[Acts 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 14:12</span></span>

And they called Barnabas, Jupiter - Jupiter was the most powerful of all
the gods of the ancients. He was represented as the son of Saturn and
Ops, and was educated in a cave on Mount Ida, in the island of Crete.
The worship of Jupiter was almost universal. He was the Aremon of
Africa, the Belus of Babylon, the Osiris of Egypt. His common
appellation was, The Father of gods and men. He was usually represented
as sitting upon a golden or an ivory throne, holding in one hand a
thunderbolt, and in the other a scepter of cypress. His power was
supposed to extend over other gods; and everything was subservient to
his will except the Fates. There is the most abundant proof that he was
worshipped in the region of Lycaonia and throughout Asia Minor. There
was, besides, a fable among the inhabitants of Lycaonia that Jupiter and
Mercury had once visited that place, and had been received by Philemon.
The whole fable is related by Ovid, "Metam.," 8, 611, etc.

And Paul, Mercurius - Mercury, called by the Greeks Hermes, was a
celebrated god of antiquity. No less than five of this name are
mentioned by Cicero. The most celebrated was the son of Jupiter and
Maia. He was the messenger of the gods, and of Jupiter in particular; he
was the patron of travelers and shepherds; he conducted the souls of the
dead into the infernal regions; he presided over orators, and
declaimers, and merchants; and he was also the god of thieves,
pickpockets, and all dishonest persons. He was regarded as the god of
eloquence; and as light, rapid, and quick in his movements. The
conjecture of Chrysostom is, that Barnabas was a large, athletic man,
and was hence taken for Jupiter; and that Paul was small in his person,
and was hence supposed to be Mercury.

Because he was the chief speaker - The office of Mercury was to deliver
the messages of the gods; and as Paul only had been discoursing, he was
supposed to be Mercury.

[Acts 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 14:13</span></span>

Then the priest of Jupiter - He whose office it was to conduct the
worship of Jupiter by offering sacrifices, etc.

Which was before their city - The word "which" here refers not to the
priest, but to Jupiter. The temple or image of Jupiter was in front of
their city, or near the gates. Ancient cities were supposed to be under
the protection of particular gods; and their image, or a temple for
their worship, was placed commonly in a conspicuous place at the
entrance of the city.

Brought oxen - Probably brought two one to be sacrificed to each. It was
common to sacrifice bullocks to Jupiter.

And garlands - The victims of sacrifice were usually decorated with
ribbons and chaplets of flowers. See Kuinoel.

Unto the gates - The gates of the city, where were the images or temple
of the gods.

Would have done sacrifice - Would have offered sacrifice to Barnabas and
Paul. This the priest deemed a part of his office. And here we have a
remarkable and most affecting instance of the folly and stupidity of
idolatry.

[Acts 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 14:14</span></span>

Which, when the apostles - Barnabas is called an apostle because he was
sent forth by the church on a particular message ([Act
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#003); compare [Act
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#026)), not because he had been chosen
to the special work of the apostleship - to Dear witness to the life and
resurrection of Christ. See the notes on [Act
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#022).

They rent their clothes - As an expression of their abhorrence of what
the people were doing, and of their deep grief that they should thus
debase themselves by offering worship to human beings. See the notes on
[Mat 26:65](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#065).

[Acts 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 14:15</span></span>

And saying, Sirs - Greek: Men.

Why do ye these things? - This is an expression of solemn remonstrance
at the folly of their conduct in worshipping those who were human. The
abhorrence which they evinced at this may throw strong light on the rank
and character of the Lord Jesus Christ. When an offer was made to
worship Paul and Barnabas, they shrank from it with strong expressions
of aversion and indignation. Yet when similar worship was offered to the
Lord Jesus; when he was addressed by Thomas in the language of worship,
"My Lord and my God" [Joh 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028), he
uttered not the slightest reproof. Nay, he approved it, and expressed
his approbation of others who should also do it, [Joh
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#029). Compare [Joh
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023). How can this difference be
accounted for except on the supposition that the Lord Jesus was divine?
Would he, if a mere man, receive homage as God, when his disciples
rejected it with horror?

Of like passions with you - We are human beings like yourselves. We have
no claim, no pretensions to anything more. The word "passions" here
means simply that they had the common feelings and propensities of
people - the nature of people; the affections of people. It does not
mean that they were subject to any improper passions, to ill temper,
etc., as some have supposed; but that they did not pretend to be gods.
"We need food and drink; we are exposed to pain, and sickness, and
death." The Latin Vulgate renders it, "We are mortal like yourselves."
The expression stands opposed to the proper conception of God, who is
not subject to these affections, who is most blessed and immortal. Such
a Being only is to be worshipped; and the apostles remonstrated strongly
with them on the folly of paying religious homage to beings like
themselves. Compare [Jam 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017), "Elias
(Elijah) was a man subject to like passions as we are, etc."

That ye should turn from these vanities - That you should cease to
worship idols. Idols are often called vanities, or vain things, [Deu
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021); [Kg2
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#015); [Kg1
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#013), [Kg1
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#026); [Jer
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#005); [Jer
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#019); [Jer
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#008); [Jon
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#008). They are called vanities, a lie,
or lying vanities, as opposed to the living and true God, because they
are unreal; because they have no power to help: because confidence in
them is vain.

Unto the living God - [Th1 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#009). He is
called the living God to distinguish him from idols. See the notes on
[Mat 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016).

Which made heaven ... - Who thus showed that he was the only proper
object of worship. This doctrine, that there is one God who has made all
things, was new to them. They worshipped multitudes of divinities; and
though they regarded Jupiter as the father of gods and human beings, yet
they had no conception that all things had been created by the will of
one Infinite Being.

[Acts 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 14:16</span></span>

Who in times past - Previous to the gospel; in past ages.

Suffered all nations - Permitted all nations; that is, all Gentiles,
[Act 17:30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030). "And the times of this
ignorance God winked at."

To walk in their own ways - To conduct themselves without the restraints
and instructions of a written law. They were permitted to follow their
own reason and passions, and their own system of religion. God gave them
no written laws, and sent to them no messengers. Why he did this we
cannot determine. It might have been, among other reasons, to show to
the world conclusively:

\(1\) The insufficiency of reason to guide people in the matters of
religion. The experiment was made under the most favorable
circumstances. The most enlightened nations, the Greeks and Romans, were
left to pursue the inquiry, and failed no less than the most degraded
tribes of people. The trial was made for four thousand years, and
attended with the same results everywhere.

\(2\) it showed the need of revelation to guide man.

\(3\) it evinced, beyond the possibility of mistake, the depravity of
man. In all nations, in all circumstances, people had shown the same
alienation from God. By suffering them to walk in their own ways, it was
seen that those ways were sin, and that some power more than human was
necessary to bring people back to God.

[Acts 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 14:17</span></span>

Nevertheless - Though he gave them no revelation.

He left not himself without witness - He gave demonstration of his
existence and of his moral character.

In that he did good - By doing good. The manner in which he did it, Paul
immediately specifies. Idols did not do good; they conferred no favors,
and were, therefore, unworthy of confidence.

And gave us rain from heaven - Rain from above - from the clouds, [Mar
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#011); [Luk
9:54](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#054); [Luk
17:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#029); [Luk
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#011); [Joh
6:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#031). Rain is one of the evidences
of the goodness of God. Man could not cause it; and without it,
regulated at proper intervals of time and in proper quantities, the
earth would soon be one wide scene of desolation. There is scarcely
anything which more certainly indicates unceasing care and wisdom than
the needful and refreshing showers of rain. The sun and stars move by
fixed laws, whose operation we can see and anticipate. The falling of
rain is regulated by laws which We cannot trace, and it seems,
therefore, to be poured, as it were, directly from God's hollow hand,
[Psa 147:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#008), "Who covereth the heaven
with clouds; who prepareth rain for the earth."

And fruitful seasons - Seasons when the earth produces abundance. It is
remarkable, and a striking proof of the divine goodness, that so few
seasons are unfruitful. The earth yields her increase; the labors of the
farmer are crowned with success; and the goodness of God demands the
expressions of praise. God does not forget his ancient covenant [Gen
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#022), though man forgets it, and
disregards his great Benefactor.

Filling our hearts with food - The word "hearts" is used here as a
Hebraism, to denote "persons" themselves; filling us with food, etc.
Compare [Mat 12:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#040).

Gladness - Joy; comfort the comfort arising from the supply of our
constantly returning needs. This is proof of everwatchful goodness. It
is a demonstration at once that there is a God, and that he is good. It
would be easy for God to withdraw these blessings, and leave us to want.
A single word, or a single deviation from the fullness of benevolence,
would blast all these comforts, and leave us to lamentation, woe, and
death, [Psa 104:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#027); [Psa
145:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#015).

[Acts 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 14:18</span></span>

And with these sayings - With these arguments.

Scarce restrained they the people - They were so fully satisfied that
the gods had appeared, and were so full of zeal to do them honor.

[Acts 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 14:19</span></span>

And there came thither certain Jews - Not satisfied with having expelled
them from Antioch and Iconium, they still pursued them. Persecutors
often exhibit a zeal and perseverance in a bad cause which it would be
well if Christians evinced in a holy cause. Bad people will often travel
further to do evil than good people will to do good; and wicked people
often show more zeal in opposing the gospel than professed Christians do
in advancing it.

Antioch and Iconium - See the notes on [Act
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#014), [Act
13:51](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#051).

Who persuaded the people - That they were impostors; and who excited
their rage against them.

And having stoned Paul - Whom they were just before ready to worship as
a god! What a striking instance of the fickleness and instability of
idolaters! And what a striking instance of the instability and
uselessness of mere popularity! Just before they were ready to adore
him; now they sought to put him to death. Nothing is more fickle than
popular favor. The unbounded admiration of a man may soon be changed
into unbounded indignation and contempt. It was well for Paul that he
was not seeking this popularity, and that he did not depend on it for
happiness. He had a good conscience; he was engaged in a good cause; he
was under the protection of God; and his happiness was to be sought from
a higher source than the applause of people, "fluctuating and uncertain
as the waves of the sea." To this transaction Paul referred when he
enumerated his trials in [Co2 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#025),
"Once was I stoned."

Drew him out of the city - Probably in haste, and in popular rage, as if
he was unfit to be in the city, and was unworthy of a decent burial; for
it does not appear that they contemplated an interment but indignantly
dragged him beyond the walls of the city to leave him there. Such
sufferings and trials it cost to establish that religion in the world
which has shed so many blessings on man; which now crowns us with
comfort; which saves us from the abominations and degradations of
idolatry here, and from the pains of hell hereafter.

Supposing he had been dead - The next verse shows that he was really not
dead, though many commentators, as well as the Jews, have supposed that
he was, and was miraculously restored to life. It is remarkable that
Barnabas was not exposed to this popular fury. But it is to be
remembered that Paul was the chief speaker, and it was his special zeal
that exposed him to this tumult.

[Acts 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 14:20</span></span>

Howbeit - Notwithstanding the supposition that he was dead.

As the disciples stood round about him - It would seem that they did not
suppose I that he was dead; but might be expecting that he would revive.

He rose up ... - Most commentators have supposed that this was the
effect of a miracle. They have maintained that he could not have risen
so soon, and entered into the city, without the interposition of
miraculous power (Calvin, Doddridge, Clarke, etc.). But the commentators
have asserted what is not intimated by the sacred penman. The
probability is that he was stunned by a blow - perhaps a single blow and
after a short time recovered from it. Nothing is more common than thus
by a violent blow on the head to be rendered apparently lifeless, the
effect of which soon is over, and the person restored to strength.
Pricaeus and Wetstein suppose that Paul feigned himself to be dead, and
when out of danger rose and returned to the city. But this is wholly
improbable.

And came into the city - It is remarkable that he should have returned
again into the same city. But probably it was only among the new
converts that he showed himself. The Jews supposed that he was dead; and
it does not appear that he again exposed himself to their rage.

And the next day ... - The opposition here was such that it was vain to
attempt to preach there any longer. Having been seen by the disciples
after his supposed death, their faith was confirmed, and he departed to
preach in another place.

To Derbe - [Act 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#006).

[Acts 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 14:21</span></span>

Had taught many - Or, rather, had made many disciples (margin).

To Lystra - [Act 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#006).

And to Iconium - [Act 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#001). We have
here a remarkable instance of the courage of the apostles. In these very
places they had been persecuted and stoned, and yet in the face of
danger they ventured to return. The welfare of the infant churches they
deemed of more consequence than their own safety; and they threw
themselves again into the midst of danger, to comfort and strengthen
those just converted to God. There are times when ministers should not
count their own lives. dear to them [Act
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#024), but when they should fearlessly
throw themselves into the midst of danger, confiding only in the
protecting care of their God and Saviour.

[Acts 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 14:22</span></span>

Confirming - "strengthening" ἐπιστηρίζοντες epistērizontes. The
expression "to confirm" as in some churches a technical signification,
denoting "to admit to the full privileges of a Christian by the
imposition of hands" (Johnson). It is scarcely necessary to say that the
word here refers to no such rite. It has no relation to an imposition of
hands, or to the thing which is usually supposed to be denoted by the
rite of "confirmation." It means simply that they established,
strengthened, made firm, or encouraged by the presentation of truth and
by the motives of the gospel. Whether the rite of confirmation, as
practiced by some churches, be founded on the authority of the New
Testament or not, it is certain that it can receive no support from this
passage. The truth was, that these were young converts; that they were
surrounded by enemies, and exposed to temptations and to dangers; that
they had as yet but a slight acquaintance with the truths of the gospel,
and that it was therefore important that they should be further
instructed in the truth, and established in the faith of the gospel.
This was what Paul and Barnabas returned to accomplish. There is not the
slightest evidence that they had not been admitted to the full
privileges of the church before; or that any ceremony was now performed
in confirming or strengthening them.

The souls - The minds, the hearts, or the disciples themselves.

Disciples - They were as yet scholars, or learners, and the apostles
returned to instruct them further in the doctrines of Christ.

And exhorting them ... - [Act 13:43](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#043).

In the faith - In the belief of the gospel.

And that we must - καὶ ὅτι δεῖ kai hoti dei. That it is fit or proper
that we should. Not that it is fixed by any fatal necessity, but that we
are not to expect that it will be otherwise. We are to calculate on it
when we become Christians. Why it is proper, or fit, the apostle did not
state. But we may remark that it is proper:

\(1\) Because such is the opposition of the world to pure religion that
it cannot be avoided. Of this they had had striking demonstration in
Lystra and Iconium.

\(2\) it is necessary to reclaim us from wandering, and to keep us in
the path of duty, [Psa 119:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#067), [Psa
119:71](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#071).

\(3\) it is necessary to wean us from the world; to keep before our
minds the great truth that we have here "no continuing city and no
abiding place." Trial here makes us pant for a world of rest. The
opposition of sinners makes us desire that world where "the wicked shall
cease from troubling," and where there shall be eternal friendship and
peace.

\(4\) when we are persecuted and afflicted, we may remember that it has
been the lot of Christians from the beginning. We tread a path that has
been watered by the tears of the saints, and rendered sacred by the
shedding of the best blood on the earth. The Saviour trod that path; and
it is enough that the "disciple be as his master, and the servant as his
lord," [Mat 10:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#024).

Through much tribulation - Through many afflictions.

Enter into the kingdom of God - Be saved. Enter into heaven. See the
notes on [Mat 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002).

[Acts 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 14:23</span></span>

And widen they had ordained - χειροτονήσαντες cheirotonēsantes. The word
"ordain" we now use in an ecclesiastical sense, to denote "a setting
apart to an office by the imposition of hands." But it is evident that
the word here is not employed in that sense. That imposition of hands
might have occurred in setting apart afterward to this office is
certainly possible, but it is not implied in the word employed here, and
did not take place in the transaction to which this word refers. The
word occurs in only one other place in the New Testament, [Co2
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#019), where it is applied to Luke, and
translated, "who was also chosen of the church (that is, appointed or
elected by suffrage by the churches) to travel with us, etc." The verb
properly denotes "to stretch out the hand"; and as it was customary to
elect to office, or to vote, by stretching out or elevating the hand, so
the word simply means "to elect, appoint, or designate to any office."
The word here refers simply to an "election" or "appointment" of the
elders. It is said, indeed, that Paul and Barnabas did this. But
probably all that is meant by it is that they presided in the assembly
when the choice was made. It does not mean that they appointed them
without consulting the church; but it evidently means that they
appointed them in the usual way of appointing officers, by the suffrages
of the people. See Schleusner, and the notes of Doddridge and Calvin.

Ordained them - Appointed for the disciples, or for the church. It is
not meant that the elders were ordained for the apostles.

Elders - Greek: presbyters. Literally, this word refers to the aged. See
the notes on [Act 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#030). But it may
also be a word relating to office, denoting those who were more
experienced than others, and who were chosen to preside over and to
instruct the rest. What was the nature of this office, and what was the
design of the appointment, is not intimated in this word. All that seems
to be implied is, that they were to take the charge of the churches
during the absence of the apostles. The apostles were about to leave
them. They were just organized into churches: they were inexperienced;
they needed counsel and direction; they were exposed to dangers; and it
was necessary, therefore, that persons should be designated to watch
over the spiritual interests of the brethren. The probability is, that
they performed all the functions that were required in the infant and
feeble churches; in exhorting, instructing; governing, etc. The more
experienced and able would be most likely to be active in exhorting and
instructing the brethren; and all would be useful in counseling and
guiding the flock. The same thing occurred in the church at Ephesus. See
the notes on [Act 20:17-28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#017). It is not
improbable that the business of instructing, or teaching, would be
gradually confined to the more talented and able of the elders, and that
the others would be concerned mainly in governing and directing the
general affairs of the church.

In every church - It is implied here that there were elders in each
church; that is, that in each church there was more than one. See [Act
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#021), where a similar phraseology
occurs, and where it is evident that there was more than one reader of
the Law of Moses in each city. Compare [Tit
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005), "I left thee in Crete, that thou
shouldst ...ordain elders in every city"; [Act
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#017), "And from Miletus he sent to
Ephesus, and called the elders of the church." It could not mean,
therefore, that they appointed a single minister or pastor to each
church, but they committed the whole affairs of the church to a bench of
elders.

And had prayed with fasting - With the church. They were about to leave
them. They had entrusted the interests of the church to a body of men
chosen for this purpose; and they now commended the church and its
elders together to God. Probably they had no prospect of seeing them
again, and they parted as ministers and people should part, and as
Christian friends should part, with humble prayer, commending themselves
to the protecting care of God.

They commended them ... - They committed the infant church to the
guardianship of the Lord. They were feeble, inexperienced, and exposed
to dangers; but in his hands they were safe.

To the Lord ... - The Lord Jesus. The connection shows that he is
particularly referred to. In his hands the redeemed are secure. When we
part with Christian friends, we may, with confidence, leave them in his
holy care and keeping.

[Acts 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 14:24</span></span>

Throughout Pisidia - See the note at [Act
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#014).

They came to Pamphylia - See the notes on [Act
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013). These places they had visited
before.

[Acts 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 14:25</span></span>

In Perga - See the notes on [Act
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013).

They went down into Attalia - "Attalia had something of the same
relation to Perga which Cadiz has to Seville. In each case the latter
city is approached by a river voyage, and the former is more
conveniently placed on the open sea. Attalus Philadelphus, king of
Pergamus, whose dominions extended from the northwestern corner of Asia
Miner to the Sea of Pamphylia, had built this city in a convenient
position for commanding the trade of Syria or Egypt. When Alexander the
Great passed this way, no such city was in existence; but since the days
of the kings of Pergamus, who inherited a fragment of his vast empire,
Attalia has always existed and flourished, retaining the name of the
monarch who built it. Its ancient site is not now certainly known" (Life
and Epistles of Paul, vol. i. pp. 200, 201). It is probable that it is
the modern Satalia.

[Acts 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 14:26</span></span>

And thence sailed to Antioch - See the note at [Act
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019).

From whence they had been recommended ... - Where they had been
appointed to this missionary tour by the church, [Act
13:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001).

To the grace of God - His favor and protection had been implored for
them in their perilous undertaking.

For the work which they fulfilled - This shows conclusively:

\(1\) That they had accomplished fully the work which was originally
contemplated. It was strictly a missionary tour among the Gentiles. It
was an important and hazardous enterprise, and was the first in which
the church formally engaged. Hence, so much importance is attached to
it, and so faithful a record of it is preserved.

\(2\) it shows that the act by which they were set apart to this [Act
13:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001) was not an ordination to the
ministerial office. It was an appointment to a missionary tour.

\(3\) it shows that the act was not an appointment to the apostleship.
Paul was an apostle before by the express appointment of the Saviour;
and Barnabas was never an apostle in the original and proper sense of
the term. It was a designation to a temporary work, which was now
fulfilled.

We may remark, also, in regard to this missionary tour:

\(1\) That the work of missions is one which early engaged the attention
of Christians.

\(2\) it entered into their plans, and was one in which the church was
deeply interested.

\(3\) the work of missions is attended with danger. People are now no
less hostile to the gospel than they were in Lystra and Iconium.

\(4\) Missionaries should be sustained by the prayers of the church.
And,

\(5\) In the conduct of Paul and Barnabas we have an example for
missionaries in founding churches, and in regard to their own trials and
persecutions. If they were persecuted, missionaries may be now; and if
the grace of Christ was sufficient to sustain them, it is not the less
sufficient to sustain those of our own times amidst all the dangers
attending the preaching of the cross in pagan lands.

[Acts 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 14:27</span></span>

They rehearsed ... - [Act 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#004). They
related what had happened; their dangers and their success. This they
did because they had been sent out by the church, and it was proper that
they should give an account of their work; and because it furnished a
suitable occasion of gratitude to God for his mercy.

All that God had done ... - In protecting, guarding them, etc. All was
traced to God.

Had opened the door of faith - Had furnished an opportunity of preaching
the gospel to the Gentiles, [Co1 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#009);
[Co2 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#012).

[Acts 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 14:28</span></span>

And there they abode - At Antioch.

Long time - How long is not intimated; but we hear no more of them until
the council at Jerusalem, mentioned in the next chapter. If the
transactions recorded in this chapter occurred, as is supposed, about 45
a.d. or 46 a.d., and the council at Jerusalem assembled 51 a.d. or 53
a.d., as is supposed, then here is an interval of from five to eight
years in which we have no account of them. Where they were, or what was
their employment in this interval, the sacred historian has not informed
us. It is certain, however, that Paul made several journeys of which we
have no particular record in the New Testament, and it is possible that
some of those journeys occurred during this interval. Thus, he preached
the gospel as far as Illyricum, [Rom
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#019). And in [Co2
11:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023), there is an account of
trials and persecutions, of many of which we have no distinct record,
and which might have occurred during this interval. We may be certain
that these holy men were not idle. From the example of Paul and Barnabas
as recorded in this chapter, we may learn to bear all persecutions and
trials without a complaint, and to acknowledge the good hand of God in
our preservation in our travels; in our defense when we are persecuted;
in all the opportunities which may be open before us to do good; and in
all the success which may attend our efforts. Christians should remember
that it is God who opens doors of usefulness; and they should regard it
as a matter of thanksgiving that such doors are opened, and that they
are permitted to spread the gospel, whatever toil it may cost, whatever
persecution they may endure, whatever perils they may encounter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 15](act015)

</div>
