<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act010)  [Next](act012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#001)

[Acts 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 11:1</span></span>

And the apostles and brethren - The Christians who Were in Judea.

Heard ... - So extraordinary an occurrence as that at Caesarea, the
descent of the Holy Spirit on the Gentiles, and their reception into the
church, would excite attention, and be likely to produce much
sensitiveness in regard to the conduct of Peter and those with him. It
was so contrary to all the ideas of the Jews, that it is not to be
wondered at that it led to contention.

[Acts 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 11:2</span></span>

They that were of the circumcision - Christians who had been converted
from among the Jews.

Contended with him - Disputed; reproved him; charged him with being in
fault. This is one of the circumstances which show conclusively that the
apostles and early Christians did not regard Peter as having any
particular supremacy over the church, or as being in any special sense
the vicar of Christ upon earth. If he had been regarded as having the
authority which the Roman Catholics claim for him, they would have
submitted at once to what he had thought proper to do. But the earliest
Christians had no such idea of Peter's so-called authority. This claim
for Peter is not only opposed to this place, but to every part of the
New Testament.

[Acts 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 11:3</span></span>

And didst eat with them - See the notes on [Act
10:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#013).

[Acts 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 11:4</span></span>

But Peter rehearsed - Greek: Peter beginning, explained it to them in
order; that is, he began with the vision which he saw, and gave a
narrative of the various events in order, as they actually occurred. A
simple and unvarnished statement of facts is usually the best way of
disarming prejudice and silencing opposition. Opposition most commonly
arises from prejudice, or from false and exaggerated statements, and
such opposition can be best removed, not by angry contention, but by an
unvarnished relation of facts. In most cases prejudice will thus be
disarmed, and opposition will die away, as was the case in regard to the
admission of the Gentiles to the church.

And expounded it - Explained it; stated it as it actually occurred.

In order - One event after another, as they happened. He thus showed
that his own mind had been as much biased as theirs, and stated in what
manner his prejudices had been removed. It often happens that those who
become most zealous and devoted in any new measures for the advancement
of religion were as much opposed to them at first as others. They are
led from one circumstance to another, until their prejudices die away,
and the providence and Spirit of God indicate clearly their duty.

[Acts 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 11:5</span></span>

See Acts 10:9-33.

[Acts 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 11:14</span></span>

And all thy house - Thy family. This is a circumstance which his omitted
in the account in Acts 10: It is said, however, in [Act
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#002), that Cornelius feared God with
all his house. It is evident from [Act
10:48](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#048) that the family also received
the ordinance of baptism, and was received into the church.

[Acts 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 11:15</span></span>

And as I began to speak - Or, while I was speaking.

The Holy Ghost ... - [Act 10:44](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#044).

[Acts 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 11:16</span></span>

The word of the Lord - See the notes on [Act
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#005).

[Acts 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 11:17</span></span>

What was I - What power or right had I to oppose the manifest will of
God that the Gentiles should be received into the Christian church.

Withstand God - Oppose or resist God. He had indicated his will; he had
showed his intention to save the Gentiles; and the prejudices of Peter
were all overcome. One of the best means of destroying prejudice and
false opinions is a powerful revival of religion. More erroneous
doctrines and unholy feelings are overcome in such scenes than in all
the bigoted and fierce contentions that have ever taken place. If people
wish to root error out of the church, they should strive by all means to
promote everywhere revivals of pure and undefiled religion. The Holy
Spirit more easily and effectually silences false doctrine, and destroys
heresy, than all the denunciations of fierce theologians; all the alarms
of heated zealots for orthodoxy; and all the anathemas which professed
love for the purity of the church ever utters from the icebergs on which
such champions usually seek their repose and their home.

[Acts 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 11:18</span></span>

They held their peace - They were convinced, as Peter had been, by the
manifest indications of the will of God.

Then hath God ... - The great truth in this manner established that the
doors of the church are opened To the entire Gentile world - a truth
that was worthy of this remarkable interposition. It at once changed the
views of the apostles and of the early Christians; gave them new, large,
and liberal conceptions of the gospel; broke down their long-cherished
prejudices; taught them to look upon all people as their brethren;
impressed their hearts with the truth, never after to be eradicated,
that the Christian church was founded for the wide world, and that it
opened the same glorious pathway to life wherever man might be found,
whether with the narrow prejudice of the Jew, or amidst the degradations
of the pagan world. To this truth we owe our hopes; for this, we should
thank the God of heaven; and, impressed with it, we should seek to
invite the entire world to partake with us of the rich provisions of the
gospel of the blessed God.

[Acts 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 11:19</span></span>

Now they ... - This verse introduces a new train of historical remark;
and from this point the course of the history of the Acts of the
Apostles takes a new direction. Thus far, the history had recorded
chiefly the preaching of the gospel to the Jews. From this point the
history records the efforts made to convert the Gentiles. It begins with
the labors put forth in the important city of Antioch ([Act
11:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019)); and as, during the work of
grace that occurred in that city, the labors of the apostle Paul were
especially sought ([Act 11:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#025)), the
sacred writer thenceforth confines the history mainly to his travels and
labors.

Which were scattered abroad - See [Act
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#001).

As far as Phenice - Phoenice, or Phoenicia, was a province of Syria,
which in its largest sense comprehended a narrow strip of country lying
on the eastern coast of the Mediterranean, and extending from Antioch to
the borders of Egypt. But Phenice Proper extended only from the cities
of Laodicea to Tyre, and included only the territories of Tyre and
Sidon. This country was called sometimes simply "Canaan." See the notes
on [Mat 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#022).

And Cyprus - An island off the coast of Asia Minor, in the Mediterranean
Sea. See the notes on [Act 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036).

And Antioch - There were two cities of this name, one situated in
Pisidia in Asia Minor (see [Act
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#014)); the other, referred to here,
was situated on the Orontes River, and was long, the capital of Syria.
It was built by Seleucus Nicanor, and was called Antioch in honor of his
father Antiochus. It was founded in 301 b.c. It is not mentioned in the
Old Testament, but is several times mentioned in the Apocrypha and in
the New Testament. It was long the most powerful city of the East, and
was inferior only to Seleucia and Alexandria. It was famous for the fact
that the right of citizenship was conferred by Seleucus on the Jews as
well as the Greeks and Macedonians, so that here they had the privilege
of worship in their own way without molestation. It is probable that the
Christians would be regarded merely as a sect of Jews, and would be here
suffered to celebrate their worship without interruption.

On this account it may have been that the early Christians regarded this
city as of such particular importance, because here they could find a
refuge from persecution, and be permitted to worship God without
molestation. This city was honored as a Roman colony, a metropolis, and
an asylum. It was large; was almost square; had many gaines; was adorned
with fine fountains; and was a city of great opulence. It was, however,
subject to earthquakes, and was several times nearly destroyed. In the
year 588 it experienced an earthquake in which 60,000 persons were
destroyed. It was conquered by the Saracens in 638 a.d., and, after some
changes and revolutions, was taken during the Crusades, after a long and
bloody siege, by Godfrey of Bouillon, June 3, 1098 ad. In 1268 it was
taken by the Sultan of Egypt, who demolished it, and placed it under the
dominion of the Turk. Antioch is now called Antakia, and contains about
10,000 inhabitants (Robinson's Calmet). "There was everything in the
situation and circumstances of the city," say Conybeare and Howson
("Life and Epistles of Paul," vol. 1, p. 121), "to make it a place of
concourse for all classes and kinds of people. By its harbor of Seleucia
it was in communication with all the trade of the Mediterranean; and,
through the open country behind the Lebanon, it was conveniently
approached by the caravans from Mesopotamia and Arabia. It united the
inland advantages of Aleppo with the maritime opportunities of Smyrna.
It was almost an Oriental Rome, in which all the forms of the civilized
life of the empire found some representative. Through the first two
centuries of the Christian era it was what Constantinople became
afterward, 'the Gate of the East.' "If any city in the first century was
worthy to be called the Pagan Queen and Metropolis of the East, that
city was Antioch. She was represented, in a famous allegorical statue,
as a female figure, seated on a rock and crowned, with the river Orontes
at her feet" (Conybeare and Howson, vol. 1, p. 125).

Preaching the word - The Word of God, the Gospel.

To none but unto the Jews only - They had the common prejudices of the
Jews, that the offers of salvation were to be made only to Jews.

[Acts 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 11:20</span></span>

Were men of Cyprus and Cyrene - Were natives of Cyprus and Cyrene.
Cyrene was a province and city of Libya in Africa. It is at present
called Cairoan, and is situated in the kingdom of Barca. In Cyprus the
Greek language was spoken; and from the vicinity of Cyrene to
Alexandria, it is probable that the Greek language was spoken there
also. From this circumstance it might have happened that they were led
more particularly to address the Grecians who were in Antioch. It is
possible, however, that they might have heard of the vision which Peter
saw, and felt themselves called on to preach the gospel to the Gentiles.

Spake unto the Grecians - πρὸς τοὺς Ἑλληνιστὰς pros tous Hellēnistas. To
the Hellenists. This word usually denotes in the New Testament "those
Jews residing in foreign lands, who spoke the Greek language." See the
notes on [Act 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001). But to them the
gospel had been already preached; and yet in this place it is evidently
the intention of Luke to affirm that the people of Cyprus and Cyrene
preached to those who were not Jews, and that thus their conduct was
distinguished from those ([Act 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019))
who preached to the Jews only. It is thus manifest that we are here
required to understand the Gentiles as those who were addressed by the
people of Cyprus and Cyrene. In many mss. the word used here is Ἕλληνας
Hellēnas, "Greeks," instead of "Hellenists." This reading has been
adopted by Griesbach, and is found in the Syriac, the Arabic, the
Vulgate, and in many of the early fathers. The Aethiopic version reads
"to the Gentiles." There is no doubt that this is the true reading; and
that the sacred writer means to say that the gospel was here preached
to. Those who were not Jews, for all were called "Greeks" by them who
were not Jews, [Rom 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016). The
connection would lead us to suppose that they had heard of what had been
done by Peter, and that, imitating his example, they preached the gospel
now to the Gentiles also.

[Acts 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 11:21</span></span>

And the hand of the Lord - See the notes on [Luk
1:66](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#066). Compare [Psa
80:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#017). The meaning is, that God showed
them favor, and evinced his power in the conversion of their hearers.

[Acts 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 11:22</span></span>

Then tidings ... - The church at Jerusalem heard of this. It was natural
that so remarkable an occurrence as the conversion of the Gentiles, and
the extraordinary success of the gospel in a splendid and mighty city,
should be reported at Jerusalem, and excite deep interest there.

And they sent forth - To aid the disciples there, and to give them their
sanction. They had done a similar thing in the revival which occurred in
Samaria. See the notes on [Act 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#014).

Barnabas - See [Act 4:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036). He was a
native of Cyprus, and was probably well acquainted with Antioch. He was,
therefore, especially qualified for the work on which they sent him.

[Acts 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 11:23</span></span>

Had seen the grace of God - The favor, or mercy of God, in converting
sinners to himself.

Was glad - Approved of what had been done in preaching the gospel to the
Gentiles, and rejoiced that God had poured down his Spirit on them. The
effect of a revival is to produce joy in the hearts of all those who
love the Saviour.

And exhorted them all - Entreated them. They would be exposed to many
trials and temptations, and he sought to secure their firm adherence to
the cause of religion.

That with purpose of heart - With a firm mind; with a fixed, settled
resolution that they would make this their settled plan of life, their
main object. A purpose, πρόθεσις prothesis, is a resolution of the mind,
a plan, or intention, [Rom 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028); [Eph
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#011); [Eph
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#011); [Ti2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009); [Ti2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#010). It is especially a resolution of
the mind in regard to future conduct, and the doctrine of Barnabas here
was, undoubtedly, that it should be a regular, fixed, determined plan or
design in their minds that they would henceforward adhere to God. Such a
plan should be formed by all Christians in the beginning of their
Christian life, and without such a plan there can be no evidence of
piety. We may also remark that such a plan is one of the heart. It is
not simply of the understanding, but is of the entire mind, including
the will and affections. It is the leading principle; the strongest
affection; the guiding purpose of the will to adhere to God, and, unless
this is the prevalent, governing desire of the heart, there can be no
evidence of conversion.

They would cleave - Greek: that they would remain; that is, that they
would adhere constantly and faithfully attached to the Lord.

[Acts 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 11:24</span></span>

For he was a good man - This is given as a reason why he was so
eminently successful. It is not said that he was a man of distinguished
talents or learning; that he was a splendid or an imposing preacher; but
simply that he was a man of an amiable, kind, and benevolent disposition
- a pious, humble man of God. We should not undervalue talent,
eloquence, or learning in the ministry, but we may remark that humble
piety will often do more in the conversion of souls than the most
splendid talents. No endowments can be a substitute for this. The real
power of a minister is concentrated in this, and without this his
ministry will be barrenness and a curse. There is nothing on the earth
so mighty as goodness. If a man wished to make the most of his powers,
the true secret would be found in employing them for a good object, and
suffering them to be wholly under the direction of benevolence. John
Howard's purpose "to do good" has made a more permanent impression on
the interests of the world than the talents of Alexander or Caesar.

Full of the Holy Ghost - Was entirely under the influence of the Holy
Spirit. This is the second qualification mentioned here of a good
minister. He was not merely exemplary for mildness and kindness of
temper, but he was eminently a man of God. He was filled with the
influences of the sacred Spirit, producing zeal, love, peace, joy, etc.
See [Gal 5:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022). Compare the notes on
[Act 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004).

And of faith - Confidence in the truth and promises of God. This is the
third qualification mentioned; and this was another cause of his
success. He confided in God. He depended, not on his own strength, but
on the strength of the arm of God. With these qualifications he engaged
in his work, and he was successful. These qualifications should be
sought by the ministry of the gospel. Others should not indeed be
neglected, but a man's ministry will usually be successful only as he
seeks to possess those endowments which distinguished Barnabas - a kind,
tender, benevolent heart; devoted piety; the fulness of the Spirit's
influence; and strong, unwavering confidence in the promises and power
of God.

And much people - Many people.

Was added unto the Lord - Became Christians.

[Acts 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 11:25</span></span>

Then departed ... - Why Barnabas sought Saul is not known. It is
probable, however, that it was owing to the remarkable success which he
had in Antioch. There was a great revival of religion, and there was
need of additional labor. In such times the ministers of the gospel need
additional help, as men in harvest-time need the aid of others. Saul was
in this vicinity [Act 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#030), and he was
eminently suited to assist in this work. With him Barnabas was well
acquainted [Act 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#027), and probably
there was no other one in that vicinity whose help he could obtain.

To Tarsus - See the notes on [Act
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#011).

[Acts 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 11:26</span></span>

That a whole year - Antioch was a city exceedingly important in its
numbers, wealth, and influence. It was for this reason, probably, that
they spent so long a time there, instead of traveling in other places.
The attention of the apostles was early and chiefly directed to cities,
as being places of influence and centers of power. Thus, Paul passed
three years in the city of Ephesus, [Act
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#031). And thus he continued a year
and a half at Corinth, [Act 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#011). It
may be added that the first churches were founded in cities; and the
most remarkable success attended the preaching of the gospel in large
towns.

They assembled themselves ... - They came together for worship.

With the church - Margin, in the church. The Greek ἐν en will bear this
construction; but there is no instance in the New Testament where the
word "church" refers to the edifice in which a congregation worships. It
evidently here means that Barnabas and Saul convened with the Christian
assembly at proper times, through the space of a year, for the purposes
of public worship.

And the disciples were called Christians ... - As this became the
distinguishing name of the followers of Christ, it was worthy of record.
The name was evidently given because they were the followers of Christ.
But by whom, or with what views it was given, is not certainly known.
Whether it was given by their enemies in derision, as the names Puritan,
Quaker, Methodist, etc., have been; or whether the disciples assumed it
themselves, or whether it was given by divine intimation, has been a
matter of debate. That it was given in derision is not probable, for in
the name "Christian" there was nothing dishonorable. To be the professed
friends of the Messiah, or the Christ, was not with Jews a matter of
reproach, for they all professed to be the friends of the Messiah. The
cause of reproach with the disciples was that they regarded Jesus of
Nazareth as the Messiah; and hence, when their enemies wished to speak
of them with contempt, they would speak of them as Galileans [Act
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#007), or as Nazarenes [Act
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#005), "And a ringleader of the sect of
the Nazarenes." It is possible that the name might have been given to
them as a mere appellation, without intending to convey by it any
reproach. The Gentiles would probably use this name to distinguish them,
and it might have become thus the common appellation. It is evident from
the New Testament, I think, that it was not designed as a term of
reproach. It occurs but twice elsewhere: [Act
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#028), "Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost
thou persuadest me to be a Christian"; [Pe1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#016), "Yet if any man suffer as a
Christian, let him not be ashamed." No certain argument can be drawn in
regard to the source of the name from the word which is used here. The
word used here, and translated "were called" - χρηματίζω chrēmatizō -
means:

\(1\) To transact any business; to be employed in accomplishing
anything, etc. This is its usual signification in the Greek writers.

\(2\) to be divinely admonished, to be instructed by a divine
communication, etc., [Mat 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#012); [Luk
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#026); [Act
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#022); [Heb
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005); [Heb
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#007); [Heb
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#025).

\(3\) to be named, or called, in any way, without a divine
communication, [Rom 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#003), "She shall be
called an adulteress." It cannot be denied, however, that the most usual
signification in the New Testament is that of a divine monition, or
communication; and it is certainly possible that the name was given by
Barnabas and Saul. I recline to the opinion, however, that it was given
to them by the Gentiles who were there, simply as an appellation,
without intending it as a name of reproach; and that it was readily
assumed by the disciples as a name that would fitly designate them. If
it had been assumed by them, or if Barnabas and Saul had conferred the
name, the record would probably have been to this effect; not simply
that they "were called," but that they took this name, or that it was
given by the apostles. It is, however, of little consequence whence the
name originated. It soon became a name of reproach, and has usually been
in all ages since, by the wicked, the frivolous, the licentious, and the
ungodly.

It is, however, an honored name - the most honorable appellation that
can be conferred on a mortal. It suggests at once to a Christian the
name of his great Redeemer; the idea of our intimate relation to him;
and the thought that we receive him as our chosen Leader, the source of
our blessings, the author of our salvation, the fountain of our joys. It
is the distinguishing name of all the redeemed. It is not that we belong
to this or that denomination; it is not that our names are connected
with high and illustrious ancestors; it is not that they are recorded in
the books of heraldry; it is not that they stand high in courts, and
among the frivolous, the fashionable, and the rich, that true honor is
conferred upon men. These are not the things that give distinction and
speciality to the followers of the Redeemer. It is that they are
"Christians." This is their special name; by this they are known; this
at once suggests their character, their feelings, their doctrines, their
hopes, their joys.

This binds them all together - a name which rises above every other
appellation; which unites in one the inhabitants of distant nations and
tribes of men; which connects the extremes of society, and places them
in most important respects on a common level; and which is a bond to
unite in one family all those who love the Lord Jesus, though dwelling
in different climes, speaking different languages, engaged in different
pursuits of life, and occupying distant graves at death. He who lives
according to the import of this name is the most blessed and eminent of
morals. This name shall be had in remembrance when the names of royalty
shall be remembered no more, and when the appellations of nobility shall
cease to amuse or to dazzle the world.

[Acts 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 11:27</span></span>

And in these days - While Barnabas and Saul were at Antioch.

Came prophets - The word "prophet" denotes properly "one who foretells
future events." See the notes on [Mat
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015). It is sometimes used in the New
Testament to denote simply "religious teachers, instructors sent from
God, without particular reference to future events." To teach the people
in the doctrines of religion was a part of the prophetic office, and
this idea was only sometimes denoted by the use of the word. See [Rom
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006); [Co1
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010), [Co1
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028); [Co1
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#002), [Co1
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#008); [Co1
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#003), [Co1
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#005),[Co1
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#024). These prophets seem to have
been endowed in a remarkable manner with the knowledge of future events;
with the power of explaining mysteries; and in some cases with the power
of speaking foreign languages. In this case, it seems that one of them
at least had the power of foretelling future events.

[Acts 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 11:28</span></span>

Named Agabus - This man is mentioned but in one other place in the New
Testament. In [Act 21:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#010), he is
referred to as having foretold that Paul would be delivered into the
hands of the Gentiles. It is not expressly said that he was a Christian,
but the connection seems to imply that he was.

And signified - See [Joh 12:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#033). The
word usually denotes "to indicate by signs, or with a degree of
obscurity and uncertainty, not to declare in explicit language." But
here it seems to denote simply "to foretell, to predict."

By the Spirit - Under the influence of the Spirit. He was inspired.

Great dearth - A great famine.

Throughout all the world - The word used here οἰκουμένην oikoumenēn
usually denotes "the inhabitable world, the parts of the earth which are
cultivated and occupied." It is sometimes used, however, to denote "an
entire land or country," in contradistinction from the parts of it:
thus, to denote "the whole of the land of Palestine" in distinction from
its parts; or to denote that an event would have reference to all the
land, and not be confined to one or more parts, as Galilee, Samaria,
etc. See the notes on [Luk 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001). The
meaning of this prophecy evidently is, that the famine would be
extensive; that it would not be confined to a single province or region,
but that it would extend so far as that it might be called "general." In
fact, though the famine was particularly severe in Judea, it extended
much further. This prediction was uttered not long after the conversion
of Saul, and probably, therefore, about the year, 38 a.d. or 40 a.d. Dr.
Lardner has attempted to show that the prophecy had reference only to
the land of Judea, though in fact there were famines in other places
(Lardher's Works, vol. 1, pp. 253, 254, edit. London, 1829).

Which came to pass ... - This is one of the few instances in which the
sacred writers in the New Testament affirm the fulfillment of a
prophecy. The history having been written after the event, it was
natural to give a passing notice of the fulfillment.

In the days of Claudius Caesar - The Roman emperor. He began his reign
in 41 a.d., and he reigned for 13 years. He was at last poisoned by one
of his wives, Agrippina, who wished to raise her son Nero to the throne.
During his reign no less than four different famines are mentioned by
ancient writers, one of which was particularly severe in Judea, and was
the one, doubtless, to which the sacred writer here refers:

\(1\) The first happened at Rome, and occurred in the first or second
year of the reign of Claudius. It arose from the difficulties of
importing provisions from abroad. It is mentioned by Dio, whose words
are these: "There being a great famine, he (Claudius) not only took care
for a present supply, but provided also for the time to come." He then
proceeds to state the great expense which Claudius was at in making a
good port at the mouth of the Tiber, and a convenient passage from
thence up to the city (did, lib. Ix. p. 671, 672; see also Suetonius,
Claudius, cap. 20).

\(2\) a second famine is mentioned as having been particularly severe in
Greece. Of this famine Eusebius speaks in his Chronicon, p. 204: "There
was a great famine in Greece, in which a modius of wheat (about half a
bushel) was sold for six drachmas." This famine is said by Eusebius to
have occurred in the ninth year of the reign of Claudius.

\(3\) in the latter part of his reign, 51 a.d., there was another famine
at Rome, mentioned by Suetonius (Claudius, cap. 18), and by Tacitus
(Ann., [Joh 12:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#043)). Of this, Tacitus
says that it was so severe that it was deemed to be a divine judgment.

\(4\) a fourth famine is mentioned as having occurred particularly in
Judea. This is described by Josephus (Antiq., book 20, chapter 2,
section 5). "A famine," says he, "did oppress them at the time (in the
time of Claudius); and many people died for the lack of what was
necessary to procure food withal. Queen Helena sent some of her servants
to Alexandria with money to buy a great quantity of grain, and others of
them to Cyprus to bring a cargo of dried figs." This famine is described
as having continued under the two procurators of Judea, Tiberius
Alexander and Cassius Fadus. Fadus was sent into Judea, on the death of
Agrippa, about the fourth year of the reign of Claudius, and the famine,
therefore, continued probably during the fifth, sixth, and seventh years
of the reign of Claudius. See the note in Whiston's Josephus, Antiq.,
book 20, chapter 2, section 5; also Lardner as quoted above. Of this
famine, or of the want consequent on the famine, repeated mention is
made in the New Testament.

[Acts 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 11:29</span></span>

Then the disciples - The Christians at Antioch.

According to his ability - According as they had prospered. It does not
imply that they were rich, but that they rendered such aid as they could
afford.

Determined to send relief - This arose not merely from their general
sense of obligation to aid the poor, but they felt themselves
particularly bound to assist their Jewish brethren. The obligation to
relieve the temporal needs of those from whom important spiritual
mercies are received is repeatedly enforced in the New Testament.
Compare [Rom 15:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025); [Co1
16:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001); [Co2
9:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#001); [Gal
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#010).

[Acts 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 11:30</span></span>

Sent it to the elders - Greek: to the presbyters. This is the first
mention which we have in the New Testament of elders, or presbyters, in
the Christian church. The word literally denotes "aged men," but in the
Jewish synagogue it was merely a name of office. It is clear, however, I
think, that the elders of the Jewish synagogue here are not included,
for the relief Was intended for the "brethren" ([Act
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#029)); that is, the Christians who
were at Jerusalem, and it is not probable that a charity like. this
would have been entrusted to the hands of Jewish elders. The connection
here does not enable us to determine anything about the sense in which
the word was used. I think it probable that it does not refer to
officers in the church, but that it means simply that the charity was
entrusted to the aged, prudent, and experienced men in the church, for
distribution among the members. Calvin supposes that the apostles were
particularly intended. But this is not probable. It is possible that the
deacons, who were probably aged men, may be here particularly referred
to, but it seems more probable that the charity was sent to the aged
members of the church without respect to their office, to be distributed
according to their discretion.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 12](act012)

</div>
