<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1002)  [Next](co1004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 3:0</span></span>

The design of this chapter is substantially the same as the former. It
is to reprove the pride, the philosophy, the vain wisdom on which the
Greeks so much rested; and to show that the gospel was not dependent on
that for its success, and that that had been the occasion of no small
part of the contentions and strifes which had arisen in the church at
Corinth. The chapter is occupied mainly with an account of his own
ministry with them; and seems designed to meet an objection which either
was made, or could have been made by the Corinthians themselves, or by
the false teacher that was among them. In [Co1
2:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#012), he had affirmed that,
Christians were in fact under the influence of the Spirit of God; that
they were enlightened in a remarkable degree; that they understood all
things pertaining to the Christian religion. To this, it either was, or
could have been objected that Paul, when among them, had not instructed
them fully in the more deep and abstruse points of the gospel; and that
he had confined his instructions to the very rudiments of the Christian
religion.

Of this, probably the false teachers who had formed parties among them,
had taken the advantage, and had pretended to carry the instruction to a
much greater length, and to explain many things which Paul had left
unexplained. Hence, this division into parties. It became Paul,
therefore, to state why he had confined his instructions to the
rudiments of the gospel among them - and this occupies the first part of
1 Cor. 3 and [Co1 5:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001). The reason
was, that they were not prepared to receive higher instruction, but were
carnal, and he could not address them as being prepared to enter fully
into the more profound doctrines of the Christian religion. The proof
that this was so was found in the fact that they had been distracted
with disputes and strifes, which demonstrated that they were not
prepared for the higher doctrines of Christianity. He then REproves them
for their contentions, on the ground that it was of little consequence
by what instrumentality they had been brought to the knowledge of the
gospel, and that there was no occasion for their strifes and sects.

all success, whoever was the instrument, was to be traced to God [Co1
3:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#005), and the fact that one teacher
or another had first instructed them, or that one was more eloquent than
another, should not be the foundation for contending sects. God was the
source of all blessings. Yet in order to show the real nature of his own
work, in order to meet the whole of the objection, he goes on to state
that he had done the most important part of the work in the church
himself. He had laid the foundation; and all the others were but rearing
the superstructure. And much as his instructions might appear to be
elementary, and unimportant, yet it had been done with the same skill
which an architect evinces who labors that the foundation may be well
laid and firm, [Co1 3:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010). The
others who had succeeded him, whoever they were, were but builders upon
this foundation. The foundation had been well laid, and they should be
careful how they built on it, [Co1
3:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012). The mention of this fact -
that he had laid the foundation, and that that foundation was Jesus
Christ, and that they had been reared upon that as a church, leads him
to the inference [Co1 3:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016), that
they should be holy as the temple of God; and the conclusion from the
whole is:

\(1\) That no man should deceive himself, of which there was so much
danger [Co1 3:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018); and,

\(2\) That no Christian should glory in man, for all things were theirs.
It was no matter who had been their teacher on earth, all belonged to
God; and they had a common interest in the most eminent teachers of
religion, and they should rise above the petty rivalships of the world,
and rejoice in the assurance that all things belonged to them, [Co1
3:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#021).

[1 Corinthians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 3:1</span></span>

And I, brethren - See [Co1 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#001). This
is designed to meet an implied objection. He had said [Co1
2:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014) that Christians were able to
understand all things. Yet, they would recollect that he had not
addressed them as such, but had confined himself to the more elementary
parts of religion when he came among them. He had not entered upon the
abstruse and difficult points of theology - the points of speculation in
which the subtle Greeks so much abounded and so much delighted. He now
states the reason why he had not done it. The reason was one that was
most humbling to their pride; but it was the true reason, and
faithfulness demanded that it should be stated. It was, that they were
carnal, and not qualified to understand the deep mysteries of the
gospel; and the proof of this was unhappily at hand. It was too evident
in their contentions and strifes, that they were under the influence of
carnal feelings and views.

Could not speak unto you as unto spiritual - "I could not regard you as
spiritual - as qualified to enter into the full and higher truths of the
gospel; I could not regard you as divested of the feelings which
influence carnal people - the people of the world, and I addressed you
accordingly. I could not discourse to you as to far-advanced and
well-informed Christians. I taught you the rudiments only of the
Christian religion." He refers here, doubtless, to his instructions when
he founded the church at Corinth. See the note at [Co1
2:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#013).

But as unto carnal - The word "carnal" here σάρκινοῖς sarkinois is not
the same which in [Co1 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014), is
translated "natural" ψυχικός psuchikos. "That" refers to one who is
unrenewed, and who is wholly under the influence of his sensual or
animal nature, and is no where applied to Christians. "This" is applied
here to Christians - but to those who have much of the remains of
corruption, and who are imperfectly acquainted with the nature of
religion; babes in Christ. It denotes those who still evinced the
feelings and views which pertain to the flesh, in these unhappy
contentions, and strifes, and divisions. "The works of the flesh are
hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, envyings" [Gal
5:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#020); and these they had evinced in
their divisions; and Paul knew that their danger lay in this direction,
and he therefore addressed them according to their character. Paul
applies the word to himself [Rom 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014),
"for I am carnal;" and here it denotes that they were as yet under the
influence of the corrupt passions and desires which the flesh produces.

As unto babes in Christ - As unto those recently born into his kingdom,
and unable to understand the profounder doctrines of the Christian
religion. It is a common figure to apply the term infants and children
to those who are feeble in understanding, or unable, from any cause, to
comprehend the more profound instructions of science or religion.

[1 Corinthians 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 3:2</span></span>

I have fed you with milk - Paul here continues the metaphor, which is
derived from the custom of feeding infants with the lightest food. Milk
here evidently denotes the more simple and elementary doctrines of
Christianity - the doctrines of the new birth, of repentance, faith,
etc. The same figure occurs in [Heb
5:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#011); and also in Classical
writers. See Wetstein.

And not with meat - "Meat" here denotes the more sublime and mysterious
doctrines of religion.

For hitherto - Formerly, when I came among you, and laid the foundations
of the church.

Not able to bear it - You were not sufficiently advanced in Christian
knowledge to comprehend the higher mysteries of the gospel.

Neither yet now ... - The reason why they were not then able he proceeds
immediately to state.

[1 Corinthians 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 3:3</span></span>

For ye are yet carnal - Though you are Christians, and are the friends
of God in the main, yet your divisions and strifes show that you are
yet, in some degree, under the influence of the principles which govern
the people of this world. People who are governed solely by the
principles of this world, evince a spirit of strife, emulation and
contention; and just so far as you are engaged in strife, just so far do
you show that you are governed by their principles and feelings.

For whereas - In proof that you are carnal I appeal to your contentions
and strifes.

Envying - ζῆλος zēlos, zeal; used here in the sense of envy, as it is in
[Jam 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#014), [Jam
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#016). It denotes, properly, any
"fervour" of mind (from ζέω zeō), and may be applied to any exciting and
agitating passion. The envy here referred to, was that which arose from
the superior advantages and endowments which some claimed or possessed
over others. Envy everywhere is a fruitful cause of strife. Most
contentions in the church are somehow usually connected with envy.

And strife - Contention and dispute.

And divisions - Dissensions and quarrels. The margin correctly renders
it "factions." The idea is, that they were split up into parties, and
that those parties were embittered with mutual recriminations and
reproaches, as they always are in a church.

And walk as men - Margin. "according to man." The word "walk" is used
often in the Scriptures in the sense of "conduct" or "act." You conduct
yourselves as human beings of this earth, that is, as people commonly
do; you evince the same spirit that the great mass of mankind does.
Instead of being filled with love; of being united and harmonious as the
members of the same family ought to be, you are split up into factions
as the people of the world are.

[1 Corinthians 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 3:4</span></span>

For while one saith ...; - See the note at [Co1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012).

[1 Corinthians 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 3:5</span></span>

Who then is Paul ... - See the notes at [Co1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013). Why should a party be formed
which should be named after Paul? What has he done or taught that should
lead to this? What eminence has he that should induce any to call
themselves by his name? He is on a level with the other apostles; and
all are but ministers, or servants, and have no claim to the honor of
giving names to sects and parties. God is the fountain of all your
blessings, and whoever may have been the "instrument" by whom you have
believed, it is improper to regard them as, in any sense the fountain of
your blessings, or to arrange yourselves under their name.

But ministers - Our word minister, as now used, does not express the
proper force of this word. We in applying it to preachers of the gospel
do not usually advert to the original sense of the word, and the reasons
why it was given to them. The original word διάκονοι diakonoi denotes
properly "servants" in contradistinction from "masters" [Mat
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#026); [Mat
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#011); [Mar
9:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#035); [Mar
10:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#043); and denotes those of course who
are in an inferior rank of life. They did not have command, or
authority, but were subject to the command of others. It is applied to
the preachers of the gospel because they are employed in the service of
God; because they go at his command, and are subject to his control and
direction. They did not have original authority, nor are they the source
of influence or power. The idea here is, that they were the mere
instruments or servants by whom God conveyed all blessings to the
Corinthians; that they as ministers were on a level, were engaged in the
same work, and that therefore, it was improper for them to form parties
that should be called by their names.

By whom - Through whom δἰ ὥν di' hōn, by whose instrumentality. They
were not the original source of faith, but were the mere servants of God
in conveying to them the knowledge of that truth by which they were to
be saved.

Even as the Lord gave to every man - God is the original source of
faith; and it is by his influence that anyone is brought to believe; see
the note at [Rom 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003), note at [Rom
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006). There were diversities of gifts
among the Corinthian Christians, as there are in all Christians. And it
is here implied:

\(1\) That all that anyone had was to be traced to God as its author;

\(2\) That he is a sovereign, and dispenses his favors to all as he
pleases;

\(3\) That since God had conferred those favors, it was improper for the
Corinthians to divide themselves into sects and call themselves by the
name of their teachers, for all that they had was to be traced to God
alone.

This idea, that all the gifts and graces which Christians had, were to
be traced to God alone, was one which the apostle Paul often insisted
on; and if this idea had been kept before the minds and hearts of all
Christians, it would have prevented no small part of the contentions in
the church, and the formation of no small part of the sects in the
Christian world.

[1 Corinthians 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 3:6</span></span>

I have planted - The apostle here compares the establishment of the
church at Corinth to the planting of a vine, a tree, or of grain. The
figure is taken from agriculture, and the meaning is obvious. Paul
established the church. He was the first preacher in Corinth; and if any
distinction was due to anyone, it was rather to him than to the teachers
who had labored there subsequently; but he regarded himself as worthy of
no such honor as to be the head of a party, for it was not himself, but
God who had given the increase.

Apollos watered - This figure is taken from the practice of watering a
tender plant, or of watering a garden or field. This was necessary in a
special manner in Eastern countries. Their fields became parched and dry
from their long droughts, and it was necessary to irrigate them by
artificial means. The sense here is, that Paul had labored in
establishing the church at Corinth; but that subsequently Apollos had
labored to increase it, and to build it, up. It is certain that Apollos
did not go to Corinth until after Paul had left it; see [Act
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#018); compare [Act
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#027).

God gave the increase - God caused the seed sown to take root and spring
up; and God blessed the irrigation of the tender plants as they sprung
up, and caused them to grow. This idea is still taken from the farmer.
It would be vain for the farmer to sow his seed unless God would give it
life. There is no life in the seed, nor is there any inherent power in
the earth to make it grow. Only God, the Giver of all life, can quicken
the germ in the seed, and make it live. So it would be in vain for the
farmer to water his plant unless God would bless it. There is no living
principle in the water; no inherent power in the rains of heaven to make
the plant grow. It is adapted, indeed, to this, and the seed would not
germinate if it was not planted, nor grow if it was not watered; but the
life is still from God. He arranged these means, and he gives life to
the tender blade, and sustains it. And so it is with the word of life.
It has no inherent power to produce effect by itself. The power is not
in the naked word, nor in him that plants, nor in him that waters, nor
in the heart where it is sown, but in God. But there is a Fitness of the
means to the end. The word is adapted to save the soul. The seed must be
sown or it will not germinate. Truth must be sown in the heart, and the
heart must be prepared for it - as the earth must be plowed and made
mellow, or it will not spring up. It must be cultivated with assiduous
care, or it will produce nothing. But still it is all of God - as much
so as the yellow harvest of the field, after all the toils of the farmer
is of God. And as the farmer who has just views, will take no praise to
himself because his grain and his vine start up and grow after all his
care, but will ascribe all to God's unceasing, beneficent agency; so
will the minister of religion, and so will every Christian, after all
their care, ascribe all to God.

[1 Corinthians 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 3:7</span></span>

Anything - This is to he taken comparatively. They are nothing in
comparison with God! Their agency is of no importance compared with his:
see the note at [Co1 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#028). It does not
mean that their agency ought not to be performed; that it is not
important, and indispensable in its place; but that the honor is due to
God - Their agency is indispensable. God could make seed or a tree grow
if they were not planted in the earth. But He does not do it. The agency
of the farmer is indispensable in the ordinary operations of His
providence. If he does not plant, God will not make the grain or the
tree grow. God blesses his labors; he does not work a miracle. God
attends effort with success; God does not interfere in a miraculous
manner to accommodate the indolence of people. So in the matter of
salvation. The efforts of ministers would be of no avail without God.
They could do nothing in the salvation of the soul unless God would give
the increase. But their labors are as indispensable and as necessary, as
are those of the farmer in the production of a harvest. And as every
farmer could say, "my labors are nothing without God, who alone can give
the increase," so it is with every minister of the gospel.

[1 Corinthians 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 3:8</span></span>

Are one - ἕν εἰσιν hen eisin. They are not the same person; but they are
one in the following respects:

\(1\) They are united in reference to the same work. Though they are
engaged in different things - for planting and watering are different
kinds of work, yet it is one in regard to the end to be gained. The
employments do not at all clash, but tend to the same end. It is not as
if one planted, and the other was engaged in pulling up.

\(2\) their work is one, because one is as necessary as the other. If
the grain was not planted there would be no use in pouring water there;
if not watered, there would be no use in planting. The work of one is as
necessary, therefore, as the other; and the one should not undervalue
the labors of the other.

\(3\) they are one in regard to God. They are both engaged in performing
one work; God is performing another. There are not three parties or
portions of the work, but two. They two perform one part of the work;
God alone performs the other. Theirs would be useless without him; he
would not ordinarily perform his without their performing their part.
They could not do his part it they would - as they cannot make a plant
grow; he could perform their part - as he could plant and water without
the farmer; but it is not in accordance with his arrangements to do it.

And every man - The argument of the apostle here has reference only to
ministers; but it is equally true of all people, that they shall receive
their proper reward.

Shall receive - On the Day of Judgment, when God decides the destiny of
men. The decisions of that Day will be simply determining what every
moral agent ought to receive.

His own reward - His fit, or proper (τον ἴδιον ton idion) reward; that
which pertains to him, or which shall be a proper expression of the
character and value of his labor - The word "reward" μισθὸν misthon
denotes properly that which is given by contract for service rendered;
an equivalent in value for services or for kindness; see the note at
[Rom 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#004). In the Scriptures it denotes
pay, wages, recompense given to day-laborers, to soldiers, etc. It is
applied often, as here, to the retribution which God will make to people
on the Day of Judgment; and is applied to the "favors" which he will
then bestow on them, or to the "punishment" which he will inflict as the
reward of their deeds. Instances of the former sense occur in [Mat
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012); 6; [Luk
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#023), [Luk
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#035); [Rev
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#018); of the latter in [Pe2
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#013), [Pe2
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#015) - In regard to the righteous, it
does not imply merit, or that they deserve heaven; but it means that,
God will render to them that which, according to the terms of his new
covenant, he has promised, and which shall be a fit expression of his
acceptance of their services. It is proper, according to these
arrangements, that they should be blessed in heaven. It would not be
proper that they should be cast down to hell - Their original and their
sole title to eternal life is the grace of God through Jesus Christ: the
"measure," or "amount" of the favors bestowed on them there, shall be
according to the services which they render on earth. A parent may
resolve to divide his estate among his sons, and their title to any
thing may be derived from his mere favor but he may determine that it
shall be divided according to their expressions of attachment, and to
their obedience to him.

[1 Corinthians 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 3:9</span></span>

For we are labourers together with God - Θεοῦ γάρ ἐσμεν συνεργοί Theou
gar esmen sunergoi. We are God's co-workers. A similar expression occurs
in [Co2 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001), "We then as workers
together with him," etc. This passage is capable of two significations:
first, as in our translation, that they were co-workers with God;
engaged with him in his work, that he and they cooperated in the
production of the effect; or that it was a joint-work; as we speak of a
partnercy, or of joint-effort among people. So many interpreters have
understood this. If this is the sense of the passage, then it means that
as a farmer may be said to be a co-worker with God when he plants and
tills his field, or does that without which God would not work in that
case, or without which a harvest would not be produced, so the Christian
minister cooperates with God in producing the same result. He is engaged
in performing that which is indispensable to the end; and God also, by
His Spirit, cooperates with the same design. If this is the idea, it
gives a special sacredness to the work of the ministry, and indeed to
the work of the farmer and the vinedresser. There is no higher honor
than for a man to be engaged in doing the same things which God does,
and participating with him in accomplishing his glorious plans. But
doubts have been suggested in regard to this interpretation:

\(1\) The Greek does not of necessity imply this. It is literally, not
we are his co-partners, but we are his fellow-laborers, that is,
fellow-laborers in his employ, under his direction - as we say of
servants of the same rank they are fellow-laborers of the same master,
not meaning that the master was engaged in working with them, but that
they were fellow-laborers one with another in his employment.

\(2\) there is no expression that is parallel to this. There is none
that speaks of God's operating jointly with his creatures in producing
the same result. They may be engaged in regard to the same end; but the
sphere of God's operations and of their operations is distinct. God does
one thing; and they do another, though they may contribute to the same
result. The sphere of God's operations in the growth of a tree is
totally distinct from that of the man who plants it. The man who planted
it has no agency in causing the juices to circulate; in expanding the
bud or the leaf; that is, in the proper work of God - In [Jo3
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#008), Christians are indeed said to he
"fellow-helpers to the truth" συνεργοὶ τῆ ἀληθεία sunergoi tē alētheia;
that is, they operate with the truth, and contribute by their labors and
influence to that effect. In Mark also [Mar
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#020), it is said that the apostles
"went forth and preached everywhere, the Lord working with them" (τοῦ
κυρίου συνεργοῖντος tou kuriou sunergointos), where the phrase means
that the Lord cooperated with them by miracles, etc. The Lord, by his
own proper energy, and in his own sphere, contributed to the success of
the work in which they were engaged.

\(3\) the main design and scope of this whole passage is to show that
God is all - that the apostles are nothing; to represent the apostles
not as joint-workers with God, but as working by themselves, and God as
alone giving efficiency to all that was done. The idea is, that of
depressing or humbling the apostles, and of exalting God; and this idea
would not be consistent with the interpretation that they were
joint-laborers with him. While, therefore, the Greek would hear the
interpretation conveyed in our translation, the sense may perhaps be,
that the apostles were joint-laborers with each other in God's service;
that they were united in their work, and that God was all in all; that
they were like servants employed in the service of a master, without
saying that the master participated with them in their work. This idea
is conveyed in the translation of Doddridge, "we are the fellow-laborers
of God." So Rosenmuller, Calvin, however, Grotius, Whitby, and
Bloomfield, coincide with our version in the interpretation. The Syriac
renders it "We work with God." The Vulgate, "We are the aids of God."

Ye are God's husbandry - (γεώργιον geōrgion); margin, "tillage." This
word occurs no where else in the New Testament. It properly denotes a
"tilled" or "cultivated field;" and the idea is, that the church at
Corinth was the field on which God had bestowed the labor of tillage, or
culture, to produce fruit. The word is used by the Septuagint in [Gen
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#014), as the translation of צבדה
‛abudaah; "For he had 'possession' of flocks," etc.; in [Jer
51:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#023), as the translation of צמד
tsemed "a yoke;" and in [Pro 24:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#030);
[Pro 31:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#016), as the translation of שׂדי
saadeh, "a field;" "I went by the 'field' of the slothful," etc. The
sense here is, that all their culture was of God; that as a church they
were under his care; and that all that had been produced in them was to
be traced to his cultivation.

God's building - This is another metaphor. The object of Paul was to
show that all that had been done for them had been really accomplished
by God. For this purpose he first says that they were God's cultivated
field; then he changes the figure; draws his illustration from
architecture, and says, that they had been built by him as an architect
rears a house. It does not rear itself; but it is reared by another. So
he says of the Corinthians, "Ye are the building which God erects." The
same figure is used in [Co2 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#016), and
[Eph 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#021); see also [Heb
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#006); [Pe1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005). The idea is, that God is the
supreme agent in the founding and establishing of the church, in all its
gifts and graces.

[1 Corinthians 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 3:10</span></span>

According to the grace of God - By the favor of God which is given to
me. All that Paul had done had been by the mere favor of God. His
appointment was from him; and all the skill which he had shown, and all
the agency which he had employed, had been from him. The architectural
figure is here continued with some striking additions and illustrations.
By the "grace of God" here, Paul probably means his apostleship to the
Gentiles, which had been conferred on him by the mere favor of God, and
all the wisdom, and skill, and success which he had evinced in founding
the church.

As a wise master-builder - Greek "Architect." The word does not imply
that Paul had any pre-eminence over his brethren, but that he had
proceeded in his work as a skillful architect, who secures first a firm
foundation. Every builder begins with the foundation; and Paul had
proceeded in this manner in laying first a firm foundation on which the
church could be reared. The word "wise" here means "skillful" or
"judicious"; compare [Mat 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024).

I have laid the foundation - "What" this foundation was, he states in
[Co1 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011). The meaning here is, that
the church at Corinth had been at first established by Paul; see [Act
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#001), etc.

And another - Other teachers. I have communicated to the church the
first elements of Christian knowledge. Others follow out this
instruction, and edify the church. The discussion here undergoes a
slight change. In the former part of the chapter, "Christians" are
compared to a building; here the "doctrines" which are taught in the
church are compared to various parts of a building. Grotius. See similar
instances of translation in Matt. 13; Mark 4; John 10.

But let every man ... - Every man who is a professed teacher. Let him be
careful what instructions he shall give to a church that has been
founded by apostolic hands, and that is established on the only true
foundation. This is designed to guard against false instruction and the
instructions of false teachers. People should take heed what instruction
they give to a church:

\(1\) Because of the fact that the church belongs to God, and they
should be cautious what directions they give to it;

\(2\) Because it is important that Christians should not only be on the
true foundation, but that they should be fully instructed in the nature
of their religion, and the church should be permitted to rise in its
true beauty and loveliness;

\(3\) Because of the evils which result from false instruction.

Even when the foundation is firm, incalculable evils will result from
the lack of just and discriminating instruction. Error sanctifies no
one. The effect of it even on the minds of true Christians is to mar
their piety; to dim its lustre; and to darken their minds. No Christian
can enjoy religion except under the full-orbed shining of the word of
truth; and every man, therefore, who gives false instruction, is
responsible for all the darkness he causes, and for all the lack of
comfort which true Christians under his teaching may experience.

\(4\) every person must give an account of the nature of his
instructions; and he should therefore "take heed to himself, and his
doctrine" [Ti1 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#016); and preach "such"
doctrine as shall bear the test of the great Day. And from this we
learn, that it is important that the church should be built on the true
foundation; and that it is scarcely less important that it should be
built up in the knowledge of the truth. Vast evils are constantly
occurring in the church for the lack of proper instruction to young
converts. Many seem to feel that provided the foundation be well laid,
that is all that is needed. But the grand thing which is needed at the
present time, is, that those who are converted should, as soon as
possible, be instructed fully in the nature of the religion which they
have embraced. What would be thought of a farmer who should plant a
tree, and never water or trim it; who should plant his seed, and never
cultivate the grain as it springs up; who should sow his fields, and
then think that all is well, and leave it to be overrun with weeds and
thorns? Piety is often stunted, its early shootings blighted, its rapid
growth checked, for the lack of early culture in the church. And perhaps
there is no one thing in which ministers more frequently fail than in
regard to the culture which ought to be bestowed upon those who are
converted - especially in early life. Our Saviour's views on this were
expressed in the admonition to Peter, "Feed my lambs," [Joh
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015).

[1 Corinthians 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 3:11</span></span>

For other foundation - It is "implied" by the course of the argument
here, that This was the foundation which had been laid at Corinth, and
on which the church there had been reared. And it is affirmed that no
other foundation can be laid. A foundation is that upon which a building
is raised; the foundation of a church is the doctrine on which it is
established; that is, the doctrines which its members hold - those
truths which lie at the basis of their hopes, and by embracing which
they have been converted to God.

Can no man lay - That is, there is no other true foundation.

Which is Jesus Christ - Christ is often called the foundation; the
stone; the cornerstone upon which the church is reared; [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016); [Mat
21:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042); [Act
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#011); [Eph
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020); [Ti2
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019); [Pe1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#006). The meaning is, that no true
church can be reared which does not embrace and hold the true doctrines
respecting him - those which pertain to his incarnation, his divine
nature, his instructions, his example, his atonement, his resurrection,
and ascension. The reason why no true church can be established without
embracing the truth as it is in Christ is, that it is by him only that
people can be saved; and where This doctrine is missing, all is missing
that enters into the essential idea of a church. The fundamental
doctrines of the Christian religion must be embraced, or a church cannot
exist and where those doctrines are denied no association of people can
be recognized as a church of God. Nor can the foundation be modified or
shaped so as to suit the wishes of people. It must be laid as it is in
the Scriptures; and the superstructure must be raised upon that alone.

[1 Corinthians 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 3:12</span></span>

Now if any man - If any teacher in the doctrines which he inculcates; or
any private Christian in the hopes which he cherishes. The main
discussion doubtless, has respect to the teachers of religion. Paul
carries forward the metaphor in this and the following verses with
respect to the building. He supposes that the foundation is laid; that
it is a true foundation; that the essential doctrines in regard to the
Messiah are the real basis on which the edifice is reared. But, he says,
that even admitting that, it is a subject of vast importance to attend
to the kind of structure which shall be reared on that; whether it shall
be truly beautiful, and valuable in itself, and such as shall abide the
trial of the last great Day; or whether it be mean, worthless,
erroneous, and such as shall at last be destroyed. There has been some
difference of opinion in regard to the interpretation of this passage,
arising from the question whether the apostle designed to represent one
or two buildings.

The former has been the more common interpretation, and the sense
according to that is, "the true foundation is laid; but on that it is
improper to place vile and worthless materials. It would be absurd to
work them in with those which are valuable; it would be absurd to work
in, in rearing a building, wood, and hay, and stubble, with gold, and
silver, and precious stones; there would be a lack of concinnity and
beauty in this. So in the spiritual temple. There is an impropriety, an
unfitness, in rearing the spiritual temple, to interweave truth with
error; sound doctrine with false." See Calvin and Macknight. Grotius
renders it, "Paul feigns to himself an edifice, partly regal, and partly
rustic. He presents the image of a house whose walls are of marble,
whose columns are made partly of gold and partly of silver, whose beams
are of wood, and whose roof thatched with straw." Others, among whom are
Wetstein, Doddridge, Rosenmuller, suppose that he refers to two
buildings that might be reared on this foundation - either one that
should be magnificent and splendid; or one that should be a rustic
cottage, or mean hovel, thatched with straw, and made of planks of wood.

Doddridge paraphrases the passage, "'If any man builds,' I say, 'upon
this foundation,' let him look to the materials and the nature of his
work; whether he raise a stately and magnificent temple upon it, adorned
as it were like the house of God at Jerusalem, with gold and silver, and
large, beautiful, and costly stones; or a mean hovel, consisting of
nothing better than planks of wood roughly put together, and thatched
with hay and stubble. That is, let him look to it, whether he teach the
substantial, vital truths of Christianity, and which it was intended to
support and illustrate; or set himself to propagate vain subtilties and
conceits on the one hand, or legal rites and Jewish traditions on the
other; which although they do not entirely destroy the foundation,
disgrace it, as a mean edifice would do a grand and extensive foundation
laid with great pomp and solemnity." This probably expresses the correct
sense of the passage. The foundation may be well laid; yet on this
foundation an edifice may be reared that shall be truly magnificent, or
one that shall be mean and worthless. So the true foundation of a church
may be laid, or of individual conversion to God, in the true doctrine
respecting Christ. That church or that individual may be built up and
adorned with all the graces which truth is suited to produce; or there
may be false principles and teachings superadded; doctrines that shall
delude and lead astray; or views and feelings cultivated as piety, and
believed to be piety, which may be no part of true religion, but which
are mere delusion and fanaticism.

Gold, silver - On the meaning of these words it is not necessary to
dwell; or to lay too much stress. Gold is the emblem of that which is
valuable and precious, and may be the emblem of that truth and holiness
which shall bear the trial of the great Day. In relation to the figure
which the apostle here uses, it may refer to the fact that columns or
beams in an edifice might be gilded; or perhaps, as in the temple, that
they might be solid gold, so as to bear the action of intense heat; or
so that fire would not destroy them - So the precious doctrines of
truth, and all the feelings, views, opinions, habits, practices, which
truth produces in an individual or a church, will bear the trial of the
last great Day.

Precious stones - By the stones here referred to, are not meant "gems"
which are esteemed of so much value for ornaments, but beautiful and
valuable marbles. The word "precious" here τιμίους timious means those
which are obtained at a "price," which are costly and valuable; and is
particularly applicable, therefore, to the costly marbles which were
used in building. The figurative sense here does not differ materially
from that conveyed by the silver and gold. By this edifice thus reared
on the true foundation, we are to understand:

\(1\) The true doctrines which should be employed to build up a
congregation - doctrines which would bear the test of the trial of the
last Day; and,

\(2\) Such views in regard to piety, and to duty; such feelings and
principles of action, as should be approved, and seen to be genuine
piety in the Day of Judgment.

Wood - That might be easily burned. An edifice reared of wood instead of
marble, or slight buildings, such as were often put for up for temporary
purposes in the East - as cottages, places for watching their vineyards,
etc.; see my note at [Isa 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008).

Hay, stubble - Used for thatching the building, or for a roof. Perhaps,
also, grass was sometimes employed in some way to make the walls of the
building. Such an edifice would burn readily; would be constantly
exposed to take fire. By this is meant:

\(1\) Errors and false doctrines, such as will not be found to be true
on the Day of Judgment, and as will then be swept away;

\(2\) Such practices and mistaken views of piety, as shall grow out of
false doctrines and errors - The foundation may be firm.

Those who are referred to may be building on the Lord Jesus, and may be
true Christians. Yet there is much error among those who are not
Christians. There are many things mistaken for piety which will yet be
seen robe false. There is much enthusiasm, wildfire, fanaticism,
bigotry; much affected humility; much that is supposed to be orthodoxy;
much regard to forms and ceremonies; to "days, and months, and times,
and years" [Gal 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#010); much over-heated
zeal, and much precision, and solemn sanctimoniousness; much regard for
external ordinances where the heart is missing, that shall be found to
be false, and that shall be swept away on the Day of Judgment.

[1 Corinthians 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 3:13</span></span>

Every man's work shall be made manifest - What every man has built on
this foundation shall be seen. Whether he has held truth or error;
whether he has had correct views of piety or false; whether what he has
done has been what he should have done or not.

For the day - The Day of Judgment. The great Day which shall reveal the
secrets of all hearts, and the truth in regard to what every man has
done. The event will show what edifices on the true foundation are
firmly, and what are weakly built. Perhaps the word "day" here may mean
time in general, as we say, "time will show" - and as the Latin adage
says, dies docebit; but it is more natural to refer it to the Day of
Judgment.

Because it shall be revealed by fire - The work, the edifice which shall
be built on the true foundation shall be made known amidst the fire of
the great Day. The "fire" which is here referred to, is doubtless that
which shall attend the consummation of all things - the close of the
world. That the world shall be destroyed by fire, and that the
solemnities of the Judgment shall be ushered in by a universal
conflagration, is fully and frequently revealed. See [Isa
66:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#015); [Th2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008); [Pe2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#007), [Pe2
3:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010). The burning fires of that
Day, Paul says, shall reveal the character of every man's work, as fire
sheds light on all around, and discloses the true nature of things. It
may be observed, however, that many critics suppose this to refer to the
fire of persecution, etc. Macknight. Whitby supposes that the apostle
refers to the approaching destruction of Jerusalem. Others, as Grotius,
Rosenmuller, etc. suppose that the reference is to "time" in general; it
shall be declared ere long; it shall be seen whether those things which
are built on the true foundation, are true by the test of time, etc. But
the most natural interpretation is that which refers it to the Day of
Judgment.

And the fire shall try every man's work - It is the property of fire to
test the qualities of objects. Thus, gold and silver, so far from being
destroyed by fire, are purified from dross. Wood, hay, stubble, are
consumed. The power of fire to try or test the nature of metals, or
other objects, is often referred to in the Scripture. Compare [Isa
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#004); [Isa
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#015); [Mal
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#002); [Pe1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#007). It is not to be supposed here
that the material fire of the last Day shall have any tendency to purify
the soul, or to remove that which is unsound; but that the
investigations and trials of the Judgment shall remove all that is evil,
as fire acts with reference to gold and silver. As they are not burned
but purified; as they pass unhurt through the intense heat of the
furnace, so shall all that is genuine pass through the trials of the
last great Day, of which trials the burning world shall be the
antecedent and the emblem. That great Day shall show what is genuine and
what is not.

[1 Corinthians 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 3:14</span></span>

If any man's work abide ... - If it shall appear that he hast taught the
true doctrines of Christianity, and inculcated right practices and views
of piety, and himself cherished right feelings: if the trial of the
great Day, when the real qualities of all objects shall be known, shall
show this.

He shall receive a reward - According to the nature of his work. See the
note on [Co1 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#008). This refers, I
suppose, to the proper rewards on the Day of Judgment, and not to the
honors and the recompense which he may receive in this world. If all
that he has taught and done shall be proved to have been genuine and
pure, then his reward shall be in proportion.

[1 Corinthians 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 3:15</span></span>

If any man's work shall be burned - If it shall not be found to hear the
test of the investigation of that Day - as a cottage of wood, hay, and
stubble would not bear the application of fire. If his doctrines have
not been true; if he has had mistaken views of piety; if he has
nourished feelings which he thought were those of religion; and
inculcated practices which, however well meant, are not such as the
gospel produces; if he has fallen into error of opinion, feeling,
practice, however conscientious, yet he shall suffer loss.

He shall suffer loss - :

\(1\) He shall not be elevated to as high a rank and to as high
happiness as he otherwise would. That which he supposed would be
regarded as acceptable by the Judge, and rewarded accordingly, shall be
stripped away, and shown to be unfounded and false; and in consequence,
he shall not obtain those elevated rewards which he anticipated. This,
compared with what he expected, may be regarded as a loss.

\(2\) he shall be injuriously affected by this forever. It shall be a
detriment to him to all eternity. The effects shall be felt in all his
residence in heaven - not producing misery but attending him with the
consciousness that he might have been raised to superior bliss in the
eternal abode - The phrase here literally means, "he shall be mulcted."
The word is a legal term, and means that he shall be fined, that is, he
shall suffer detriment.

But he himself shall be saved - The apostle all along has supposed that
the true foundation was laid [Co1
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011), and if that is laid, and the
edifice is reared upon that, the person who does it shall be safe. There
may be much error, and many false views of religion, and much
imperfection, still the man that is building on the true foundation
shall be safe. His errors and imperfections shall be removed, and he may
occupy a lower place in heaven, but he shall be safe.

Yet so as by fire - ὡς διὰ πυρός hōs dia puros. This passage has greatly
perplexed commentators; but probably without any good reason. The
apostle does not say that Christians will be doomed to the fires of
purgatory; nor that they will pass through fire; nor that they will be
exposed to pains and punishment at all; but he "simply carries out the
figure" which he commenced, and says that they will be saved, as if the
action of fire had been felt on the edifice on which he is speaking.
That is, as fire would consume the wood, hay, and stubble, so on the
great Day everything that is erroneous and imperfect in Christiana shall
be removed, and that which is true and genuine shall be preserved as if
it had passed through fire. Their whole character and opinions shall be
investigated; and that which is good shall be approved; and that which
is false and erroneous be removed.

The idea is not that of a man whose house is burnt over his head and who
escapes through the flames, nor that of a man who is subjected to the
pains and fires of purgatory; but that of a man who had been spending
his time and strength to little purpose; who had built, indeed, on the
true foundation, but who had reared so much on it which was unsound, and
erroneous, and false, that he himself would be saved with great
difficulty, and with the loss of much of that reward which he had
expected, as if the fire had passed over him and his works. The simple
idea, therefore, is, that that which is genuine and valuable in his
doctrines and works, shall be rewarded, and the man shall be saved; that
which is not sound and genuine, shall be removed, and he shall suffer
loss. Some of the fathers, indeed, admitted that this passage taught
that all people would be subjected to the action of fire in the great
conflagration with which the world shall close; that the wicked shall be
consumed; and that the righteous are to suffer, some more and some less,
according to their character. On passages like this, the Roman Catholic
doctrine of purgatory is based. But we may observe:

\(1\) That this passage does not necessarily or naturally give any such
idea. The interpretation stated above is the natural interpretation, and
one which the passage will not only bear, but which it demands.

\(2\) If this passage would give any countenance to the absurd and
unscriptural idea that the souls of the righteous at the Day of Judgment
are to be re-united to their bodies, in order to be subjected to the
action of intense heat, to be brought from the abodes of bliss and
compelled to undergo the burning fires of the last conflagration, still
it would give no countenance to the still more absurd and unscriptural
opinion that those fires have been and are still burning; that all souls
are to be subjected to them; and that they can be removed only by masses
offered for the dead, and by the prayers of the living. The idea of
danger and peril is, indeed, in this text; but the idea of personal
salvation is retained and conveyed.

[1 Corinthians 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 3:16</span></span>

Know ye not ... - The apostle here carries forward and completes the
figure which he had commenced in regard to Christians. His illustrations
had been drawn from architecture; and he here proceeds to say that
Christians are that building (see [Co1
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009)): that they were the sacred temple
which God had reared; and that, therefore, they should be pure and holy.
This is a practical application of what he had been before saying.

Ye are the temple of God - This is to be understood of the community of
Christians, or of the church, as being the place where God dwells on the
earth. The idea is derived from the mode of speaking among the Jews,
where they are said often in the Old Testament to be the temple and the
habitation of God. And the allusion is probably to the fact that God
dwelt by a visible symbol - "the Shechinah" - in the temple, and that
His abode was there. As He dwelt there among the Jews; as He had there a
temple - a dwelling place, so he dwells among Christians. they are His
temple, the place of His abode. His residence is with them; and He is in
their midst. This figure the apostle Paul several times uses, [Co1
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019); [Co2
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#016); [Eph
2:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020). A great many passages have
been quoted by Eisner and Wetstein, in which a virtuous mind is
represented as the temple of God, and in which the obligation to
preserve that inviolate and unpolluted is enforced. The figure is a
beautiful one, and very impressive. A temple was an edifice erected to
the service of God. The temple at Jerusalem was not only most
magnificent, but was regarded as most sacred:

\(1\) From the fact that it was devoted to his service; and,

\(2\) From the fact that it was the special residence of Yahweh.

Among the pagan also, temples were regarded as sacred. They were
supposed to be inhabited by the divinity to whom they were dedicated.
They were regarded, as inviolable. Those who took refuge there were
safe. It was a crime of the highest degree to violate a temple, or to
tear a fugitive who had sought protection there from the altar. So the
apostle says of the Christian community. They were regarded as his
temple - God dwelt among them - and they should regard themselves as
holy, and as consecrated to his service. And so it is regarded as a
species of sacrilege to violate the temple, and to devote it to other
uses, [Co1 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019); see [Co1
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017).

And that the Spirit of God - The Holy Spirit, the third person of the
Trinity. This is conclusively proved by [Co1
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019), where he is called "the Holy
Ghost."

Dwelleth in you - As God dwelt formerly in the tabernacle, and afterward
in the temple, so His Spirit now dwells among Christians - This cannot
mean:

\(1\) That the Holy Spirit is "personally united" to Christians, so as
to form a personal union; or,

\(2\) That there is to Christians any communication of his nature or
personal qualities; or,

\(3\) That there is any union of "essence," or "nature" with them, for
God is present in all places, and can, as God, be no more present at one
place than at another.

The only sense in which he can be especially present in any place is by
His "influence," or "agency." And the idea is one which denotes agency,
influence, favor, special regard; and in that sense only can he be
present with his church. The expression must mean:

\(1\) That the church is the seat of His operations, the field or abode
on which He acts on earth;

\(2\) That His influences are there, producing the appropriate effects
of His agency, love, joy, peace, long-suffering, etc.; [Gal
5:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022);

\(3\) that He produces consolations there, that he sustains and guides
His people;

\(4\) That they are regarded as dedicated or consecrated to Him;

\(5\) That they are especially dear to Him - that He loves them, and
thus makes His abode with them. See the note at [Joh
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023).

("These words import the actual presence and inhabitation of the Spirit
himself. The fact is plainly attested, but it is mysterious, and cannot
be distinctly explained. In respect of His essence, He is as much
present with unbelievers as with believers. His dwelling in the latter
must therefore signify, that He manifests himself, in their souls, in a
special manner; that He exerts there His gracious power, and produces
effects which other people do not experience - We may illustrate His
presence with them, as distinguished from His presence with people in
general, by supposing the vegetative power of the earth to produce, in
the surrounding regions, only common and worthless plants, but to throw
out, in a select spot, all the riches and beauty of a cultivated garden"
- Dick's Theology, Vol. III. p. 287.)

[1 Corinthians 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 3:17</span></span>

If any man defile ... - Or, "destroy, corrupt" (φθείρει phtheirei). The
Greek word is the same in both parts of the sentence. "If any man
'destroy' the temple of God, God shall 'destroy' him." This is presented
in the form of an adage or proverb. And the truth here stated is based
on the fact that the temple of God was inviolable. That temple was holy;
and if any man subsequently destroyed it, it might be presumed that God
would destroy him. The figurative sense is, "If any man by his doctrines
or precepts shall pursue such a course as tends to destroy the church,
God shall severely punish him.

For the temple of God is holy - The temple of God is to be regarded as
sacred and inviolable. This was unquestionably the common opinion among
the Jews respecting the temple at Jerusalem; and it was the common
doctrine of the Gentiles respecting their temples. Sacred places were
regarded as inviolable; and this general truth Paul applies to the
Christian church in general - Locke supposes that Paul had particular
reference here to the false teachers in Corinth. But the expression, "if
any man," is equally applicable to all other false teachers as to him.

Which temple ye are - This proves that though Paul regarded them as
lamentably corrupt in some respects, he still regarded them as a true
church - as a part of the holy temple of God.

[1 Corinthians 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 3:18</span></span>

Let no man deceive himself - The apostle here proceeds to make a
practical application of the truths which he had stated, and to urge on
them humility, and to endeavor to repress the broils and contentions
into which they had fallen. Let no man be puffed up with a vain conceit
of his own wisdom, for this had been the real cause of all the evils
which they had experienced. Grotius renders this, "See that you do not
attribute too much to your wisdom and learning, by resting on it, and
thus deceive your own selves." "All human philosophy," says Grotius,
"that is repugnant to the gospel is but vain deceit" - Probably there
were many among them who would despise this admonition as coming from
Paul, but he exhorts them to take care that they did not deceive
themselves. We are taught here:

\(1\) The danger of self-deception - a danger that besets all on the
subject of religion.

\(2\) the fact that false philosophy is the most fruitful source of
self-deception in the business of religion. So it was among the
Corinthians; and so it has been in all ages since.

If any man among you - Any teacher, whatever may be his rank or his
confidence in his own abilities; or any private member of the church.

Seemeth to be wise - Seems to himself; or is thought to be, has the
credit, or reputation of being wise. The word "seems" δοκεῖ dokei
implies this idea - if anyone seems, or is supposed to be a man of
wisdom; if this is his reputation; and if he seeks that this should be
his reputation among people. See instances of this construction in
Bloomfield.

In this world - In this "age," or "world" (ἐν τῷ αἰῶν τούτῳ en tō aiōn
toutō). There is considerable variety in the interpretation of this
passage among critics. It may be taken either with the preceding or the
following words. Origen, Cyprian, Beza, Grotius, Hammond, and Locke
adopt the latter method, and understand it thus: "If any man among you
thinks himself to be wise, let him not hesitate to be a fool in the
opinion of this age in order that he may be truly wise" - But the
interpretation conveyed in our translation, is probably the correct one.
"If any man has the reputation of wisdom among the people of this
generation, and prides himself on it," etc. If he is esteemed wise in
the sense in which the people of this world are, as a philosopher, a man
of science, learning, etc.

Let him become a fool -

\(1\) Let him be willing to be regarded as a fool.

\(2\) let him sincerely embrace this gospel, which will inevitably
expose him to the charge of being a fool.

\(3\) let all his earthly wisdom be esteemed in his own eyes as
valueless and as folly in the great matters of salvation.

That he may be wise - That he may have true wisdom - that which is of
God. It is implied here:

\(1\) That the wisdom of this world will not make a man truly wise.

\(2\) that a "reputation" for wisdom may contribute nothing to a man's
true wisdom, but may stand in the way of it.

\(3\) that for such a man to embrace the gospel it is necessary that he
should be willing to cast away dependence on his own wisdom, and come
with the temper of a child to the Saviour.

\(4\) that to do this will expose him to the charge of folly, and the
derision of those who are wise in their own conceit.

\(5\) that true wisdom is found only in that science which teaches
people to live unto God, and to be prepared for death and for heaven -
and that science is found only in the gospel.

[1 Corinthians 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 3:19</span></span>

For the wisdom of this world - That which is esteemed to be wisdom by
the people of this world on the subject of religion. It does not mean
that true wisdom is foolishness with him. It does not mean that science,
and prudence, and law - that the knowledge of his works - that
astronomy, and medicine, and chemistry, are regarded by him as folly,
and as unworthy the attention of people. God is the friend of truth on
all subjects; and he requires us to become acquainted with his works,
and commends those who search them, [Psa
92:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#004); [Psa
111:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#002). But the apostle refers here to
that which was esteemed to be wisdom among the ancients, and in which
they so much prided themselves, their vain, self-confident, and false
opinions on the subject of religion; and especially those opinions when
they were opposed to the simple but sublime truths of revelation. See
the note at [Co1 1:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020).

Is foolishness with God - Is esteemed by him to be folly. See the note
at [Co1 1:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020).

For it is written ... - [Job 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013). The
word rendered "taketh" here denotes to clench with the fist, gripe,
grasp. And the sense is:

\(1\) However crafty, or cunning, or skillful they may be; however
self-confident, yet that they cannot deceive or impose upon God. He can
thwart their plans, overthrow their schemes, defeat their counsels, and
foil them in their enterprises, [Job
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#012).

\(2\) he does it by their own cunning or craftiness. He allows them to
involve themselves in difficulties or to entangle each other. He makes
use of even their own craft and cunning to defeat their counsels. He
allows the plans of one wise man to come in conflict with those of
another, and thus to destroy one another. Honesty in religion, as in
everything else, is the best policy; and a man who pursues a course of
conscientious integrity may expect the protection of God. But he who
attempts to carry his purposes by craft and intrigue - who depends on
skill and cunning instead of truth and honesty, will often find that he
is the prey of his own cunning and duplicity.

[1 Corinthians 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 3:20</span></span>

And again, - [Psa 94:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#011).

The Lord knoweth - God searches the heart. The particular thing which it
is here said that he knows, is, that the thoughts of man are vain. They
have this quality; and this is that which the psalmist here says that
God sees. The affirmation is not one respecting the omniscience of God,
but with respect to what God sees of the nature of the thoughts of the
wise.

The thoughts of the wise - Their plans, purposes, designs.

That they are vain - That they lack real wisdom; they are foolish; they
shall not be accomplished as they expect; or be seen to have that wisdom
which they now suppose they possess.

[1 Corinthians 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 3:21</span></span>

Therefore ... - Paul here proceeds to apply the principles which he had
stated above. Since all were ministers or servants of God; since God was
the source of all good influences; since, whatever might be the
pretensions to wisdom among people, it was all foolishness in the sight
of God, the inference was clear, that no man should glory in man. They
were all alike poor, frail, ignorant, erring, dependent beings. And
hence, also, as all wisdom came from God, and as Christians partook
Alike of the benefits of the instruction of the most eminent apostles,
they ought to regard this as belonging to them in common, and not to
form parties with these names at the head.

Let no man glory in men; - See [Co1
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#029); compare [Jer
9:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#023). It was common among the Jews
to range themselves under different leaders - as Hillel and Shammai; and
for the Greeks, also, to boast themselves to be the followers of
Pythagoras, Zeno, Plato, etc. The same thing began to be manifest in the
Christian church; and Paul here rebukes and opposes it.

For all things are yours - This is a reason why they should not range
themselves in parties or factions under different leaders. Paul
specifies what he means by "all things" in the following verses. The
sense is, that since they had an interest in all that could go to
promote their welfare; as they were common partakers of the benefits of
the talents and labors of the apostles; and as they belonged to Christ,
and all to God, it was improper to be split up into factions, as if they
derived any special benefit; from one set of persons, or one set of
objects. In Paul, in Apollos, in life, death, etc. they had a common
interest, and no one should boast that he had any special proprietorship
in any of these things.

[1 Corinthians 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 3:22</span></span>

Whether Paul, or Apollos - The sense of this is clear. Whatever
advantages result from the piety, self-denials, and labors of Paul,
Apollos, or any other preacher of the gospel, are yours - you have the
benefit of them. One is as much entitled to the benefit as another; and
all partake alike in the results of their ministration. You should
therefore neither range yourselves into parties with their names given
to the parties, nor suppose that one has any special interest in Paul,
or another in Apollos. Their labors belonged to the church in general.
they had no partialities - no rivalship - no desire to make parties.
They were united, and desirous of promoting the welfare of the whole
church of God. The doctrine is, that ministers belong to the church, and
should devote themselves to its welfare; and that the church enjoys, in
common, the benefits of the learning, zeal, piety, eloquence, talents,
example of the ministers of God. And it may be observed, that it is no
small privilege thus to be permitted to regard all the labors of the
most eminent servants of God as designed for our welfare; and for the
humblest saint to feel that the labors of apostles, the self-denials and
sufferings, the pains and dying agonies of martyrs, have been for his
advantage.

Or Cephas - Or Peter. [Joh 1:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#042).

Or the world - This word is doubtless used, in its common signification,
to denote the things which God has made; the universe, the things which
pertain to this life. And the meaning of the apostle probably is, that
all things pertaining to this world which God has made - all the events
which are occurring in his providence were so far theirs, that they
would contribute to their advantage, and their enjoyment. This general
idea may be thus expressed:

\(1\) The world was made by God their common Father, and they have an
interest in it as his children, regarding it as the work of His hand,
and seeing Him present in all His works. Nothing contributes so much to
the true enjoyment of the world - to comfort in surveying the heavens,
the earth, the ocean, hills, vales, plants, flowers, streams, in
partaking of the gifts of Providence, as this feeling, that all are the
works of the Christian's Father, and that they may all partake of these
favors as His children.

\(2\) the frame of the universe is sustained and upheld for their sake.
The universe is kept by God; and one design of God in keeping it is to
protect, preserve, and redeem his church and people. To this end He
defends it by day and night; He orders all things; He keeps it from the
storm and tempest; from flood and fire; and from annihilation. The sun,
and moon, and stars - the times and seasons, are all thus ordered, that
His church may be guarded, and brought to heaven.

\(3\) the course of providential events are ordered for their welfare
also, [Rom 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028). The revolutions of
kingdoms - the various persecutions and trials, even the rage and fury
of wicked people, are all overruled, to the advancement of the cause of
truth, and the welfare of the church.

\(4\) Christians have the promise of as much of this world as shall be
needful for them; and in this sense "the world" is theirs. See [Mat
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033); [Mar
10:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#029); [Ti1
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008), "Godliness is profitable for all
things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to
come." And such was the result of the long experience and observation of
David, [Psa 37:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#025), "I have been young,
and now am old; yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed
begging bread." See [Isa 33:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#016).

Or life - Life is theirs, because:

\(1\) They enjoy life. It is real life to them, and not a vain show.
They live for a real object, and not for vanity. Others live for parade
and ambition - Christians live for the great purposes of life; and life
to them has reality, as being a state preparatory to another and a
higher world. Their life is not an endless circle of unmeaning
ceremonies - of false and hollow pretensions to friendship - of a vain
pursuit of happiness, which is never found, but is passed in a manner
that is rational, and sober, and that truly deserves to be called life.

\(2\) the various events and occurrences of life shall all tend to
promote their welfare, and advance their salvation.

Death - They have an "interest," or "property" even in death, usually
regarded as a calamity and a curse. But it is theirs:

\(1\) Because they shall have "peace" and support in the dying hour.

\(2\) because it has no terrors for them. It shall take away nothing
which they are not willing to resign.

\(3\) because it is the avenue which leads to their rest; and it is
theirs just in the same sense in which we say that "this is our road"
when we have been long absent, and are inquiring the way to our homes.

\(4\) because they shall triumph over it. It is subdued by their
Captain, and the grave has been subjected to a triumph by his rising
from its chills and darkness.

\(5\) because death is the means - the occasion of introducing them to
their rest. It is the "advantageous circumstance" in their history, by
which they are removed from a world of ills, and translated to a world
of glory. It is to them a source of inexpressible advantage, as it
translates them to a world of light and eternal felicity; and it may
truly be called theirs.

Or things present, or things to come - Events which are now happening,
and all that can possibly occur to us, see the note at [Rom
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#038). All the calamities, trials,
persecutions - all the prosperity, advantages, privileges of the present
time, and all that shall yet take place, shall tend to promote our
welfare, and advance the interests of our souls, and promote our
salvation.

All are yours - All shall tend to promote your comfort and salvation.

[1 Corinthians 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 3:23</span></span>

And ye are Christ's - You belong to him; and should not, therefore, feel
that you are devoted to any earthly leader, whether Paul, Apollos, or
Peter. As you belong to Christ by redemption, and by solemn dedication
to his service, so you should feel that you are his alone. You are his
property - his people - his friends. You should regard yourselves as
such, and feel that you all belong to the same family, and should not,
therefore, be split up into contending factions and parties.

Christ is God's - Christ is the Mediator between God and man. He came to
do the will of God. He was and is still devoted to the service of his
Father. God has a proprietorship in all that he does, since Christ
lived, and acted, and reigns to promote the glory of his Father. The
argument here seems to be this, "You belong to Christ; and he to God.
You are bound therefore, not to devote yourselves to a man, whoever he
may be, but to Christ, and to the service of that one true God, in whose
service even Christ was employed. And as Christ sought to promote the
glory of his Father, so should you in all things." This implies no
inferiority of nature of Christ to God. It means only that he was
employed in the service of his Father, and sought his glory - a doctrine
everywhere taught in the New Testament. But this does not imply that he
was inferior in his nature. A son may be employed in the service of his
father, and may seek to advance his father's interests. But this does
not prove that the son is inferior in nature to his father. It proves
only that he is inferior in some respects - in office. So the Son of God
consented to take an inferior office or rank; to become a mediator, to
assume the form of a servant, and to be a man of sorrows; but this
proves nothing in regard to his original rank or dignity. That is to be
learned from the numerous passages which affirm that in nature he was
equal with God. See the note at [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001).

Remarks On 1 Corinthians 3

1\. Christians when first converted may be well compared to infants,
[Co1 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001). They are in a new world.
They just open their eyes on truth. They see new objects; and have new
objects of attachment. They are feeble, weak, helpless. And though they
often have high joy, and even great self-confidence, yet they are in
themselves ignorant and weak, and in need of constant teaching.
Christians should not only possess the spirit, but they should feel that
they are like children. They are like them not only in their temper, but
in their ignorance, and weakness, and helplessness.

2\. The instructions which are imparted to Christians should be adapted
to their capacity, [Co1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002). Skill and
care should be exercised to adapt that instruction to the needs of
tender consciences, and to those who are feeble in the faith. It would
be no more absurd to furnish strong food to the new born babe than it is
to present some of the higher doctrines of religion to the tender minds
of converts. The elements of knowledge must be first learned; the
tenderest and most delicate food must first nourish the body - And
perhaps in nothing is there more frequent error than in presenting the
higher, and more difficult doctrines of Christianity to young converts,
and because they have a difficulty in regard to them, or because they
even reject them, pronouncing them destitute of piety. Is the infant
destitute of life because it cannot digest the solid food which
nourishes the man of fifty years? Paul adapted his instructions to the
delicacy and feebleness of infant piety; and those who are like Paul
will feed with great care the lambs of the flock. All young converts
should be placed under a course of instruction adapted to their
condition, and should secure the careful attention of the ministers of
the churches.

3\. Strife and contention in the church is proof that people are under
the influence of carnal feelings. No matter what is the cause of the
contention, the very fact of the existence of such strife is a proof of
the existence of such feelings somewhere, [Co1
3:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#003). On what side soever the
original fault of the contention may be, yet its existence in the church
is always proof that some - if not all - of those who are engaged in it
are under the influence of carnal feelings. Christ's kingdom is designed
to be a kingdom of peace and love; and divisions and contentions are
always attended with evils, and with injury to the spirit of true
religion.

4\. We have here a rebuke to that spirit which has produced the
existence of sects and parties, [Co1
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#004). The practice of naming sects
after certain people, we see, began early, and was as early rebuked by
apostolic authority. Would not the same apostolic authority rebuke the
spirit which now calls one division of the church after the name of
Calvin, another after the name of Luther, another after the name of
Arminius! Should not, and will not all these divisions yet be merged in
the high and holy name of Christian? Our Saviour evidently supposed it
possible that his church should be one [Joh
17:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021); and Paul certainly supposed
that the church at Corinth might be so united. So the early churches
were; and is it too much to hope that some way may yet be discovered
which shall break down the divisions into sects, and unite Christians
both in feeling and in name in spreading the gospel of the Redeemer
everywhere? Does not every Christian sincerely desire it? And may there
not yet await the church such a union as shall concentrate all its
energies in saving the world? How much effort, how much talent, how much
wealth and learning are now wasted in contending with other
denominations of the great Christian family! How much would this wasted
- and worse than wasted wealth, and learning, and talent, and zeal do in
diffusing the gospel around the world! Whose heart is not sickened at
these contentions and strifes; and whose soul will not breathe forth a
pure desire to Heaven that the time may soon come when all these
contentions shall die away, and when the voice of strife shall be
hushed; and when the united host of God's elect shall go forth to subdue
the world to the gospel of the Saviour?

5\. The proper honor should be paid to the ministers of the gospel [Co1
3:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#005). They should not be put in the
place of God; nor should their services, however important, prevent the
supreme recognition of God in the conversion of souls. God is to be all
and in all - It is proper that the ministers of religion should be
treated with respect [Th1 5:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#012); and
ministers have a right to expect and to desire the affectionate regards
of those who are blessed by their instrumentality. But Paul - eminent
and successful as he was - would do nothing that would diminish or
obscure the singleness of view with which the agency of God should be
regarded in the work of salvation. He regarded himself as nothing
compared with God; and his highest desire was that God in all things
might be honored.

6\. God is the source of all good influence, and of all that is holy in
the church. Its only gives the increase. Whatever of humility, faith,
love, joy, peace, or purity we may have, is all to be traced to him. No
matter who plants, or who waters, God gives life to the seed; God rears
the stalk; God expands the leaf; God opens the flower and gives it its
fragrance; and God forms, preserves, and ripens the fruit. So in
religion. No matter who the minister may be; no matter how faithful,
learned, pious, or devoted, yet if any success attends his labors, it is
all to be traced to God. This truth is never to be forgotten; nor should
any talents, or zeal, however great, ever be allowed to dim or obscure
its lustre in the minds of those who are converted.

7\. Ministers are on a level, [Co1
3:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#008). Whatever may be their
qualifications or their success, yet they can claim no pre-eminence over
one another. They are fellow laborers - engaged in one work,
accomplishing the same object, though they may be in different parts of
the same field. The man who plants is as necessary as he that waters;
and both are inferior to God, and neither could do anything without him.

8\. Christians should regard themselves as a holy people, [Co1
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009). They are the cultivation of God.
All that they have is from him. His own agency has been employed in
their conversion; his own Spirit operates to sanctify and save them.
Whatever they have is to be traced to God; and they should remember that
they are, therefore, consecrated to him.

9\. No other foundation can be laid in the church except that of Christ,
[Co1 3:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010). Unless a church is
founded on the true doctrine respecting the Messiah, it is a false
church, and should not be recognized as belonging to him. There can be
no other foundation, either for an individual sinner, or for a church.
How important then to inquire whether we are building our hopes for
eternity on this tried foundation! How faithfully should we examine this
subject lest our hopes should all be swept away in the storms of divine
wrath! [Mat 7:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#027). How deep and
awful will be the disappointment of those who suppose they have been
building on the true foundation, and who find in the great Day of
Judgment that all has been delusion!

10\. We are to be tried at the Day of Judgment, [Co1
3:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#013). All are to be arraigned, not
only in regard to the foundation of our hopes for eternal life, but in
regard to the superstructure, the nature of our opinions and practices
in religion. Everything shall come into judgment.

11\. The trial will be such as to test our character. All the trials
through which we are to pass are designed to do this. Affliction,
temptation, sickness, death, are all intended to produce this result,
and all have a tendency to this end. But, pre-eminently is this the case
with regard to the trial at the great Day of Judgment. Amidst the light
of the burning world, and the terrors of the Judgment; under the blazing
throne, and the eye of God, every man's character shall be seen, and a
just judgment shall be pronounced.

12\. The trial shall remove all that is impure in Christians, [Co1
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#014). They shall then see the truth;
and in that world of truth, all that was erroneous in their opinions
shall be corrected. They shall be in a world where fanaticism cannot be
mistaken for the love of truth, and where enthusiasm cannot be
substituted for zeal. All true and real piety shall there abide; all
which is false and erroneous shall be removed.

13\. What a change will then take place in regard to Christians. all
probably cherish some opinions which are unsound; all indulge in some
things now supposed to be piety, which will not then bear the test. The
great change will then take place from impurity to purity; from
imperfection to perfection. The very passage from this world to heaven
will secure this change; and what a vast revolution will it be thus to
be ushered into a world where all shall be pure in sentiment; all
perfect in love.

14\. Many Christians may be much disappointed in that Day. Many who are
now zealous for doctrines, and who pursue with vindictive spirit others
who differ from them, shall then "suffer loss," and find that the
persecuted had more real love of truth than the persecutor. Many who are
now filled with zeal, and who denounce the comparatively leaden and
tardy pace of others; many whose bosoms glow with rapturous feeling, and
burn, as they suppose, with a seraph's love, shall find that all this
was not piety - that animal feeling was mistaken for the love of God;
and that a zeal for sect, or for the triumph of a party, was mistaken
for love to the Saviour; and that the kindlings of an ardent imagination
had been often substituted for the elevated emotions of pure and
disinterested love.

15\. Christians, teachers, and people should examine themselves, and see
what is the building which they are rearing on the true foundation. Even
where the foundation of a building is laid broad and deep, it is of much
importance whether a stately and magnificent palace shall he reared on
it, suited to the nature of the foundation, or whether a mud-walled and
a thatched cottage shall be all. Between the foundation and the edifice
in the one case there is the beauty of proportion and fitness; in the
other there is incongruity and unfitness. Who would lay such a deep and
broad foundation as the basis upon which to raise the hut of the savage
or the mud cottage of the Hindu? So in religion. The foundation to all
who truly believe in the Lord Jesus is broad, deep, firm, magnificent.
But the superstructure - the piety, the advancement in knowledge, the
life, is often like the cottage that is reared on the firm basis - that
every wind shakes, and that the fire would soon consume. As the basis of
the Christian hope is firm, so should the superstructure be large,
magnificent, and grand,

16\. Christians are to regard themselves as holy and pure, [Co1
3:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016). They are the temple of the
Lord - the dwelling place of the Spirit. A temple is sacred and
inviolable. So should Christians regard themselves. They are dedicated
to God. He dwells among them. And they should deem themselves holy and
pure; and should preserve their minds from impure thoughts, from unholy
purposes, from selfish and sensual desires. They should be in all
respects such as will be the fit abode for the Holy Spirit of God. How
pure should people be in whom the Holy Spirit dwells! How single should
be their aims! How constant their self-denials! How single their desire
to devote all to his service, and to live always to his glory! How
heavenly should they be in their feelings; and how should pride,
sensuality:. vanity, ambition, covetousness, and the love of gaiety, be
banished from their bosoms! Assuredly in God's world there should be one
place where he will delight to dwell - one place that shall remind of
heaven, and that place should be the church which has been purchased
with the purest blood of the universe.

17\. We see what is necessary if a man would become a Christian, [Co1
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018). He must be willing to be
esteemed a feel; to be despised; to have his name cast out as evil; and
to be regarded as even under delusion and deception. Whatever may be his
rank, or his reputation for wisdom, and talent, and learning, he must be
willing to be regarded as a fool by his former associates and
companions; to cast off all reliance on his own wisdom; and to be
associated with the poor, the persecuted, and the despised followers of
Jesus. Christianity knows no distinctions of wealth, talent, learning.
It points out no royal road to heaven. It describes but one way; and
whatever contempt an effort to be saved may involve us in, it requires
us to submit to that, and even to rejoice that our names are cast out as
evil.

18\. This is a point on which people should be especially careful that
they are not deceived, [Co1 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018).
There is nothing on which they are more likely to be than this. It is
not an easy thing for a proud man to humble himself; it is not easy for
people who boast of their wisdom to be willing that their names should
be cast out as evil. And there is great danger of a man's flattering
himself that he is willing to be a Christian, who would not be willing
to be esteemed a fool by the great and the frivilous people of this
world. He still intends to be a Christian and be saved; and yet to keep
up his reputation for wisdom and prudence. Hence, everything in religion
which is not consistent with such a reputation for prudence and wisdom
he rejects. Hence, he takes sides with the world. As far as the world
will admit that a man ought to attend to religion he will go. Where the
world would pronounce anything to be foolish, fanatical, or
enthusiastic, he pauses. And his religion is not shaped by the New
Testament, but by the opinions of the world - Such a man should be
cautious that he is not deceived. All his hopes of heaven are probably
built on the sand,

19\. We should not overvalue the wisdom of this world, [Co1
3:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018). It is folly in the sight of
God. And we, therefore, should not over-estimate it, or desire it, or be
influenced by it. True wisdom on any subject we should not despise; but
we should especially value that which is connected with salvation.

20\. This admonition is of special applicability to ministers of the
gospel. They are in special danger on the subject; and it has been by
their yielding themselves so much to the power of speculative
philosophy, that parties have been formed in the church, and that the
gospel has been so much corrupted.

21\. These considerations should lead us to live above contention, and
the fondness of party. Sect and party in the church are not formed by
the love of the pure and simple gospel, but by the love of some
philosophical opinion, or by an admiration of the wisdom, talents,
learning, eloquence, or success of some Christian teacher. Against this
the apostle would guard us; and the considerations presented in this
chapter should elevate us above all the causes of contention and the
love of sect, and teach us to love as brothers all who love our Lord
Jesus Christ.

22\. Christians have an interest in all things that can go to promote
their happiness. Life and death, things present and things to come - all
shall tend to advance their happiness, and promote their salvation; [Co1
3:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#021).

23\. Christians have nothing to fear in death. Death is theirs, and
shall be a blessing to them. Its sting is taken away; and it shall
introduce them to heaven. What have they to fear? Why should they be
alarmed? Why afraid to die? Why unwilling to depart and to be with
Christ?

24\. Christians should regard themselves as devoted to the Saviour. They
are his, and he has the highest conceivable claim on their time, their
talents, their influence, and their wealth. To him, therefore, let us be
devoted, and to him let us consecrate all that we have.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 4](co1004)

</div>
