<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1013)  [Next](co1015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 14:0</span></span>

This chapter is a continuation of the subject commenced in 1 Cor. 12 and
pursued through [Co1 13:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001). In 1
Cor. 12 Paul had entered on the discussion of the various endowments
which the Holy Spirit confers on Christians, and had shown that these
endowments were bestowed in a different degree on different individuals,
and yet so as to promote in the best way the edification of the church.
It was proper, he said [Co1 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031), to
desire the more eminent of these endowments, and yet there was one gift
of the Spirit of more value than all others, which might be obtained by
all, and which should be an object of desire to all. That was love; and
to show the nature, power, and value of this, was the design of the
thirteenth chapter, certainly one of the most tender and beautiful
portions of the Bible. In this chapter the subject is continued with
special reference to the subject of "prophecy," as being the most
valuable of the miraculous endowments, or the extraordinary gifts of the
Spirit.

In doing this, it was necessary to correct an erroneous estimate which
they had placed on the power of speaking foreign languages. They had
prized this, perhaps, because it gave them importance in the eyes of the
pagan. And in proportion as they valued this, they undervalued the gift
of being able to edify the church by speaking in a known and
intelligible language. To correct this misapprehension; to show the
relative value of these endowments, and especially to recommend the gift
of "prophecy" as the more useful and desirable of the gifts of the
Spirit, was the leading design of this chapter. In doing this, Paul
first directs them to seek for charity. He also recommends to them, as
in [Co1 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031), to desire spiritual
endowments, and of these endowments especially to desire prophecy; [Co1
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001). He then proceeds to set forth
the advantage of speaking in intelligible language, or of speaking so
that the church may be edified, by the following considerations, which
comprise the chapter:

1\. The advantage of being understood, and of speaking for the
edification of the church; [Co1
14:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#002).

2\. No man could be useful to the church except he delivered that which
was understood, any more than the sound of a trumpet in times of war
would be useful, unless it were so sounded as to be understood by the
army; [Co1 14:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#006).

3\. It was the duty of all to seek to edify the church; and if a man
could speak in an unknown tongue, it was his duty also to seek to be
able to interpret what he said; [Co1
14:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#012).

4\. The use of tongues would produce embarrassment and confusion, since
those who heard them speak would be ignorant of what was said, and be
unable to join in the devotions; [Co1
14:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#016).

5\. Though Paul himself was more signally endowed than any of them, yet
he prized far more highly the power of promoting the edification of the
church, though he uttered but five words, if they were understood, than
all the power which he possessed of speaking foreign languages; [Co1
14:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#018).

6\. This sentiment illustrated from the Old Testament; [Co1
14:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020).

7\. The real use of the power of speaking foreign languages was to be a
sign to unbelievers, an evidence that the religion was from God, and not
to be used among those who were already Christians; [Co1
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#022).

8\. The effect of their all speaking with tongues would be to produce
confusion and disorder, and disgust among observers, and the conviction
that they were deranged; but the effect of order, and of speaking
intelligibly, would be to convince and convert them; [Co1
14:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#023).

9\. The apostle then gives rules in regard to the proper conduct of
those who were able to speak foreign languages; [Co1
14:26-32](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#026).

10\. The great rule was, that order was to be observed, and that God was
the author of peace; [Co1 14:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033).

11\. The apostle then gives a positive direction that on no pretence are
women to be allowed to speak in the church, even though they should
claim to be inspired; [Co1 14:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034).

12\. He then required all to submit to his authority, and to admit that
what he had spoken was from the Lord; [Co1
14:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#036). And then,

13\. Concludes with directing them to desire to prophesy, and not to
forbid speaking with tongues on proper occasions, but to do all things
in decency and order; [Co1 14:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#038),

[1 Corinthians 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 14:1</span></span>

Follow after charity - Pursue love [Co1
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001); that is, earnestly desire it;
strive to possess it; make it the object of your anxious and constant
solicitude to obtain it, and to be influenced by it always. Cultivate it
in your own hearts, as the richest and best endowment of the Holy
Spirit, and endeavor to diffuse its happy influence on all around you.

And desire spiritual gifts - I do not forbid you, while you make the
possession of love your great object, and while you do not make the
desire of spiritual gifts the occasion of envy or strife, to desire the
miraculous endowments of the Spirit and to seek to excel in those
endowments which he imparts; see the note at [Co1
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031). The main thing was to cultivate
a spirit of love. Yet it was not improper also to desire to be so
endowed as to promote their highest usefulness in the church. On the
phrase "spiritual gifts," see the note at [Co1
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#001).

But rather that ye may prophesy - But especially, or particularly desire
to be qualified for the office of prophesying. The apostle does not mean
to say that prophecy is to be preferred to love or charity; but that, of
the spiritual gifts which it was proper for them to desire and seek,
prophecy was the most valuable. That is, they were not most earnestly
and especially to desire to be able to speak foreign languages or to
work miracles; but they were to desire to be qualified to speak in a
manner that would be edifying to the church. They would naturally,
perhaps, most highly prize the power of working miracles and of speaking
foreign languages. The object of this chapter is to show them that the
ability to speak in a plain, clear, instructive manner, so as to edify
the church and convince sinners, was a more valuable endowment than the
power of working miracles, or the power of speaking foreign languages.

On the meaning of the word "prophesy," see the note at [Rom
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#006). To what is said there on the
nature of this office, it seems necessary only to add an idea suggested
by Prof. Robinson (Greek and English Lexicon, under the article,
Προφήτης Prophētēs), that the prophets were distinguished from the
teachers (διδάσκαλοι didaskaloi), "in that, while the latter spoke in a
calm, connected, didactic discourse adapted to instruct and enlighten
the hearers, the prophet spoke more from the impulse of sudden
inspiration, from the light of a sudden revelation at the moment ([Co1
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#030), ἀποκάλυφθη apokalupthē), and
his discourse was probably more adapted, by means of powerful
exhortation, to awaken the feelings and conscience of the hearers." The
idea of speaking from "revelation," he adds, seems to be fundamental to
the correct idea of the nature of the prophecy here referred to. Yet the
communications of the prophets were always in the vernacular tongue, and
were always in intelligible language, and in this respect different from
the endowments of those who spoke foreign languages.

The same truth might be spoken by both; the influence of the Spirit was
equally necessary in both; both were inspired; and both answered
important ends in the establishment and edification of the church. The
gift of tongues, however, as it was the most striking and remarkable,
and probably the most rare, was most highly prized and coveted. The
object of Paul here is, to show that it was really an endowment of less
value, and should be less desired by Christians than the gift of
prophetic instruction, or the ability to edify the church in language
intelligible and understood by all, under the immediate influences of
the Holy Spirit.

[1 Corinthians 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 14:2</span></span>

For he that speaketh in an unknown tongue - This verse is designed to
show that the faculty of speaking intelligibly, and to the edification
of the church, is of more value than the power of speaking a foreign
language. The reason is, that however valuable may be the endowment in
itself, and however important the truth which he may utter, yet it is as
if he spoke to God only. No one could understand him.

Speaketh not unto men - Does not speak so that people can understand
him. His address is really not made to people, that is, to the church.
He might have this faculty without being able to speak to the
edification of the church. It is possible that the power of speaking
foreign languages and of prophesying were sometimes united in the same
person; but it is evident that the apostle speaks of them as different
endowments, and they probably were found usually in different
individuals.

But unto God - It is as if he spoke to God. No one could understand him
but God. This must evidently refer to the addresses "in the church,"
when Christians only were present, or when those only were present who
spoke the same language, and who were unacquainted with foreign tongues.
Paul says that "there" that faculty would be valueless compared with the
power of speaking in a manner that should edify the church. He did not
undervalue the power of speaking foreign languages when foreigners were
present, or when they went to preach to foreigners; see [Co1
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#022). It was only when it was
needless, when all present spoke one language, that he speaks of it as
of comparatively little value.

For no man understandeth him - That is, no man in the church, since they
all spoke the same language, and that language was different from what
was spoken by him who was endowed with the gift of tongues. As God only
could know the import of what he said, it would be lost upon the church,
and would be useless.

Howbeit in the Spirit - Although, by the aid of the Spirit, he should,
in fact, deliver the most important and sublime truths. This would
doubtless be the case, that those who were thus endowed would deliver
most important truths, but they would be "lost" upon those who heard
them, because they could not understand them. The phrase "in the
Spirit," evidently means "by the Holy Spirit," that is, by his aid and
influence. Though he should be "really" under the influence of the Holy
Spirit, and though the important truth which he delivers should be
imparted by his aid, yet all would be valueless unless it were
understood by the church.

He speaketh mysteries - For the meaning of the word "mystery," see Note,
[Co1 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007). The word here seems to be
synonymous with sublime and elevated truth; truth that was not before
known, and that might be of the utmost importance.

[1 Corinthians 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 14:3</span></span>

But he that prophesieth - See the note at [Co1
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001). He that speaks under the
influence of inspiration in the common language of his hearers. This
seems to be the difference between those who spoke in foreign languages
and those who prophesied. Both were under the influence of the Holy
Spirit; both might speak the same truths; both might occupy an equally
important and necessary place in the church; but the language of the one
was intelligible to the church, the other not; the one was designed to
edify the church, the other to address those who spoke foreign tongues,
or to give demonstration, by the power of speaking foreign languages,
that the religion was from God.

Speaketh unto men - So as to be understood by those who were present.

To edification - See the note at [Co1
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#008), note at [Co1
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#023). Speaks so as to enlighten and
strengthen the church.

And exhortation - See the note at [Rom
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#008). He applies and enforces the
practical duties of religion, and urges motives for a holy life.

And comfort - Encouragement. That is, he presents the promises and the
"hopes" of the gospel; the various considerations adapted to administer
comfort in the time of trial. The other might do this, but it would be
in a foreign language, and would be useless to the church.

[1 Corinthians 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 14:4</span></span>

Edifieth himself - That is, the truths which are communicated to him by
the Spirit, and which he utters in an unknown language, may be valuable,
and may be the means of strengthening his faith, and building him up in
the hopes of the gospel, but they can he of no use to others. His own
holy affections might be excited by the truths which he would deliver,
and the consciousness of possessing miraculous powers might excite his
gratitude. And yet, as Doddridge has well remarked, there might be
danger that a man might be injured by this gift when exercised in this
ostentatious manner.

[1 Corinthians 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 14:5</span></span>

I would that ye all spake with tongues - "It is an important endowment,
and is not, in its place, to be undervalued. It maybe of great service
in the cause of truth, and if properly regulated, and not abused, I
would rejoice if these extraordinary endowments were conferred on all. I
have no envy against anyone who possesses it; no opposition to the
endowment; but I wish that it should not be overvalued; and would wish
to exalt into proper estimation the more useful but humble gift of
speaking for the edification of the church."

Greater is he that prophesieth - This gift is of more value, and he
really occupies a more elevated rank in the church. He is more "useful."
The idea here is, that talents are not to he estimated by their
"brilliancy," but by their "usefulness." The power of speaking in an
unknown tongue was certainly a more striking endowment than that of
speaking so as simply to be "useful," and yet the apostle tells us that
the latter is the more valuable. So it is always. A man who is useful,
however humble and unknown he may be, really occupies a more elevated
and venerable rank than the man of most splendid talents and dazzling
eloquence, who accomplishes nothing in saving the souls of people.

Except he interpret - However important and valuable the truth might he
which he uttered, it would be useless to the church, unless he should
explain it in language which they could understand. In that case, the
apostle does not deny that the power of speaking foreign languages was a
higher endowment and more valuable than the gift of prophecy. That the
man who spoke foreign languages had the power of interpreting, is
evident from this verse. From [Co1
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#027), it appears that the office of
interpreting was sometimes performed by others.

[1 Corinthians 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 14:6</span></span>

Now, brethren, if I come unto you ... - The truth which the apostle had
been illustrating in an abstract manner, he proceeds to illustrate by
applying it to himself. If he should come among them speaking foreign
languages, it could be of no use unless it were interpreted to them.

Speaking with tongues - Speaking foreign languages; that is, speaking
them "only," without any interpreter. Paul had the power of speaking
foreign languages [Co1 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#018); but he
did not use this power for ostentation or display, but merely to
communicate the gospel to those who did not understand his native
tongue.

Either by revelation - Macknight renders this, "speak intelligibly;"
that is, as he explains it, "by the revelation peculiar to an apostle."
Doddridge, "by the revelation of some gospel doctrine and mystery."
Locke interprets it, that you might understand the revelation, or
knowledge," etc.; but says in a note, that we cannot now certainly
understand the difference between the meaning of the four words here
used. "It is sufficient," says he, "to know that these reruns stand for
some intelligible discourse tending to the edification of the church."
Rosenmuller supposes the word "revelation" stands for some "clear and
open knowledge of any truth arising from meditation." It is probable
that the word here does not refer to divine inspiration, as it usually
does, but that it stands opposed to that which is unknown and
unintelligible, as that which is "revealed" ἀποκαλύψις apokalupsis
stands opposed to what is unknown, concealed, "hidden," obscure. Here,
therefore, it is synonymous, perhaps, with "explained." "What shall it
profit, unless that which I speak be brought out of the obscurity and
darkness of a foreign language, and uncovered or explained!" The
original sense of the word "revelation" here is, I suppose, intended
ἀποκαλύψις apokalupsis, from ἀποκαλύπτω apokaluptō, "to uncover"), and
means that the sense should be uncovered, that is, explained or what was
spoken could not be of value.

Or by knowledge - By making it intelligible. By so explaining it as to
make it understood. Knowledge here stands opposed to the "ignorance" and
"obscurity" which would attend a communication in a foreign language.

Or by prophesying - See the note at [Co1
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001). That is, unless it be
communicated, through interpretation, in the manner in which the
prophetic teachers spoke; that is, made intelligible, and explained, and
actually brought down to the usual characteristics of communications
made in their own language.

Or by doctrine - By teaching (διδαχῇ didachē). By instruction; in the
usual mode of plain and familiar instruction. The sense of this passage,
therefore, is clear. Though Paul should utter among them, as he had
abundant ability to do, the most weighty and important truths, yet,
unless he interpreted what he said in a manner clear from obscurity,
like "revelation;" or intelligibly, and so as to constitute "knowledge;"
or in the manner that the prophets spoke, in a plain and intelligible
manner; or in the manner usual in simple and plain "instruction," it
would be useless to them. The perplexities of commentators may be seen
stated in Locke, Bloomfield, and Doddridge.

[1 Corinthians 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 14:7</span></span>

Things without life - Instruments of music.

Whether pipe - This instrument (αὐλὸς aulos) was usually made of reeds,
and probably had a resemblance to a flageolet.

Or harp - This instrument (κιθάρα kithara) was a stringed instrument,
and was made in the same way as a modern harp. It usually had ten
strings, and was struck with the plectrum, or with a key. It was
commonly employed in praise.

Except they give a distinction in the sounds - Unless they give a
difference in the "tones," such as are indicated in the gamut for music.

How shall it be known ... - That is, there would be no time, no music.
Nothing would be indicated by it. It would not be suited to excite the
emotions of sorrow or of joy. All music is designed to excite emotions;
but if there be no difference in the tones, no emotion would be
produced. So it would be in words uttered. Unless there was something
that was suited to excite thought or emotion; unless what was spoken was
made "intelligible," no matter how important in itself it might be, yet
it would be useless.

[1 Corinthians 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 14:8</span></span>

For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound - The trumpet was used
commonly in war. It is a well-known wind instrument, and was made of
brass, silver, etc. It was used for various purposes in war - to summon
the soldiers; to animate them in their march; to call them forth to
battle; to sound a retreat; and to signify to them what they were to do
in battle, whether to charge, advance, or retreat, etc. It therefore
employed a "language" which was intelligible to an army. An uncertain
sound was one in which none of these things were indicated, or in which
it could not be determined what was required.

Who shall prepare himself ... - The apostle selects a single instance of
what was indicated by the trumpet, as an illustration of what he meant.
The idea is, that foreign tongues spoken in their assembly would be just
as useless in regard to their duty, their comfort, and edification, as
would be the sound of a trumpet when it gave one of the usual and
intelligible sounds by which it was known what the soldiers were
required to do. Just as we would say, that the mere beating on a drum
would he useless, unless some tune was played by which it was known that
the soldiers were summoned to the parade, to advance, or to retreat.

[1 Corinthians 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 14:9</span></span>

So likewise ye ... - To apply the case. If you use a foreign language,
how shall it be known what is said, or of what use will it be, unless it
is made intelligible by interpretation?

Utter by the tongue - Unless you speak.

Words easy to be understood - Significant words (margin), words to which
your auditors are accustomed.

For ye shall speak into the air - You will not speak so as to be
understood; and it will be just the same as if no one was present, and
you spoke to the air. We have a proverb that resembles this: "You may as
well speak to the winds:" that is, you speak where it would not be
understood, or where the words would have no effect. It may he observed
here, that the practice of the papists accords with what the apostle
here condemns, where worship is conducted in a language not understood
by the people; and that there is much of this same kind of speaking now,
where unintelligible terms are used, or words are employed that are
above the comprehension of the people; or where doctrines are discussed
which are unintelligible, and which are regarded by them without
interest. All preaching should be plain, simple, perspicuous, and
adapted to the capacity of the hearers.

[1 Corinthians 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 14:10</span></span>

There are it may be ... - There has been considerable variety in the
interpertation of this expression. Rosenmuller renders it, "for the sake
of example." Grotius supposes that Paul meant to indicate that there
were, perhaps, or might be, as many languages as the Jews supposed, to
wit, seventy. Beza and others suppose it means, that there may he as
many languages as there are nations of people. Bloomfield renders it,
"Let there he as many kinds of languages as you choose." Macknight,
"There are, no doubt, as many kinds of languages in the world as ye
speak." Robinson (Lexicon) renders it, "If so happen, it may be;
perchance, perhaps;" and says the phrase is equivalent to "for example,"
The sense is, "There are perhaps, or for example, very many kinds of
voices in the world; and all are significant. None are used by those who
speak them without meaning; none speak them without designing to convey
some intelligible idea to their hearers." The "argument" is, that as
"all" the languages that are in the world, however numerous they are,
are for "utility," and as none are used for the sake of mere display, so
it should be with those who had the power of speaking them in the
Christian church. They should speak them only when and where they would
be understood.

Voices - Languages.

[1 Corinthians 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 14:11</span></span>

The meaning of the voice - Of the language that is uttered, or the
sounds that are made.

I shall be unto him ... - What I say will be unintelligible to him, and
what he says will be unintelligible to me. We cannot understand one
another any more than people can who speak different languages.

A barbarian - See the note at [Rom
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#014). The word means one who speaks a
different, or a foreign language.

[1 Corinthians 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 14:12</span></span>

Even so ye - Since you desire spiritual gifts, I may urge it upon you to
seek to he able to speak in a clear and intelligible manner, that you
may edify the church. This is one of the most valuable endowments of the
Spirit; and this should be earnestly desired.

Forasmuch as ye are zealous - Since you earnestly desire; See the note
at [Co1 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031).

Spiritual gifts - The endowments conferred by the Holy Spirit; See the
note at [Co1 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#001).

Seek that ye may excel ... - Seek that you may be able to convey truth
in a clear and plain manner; seek to be distinguished for that. It is
one of the most rare and valuable endowments of the Holy Spirit.

[1 Corinthians 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 14:13</span></span>

Pray that he may interpret - Let him ask of God ability that he may
explain it clearly to the church. It would seem probable that the power
of speaking foreign languages, and the power of conveying truth in a
clear and distinct manner, were not always found in the same person, and
that the one did not of necessity imply the other. The truth seems to
have been, that these extraordinary endowments of the Holy Spirit were
bestowed upon people in some such way as "ordinary" talents and mental
powers are now conferred; and that they became in a similar sense the
"characteristic mental endowments of the individual," and of course were
subject to the same laws, and liable to the same kinds of abuse, as
mental endowments are now. And as it now happens that one man may have a
special faculty for acquiring and expressing himself in a foreign
language who may not be by any means distinguished for clear
enunciation, or capable of conveying his ideas in an interesting manner
to a congregation, so it was then.

The apostle, therefore, directs such, if any there were, instead of
priding themselves on their endowments, and instead of always speaking
in an unknown tongue, which would he useless to the church, to "pray"
for the more useful gift of being able to convey their thoughts in a
clear and intelligible manner in their vernacular tongue. This would be
useful. The truths, therefore, that they had the power of speaking with
eminent ability in a foreign language, they ought to desire to be able
to "interpret" so that they would be intelligible to the people whom
they addressed in the church. This seems to me to be the plain meaning
of this passage, which has given so much perplexity to commentators.
Macknight renders it, however, "Let him who prayeth in a foreign
language, pray so as some one may interpret;" meaning that he who prayed
in a foreign language was to do it by two or three sentences at a time,
so that he might be followed by an interpreter. But this is evidently
forced. In order to this, it is needful to suppose that the phrase ὁ
λαλῶν ho lalōn , "that speaketh," should be rendered, contrary to its
obvious and usual meaning, "who prays," and to supply τις tis,
"someone," in the close of the verse. The obvious interpretation is that
which is given above; and this proceeds only on the supposition that the
power of speaking foreign languages and the power of interpreting were
not always united in the same person - a supposition that is evidently
true, as appears from [Co1 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010).

[1 Corinthians 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 14:14</span></span>

For if I pray ... - The reference to prayer here, and to singing in [Co1
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#015), is designed to illustrate the
propriety of the general sentiment which he is defending, that public
worship should be conducted in a language that would be intelligible to
the people. However well meant it might be, or however the "heart" might
be engaged in it, yet unless it was intelligible, and the understanding
could join in it, it would be vain and profitless.

My spirit prayeth - The word spirit here (πνεῦμα pneuma) has been
variously understood. Some have understood it of the Holy Spirit - the
Spirit by which Paul says he was actuated. Others of the "spiritual
gift," or that spiritual influence by which he was endowed. Others of
the mind itself. But it is probable that the word "spirit" refers to the
"will;" or to the mind, as the seat of the affections and emotions; that
is, to the heart, desires, or intentions. The word "spirit" is often
used in the Scriptures as the seat of the affections, and emotions, and
passions of various kinds; see [Mat
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003), "Blessed are the poor in spirit;"
[Luk 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#021), "Jesus rejoiced in
spirit." So it is the seat of ardor or fervor [Luk
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017); [Act
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#025); [Rom
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#011); of grief or indignation; [Mar
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#012); [Joh
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#033); [Joh
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#021); [Act
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#016). It refers also to feelings,
disposition, or temper of mind, in [Luk
9:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#055); [Rom
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015). Here it refers, it seems to me.
to the heart, the will, the disposition, the feelings, as
contradistinguished from the understanding; and the sense is, "My
feelings find utterance in prayer; my heart is engaged in devotion; my
prayer will be acceptable to God, who looks upon the feelings of the
heart, and I may have true enjoyment; but my understanding will be
unfruitful, that is, will not profit others. What I say will not he
understood by them; and of course, however much benefit I might derive
from my devotions, yet they would be useless to others."

But my understanding - (ὁ δὲ νοῦς μου ho de nous mou). My intellect, my
mind; my mental efforts and operations.

Is unfruitful - Produces nothing that will be of advantage to them. It
is like a barren tree; a tree that bears nothing that can be of benefit
to others. They cannot understand what I say, and of course, they cannot
be profited by what I utter.

[1 Corinthians 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 14:15</span></span>

What is it then? - What shall I do? What is the proper course for me to
pursue? What is my practice and my desire; see the same form of
expression in [Rom 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#009), and [Rom
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#015). It indicates the "conclusion" to
which the reasoning had conducted him, or the course which he would
pursue in view of all the circumstances of the case.

I will pray with the spirit ... - I will endeavor to "blend" all the
advantages which can be derived from prayer; I will "unite" all the
benefits which "can" result to myself and to others. I deem it of vast
importance to pray with the spirit in such a way that the "heart" and
the "affections" may be engaged, so that I may myself derive benefit
from it; but I will also unite with that, utility to others; I will use
such language that they may understand it, and be profited.

And I will pray with the understanding also - So that others may
understand me. I will make the appropriate use of the intellect, so that
it may convey ideas, and make suitable impressions on the minds of
others.

I will sing with the spirit - It is evident that the same thing might
take place in singing which occurred in prayer. It might be in a foreign
language, and might be unintelligible to others. The affections of the
man himself might be excited, and his heart engaged in the duty, but it
would be profitless to others. Paul, therefore, says that he would so
celebrate the praises of God as to excite the proper affections in his
own mind, and so as to be intelligible and profitable to others. This
passage proves:

\(1\) That the praises of God are to be celebrated among Christians, and
that it is an important part of worship;

\(2\) That the heart should be engaged in it, and that it should be so
performed as to excite proper affections in the hearts of those who are
engaged in it; and,

\(3\) That it should be so done as to be "intelligible" and edifying to
others.

The words should be so uttered as to be distinct and understood. There
should be clear enunciation as well as in prayer and preaching, since
the design of sacred music in the worship of God is not only to utter
praise, but it is to impress the sentiments which are sung on the heart
by the aid of musical sounds and expression more deeply than could
otherwise be done. If this is not done, the singing might as well be in
a foreign language. Perhaps there is no part of public worship in which
there is greater imperfection than in the mode of its psalmody. At the
same time, there is scarcely any part of the devotions of the sanctuary
that may be made more edifying or impressive. It has the "advantage" -
an advantage which preaching and praying have not - of using the sweet
tones of melody and harmony to "impress" sentiment on the heart and it
should be done.

[1 Corinthians 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 14:16</span></span>

Else - (Ἐπεί Epei). Since; if this is not done; if what is said is not
intelligible, how shall the unlearned be able appropriately to express
his assent, and join in your devotions?

When thou shalt bless - When thou shalt bless God, or give thanks to
him. If thou shalt lead the devotions of the people in expressing
thanksgiving for mercies and favors. This may refer to a part of public
worship, or to the thanks which should be expressed at table, and the
invocation of the divine blessing to attend the bounties of his
providence. Paul had illustrated his subject by prayer and by singing;
be now does it by a reference to the important part of public worship
expressed in giving thanks.

With the spirit - In the manner referred to above; that is, in an
unknown tongue, in such a way that your own "heart" may be engaged in
it, but which would be unintelligible to others.

He that occupieth the room - Is in the place, or the seat of the
unlearned; that is, he who is unlearned. On the meaning of the word
"room," see the note at [Luk 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#008). To
"fill" a place means to occupy a station, or to be found in a slate or
condition.

Of the unlearned - (τοῦ ἰδιώτου tou idiōtou. On the meaning of this
word, see the note at [Act 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013). Here
it means one who was unacquainted with the foreign language spoken by
him who gave thanks. It properly denotes a man in "private," in
contradistinction from a man in "public" life; and hence, a man who is
ignorant and unlettered, as such people generally were.

Say Amen - This word means "truly, verily;" and is an expression of
affirmation [Joh 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005) or of assent.
Here it means assent. How can he pronounce "the" Amen; how can he
express his assent; how can he join in the act of devotion? This "might"
have been, and probably "was," expressed aloud; and there is no
impropriety in it. It "may," however, be "mental" - a silent assent to
what is said, and a silent uniting in the act of thanksgiving. In one
way or the other, or in both, the assent should always be expressed by
those who join in acts of public worship.

[1 Corinthians 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 14:17</span></span>

For thou verily givest thanks well - That is, even if you use a foreign
language. You do it with the heart; and it is accepted by God as your
offering; but the other, who cannot understand it, cannot be benefited
by it.

[1 Corinthians 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 14:18</span></span>

I thank my God - Paul here shows that he did not undervalue or despise
the power of speaking foreign languages. It was with him a subject of
thanksgiving that he could speak so many; but he felt that there were
more valuable endowments than this; see the next verse.

With tongues more than ye all - I am able to speak more foreign
languages than all of you. "How many" languages Paul could speak, he has
no where told us. It is reasonable, however, to presume that he was able
to speak the language of any people to whom God in his providence, and
by his Spirit, called him to preach. He had been commissioned to preach
to the "Gentiles," and it is probable that he was able to speak the
languages of all the nations among whom he ever traveled. There is no
account of his being under a necessity of employing an interpreter
wherever he preached.

[1 Corinthians 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 14:19</span></span>

Yet in the church - In the Christian assembly. The word "church" does
not refer to the "edifice" where Christians worshipped, but to the
organized body of Christians.

I had rather ... - It is probable that in the Christian assembly,
usually, there were few who understood foreign languages. Paul,
therefore, would not speak in a foreign language when its only use would
be mere display.

With my understanding - So as to be intelligible to others; so that I
might understand it, and so that at the same time others might be
benefitted.

[1 Corinthians 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 14:20</span></span>

Brethren, be not children in understanding - Be not childish; do not
behave like little children. They admire, and are astonished at what is
striking, novel, and what may be of no real utility. They are pleased
with anything that will amuse them, and at little things that afford
them play and pastime. So your admiration of a foreign language and of
the ability to speak it, is of as little solid value as the common
sports and plays of boys. This, says Doddridge, is an admirable stroke
of oratory, and adapted to bring down their pride by showing them that
those things on which they were disposed to value themselves were
"childish." It is sometimes well to appeal to Christians in this manner,
and to show them that what they are engaged in is "unworthy" the dignity
of the understanding - unfit to occupy the time and attention of an
immortal mind. Much, alas! very much of that which engages the attention
of Christians is just as unworthy of the dignity of the mind, and of
their immortal nature, as were the aims and desires which the apostle
rebuked among the Christians at Corinth. Much that pertains to dress, to
accomplishment, to living, to employment, to amusement, to conversation,
will appear, when we come to die, to have been like the playthings of
"children;" and we shall feel that the immortal mind has been employed,
and the time wasted, and the strength exhausted in that which was
foolish and puerile.

Howbeit in malice be ye children - This is one of Paul's most happy
turns of expression and of sentiment. He had just told them that in one
respect they ought not to be children. Yet, as if this would appear to
be speaking lightly of children - and Paul would not speak lightly of
anyone, even of a child - he adds, that in "another" respect it would be
well to be like them - nay, not only like children, but like "infants."
The phrase "be ye children," here, does not express the force of the
original νηπιάζετε nēpiazete. It means, "be infants," and is emphatic,
and was used, evidently, by the apostle of design. The meaning may be
thus expressed. "Your admiration of foreign languages is like the sports
and plays of "childhood." In this respect be not children (παιδίᾳ
paidia); be men! Lay aside such childish things. Act worthy of the
"understanding" which God has given you. I have mentioned children. Yet
I would not speak unkindly or with contempt even of them. "In one
respect" you may imitate them. Nay, you should not only be like
"children," that are somewhat advanced in years, but like "infants." Be
as free from malice, from any ill-will toward others, from envy, and
every improper passion, as they are." This passage, therefore, accords
with the repeated declaration of the Saviour, that in order to enter
into heaven, it was needful that we should become as little children;
[Mat 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003).

Be men - Margin, "Perfect, or of a riper age" (τέλειοι teleioi). The
word means full-grown men. Act like them whose understandings are mature
and ripe.

[1 Corinthians 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 14:21</span></span>

In the law it is written - This passage is found in [Isa
38:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#011). The word "law" here seems to
mean the same as revelation; or is used to denote the Old Testament in
general. A similar use occurs in [Joh
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034), and [Joh
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#025).

With men of other tongues ... - This passage, where it occurs in Isaiah,
means, that God would teach the rebellious and refractory Jews
submission to himself, by punishing them amidst a people of another
language, by removing them to a land - the land of Chaldea - where they
would hear only a language that to them would be unintelligible and
barbarous. Yet, notwithstanding this discipline, they would be still, to
some extent, a rebellious people. The passage in Isaiah has no reference
to the miraculous gift of tongues. and cannot have been used by the
apostle as containing any intimation that such miraculous gifts would be
imparted. It seems to have been used by Paul, because the "words" which
occurred in Isaiah would "appropriately express" the idea which he
wished to convey (see the note at [Mat
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023)), that God would make use of
foreign languages for some "valuable purpose." But he by no means
intimates that Isaiah had any such reference; nor does he quote this as
a fulfillment of the prophecy; nor does he mean to say, that God would
accomplish "the same purpose" by the use of foreign languages, which was
contemplated in the passage in Isaiah. The sense is, as God accomplished
an important purpose by the use of a foreign language in regard to his
ancient people, as recorded in Isaiah, so he will make use of foreign
languages to accomplish important purposes still. They shall be used in
the Christian church to effect important objects, though not in the same
manner, nor for the same end, as in the time of the captivity. What the
design of making use of foreign languages was, in the Christian church,
the apostle immediately states; [Co1
14:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#022).

Yet for all that ... - Notwithstanding all this chastisement that shall
be inflicted on the Jews in a distant land, and among a people of a
different language, they will still be a rebellious people. This is the
sense of the passage, as it is used by Isaiah; see [Isa
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#012). It is not quoted literally by
the apostle, but the main idea is retained. He does not appear to design
to apply this to the Corinthians, unless it may be to intimate that the
power of speaking foreign languages did not of necessity secure
obedience. It might he that this power might be possessed, and yet they
be a sinful people; just as the Jews were admonished by the judgments of
God, inflicted by means of a people speaking a foreign language, and yet
were not reformed or made holy.

[1 Corinthians 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 14:22</span></span>

Wherefore - Thus, (Ὥστε Hōste), or wherefore. The apostle does not mean
to say that what he was about to state was a direct conclusion from the
passage of Scripture which he had quoted, but that it followed from all
that he had said, and from the whole view of the subject. "The true
statement or doctrine is, that tongues are for a sign," etc.

Tongues - The power of speaking foreign languages.

Are for a sign - An "indication," an evidence, or a proof that God has
imparted this power, and that he attends the preaching of the gospel
with his approbation. It is a "sign," or a "miracle," which, like all
other miracles, may be designed to convince the unbelieving world that
the religion is from God.

Not to them that believe - Not to Christians. They are already convinced
of the truth of religion, and they would not be benefited by that which
was spoken in a language which they could not understand,

But to them that believe not - It is a miracle designed to convince them
of the truth of the Christian religion. God alone could confer the power
of thus speaking; and as it was conferred expressly to aid in the
propagation of the gospel, it proved that it was from God; see the note
on [Act 2:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001).

But prophesying - Speaking in a calm, connected, didactic manner, in
language intelligible to all under the influence of inspiration; see
notes on [Co1 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001).

For them that believe not - Is not particularly intended for them; but
is intended mainly for the edifying of the church. It is not so
striking, so replete with proofs of the divine presence and power as the
gift of tongues. Though it may be really under the influence of the Holy
Spirit, and may be really by inspiration, yet it is not so evidently
such as is the power of speaking foreign languages. It was, therefore,
better adapted to edify the church than to convince gainsayers. At the
same time the "truths" conveyed by it, and the consolations administered
by it, might be as clear evidence to the church of the attending power,
and presence, and goodness of God, as the power of speaking foreign
languages might be to infidels.

[1 Corinthians 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 14:23</span></span>

Be come together into one place - For public worship.

And all speak with tongues - All speak with a variety of unknown
tongues; all speak foreign languages. The idea is, that the church would
usually speak the same language with the people among whom they dwelt;
and if they made use of foreign languages which were unintelligible to
their visitors, it would leave the impression that the church was a
bedlam.

And there come in - those that are "unlearned." Those that are
unacquainted with foreign languages, and to whom, therefore, what was
said would be unintelligible.

Or unbelievers - Heathen, or Jews, who did not believe in Christ. It is
evident from this that such persons often attended on the worship of
Christians. Curiosity might have led them to it; or the fact that they
had relatives among Christians might have caused it.

That ye are mad - They will not understand what is said; it will be a
confused jargon; and they will infer that it is the effect of insanity.
Even though it might not, therefore, be in itself improper, yet a regard
to the honor of Christianity should have led them to abstain from the
use of such languages in their worship when it was needless. The
apostles were charged, from a similar cause, with being intoxicated; see
[Act 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#013).

[1 Corinthians 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co1 14:24</span></span>

But if all prophesy - See the note at [Co1
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001). If all, in proper order and
time, shall utter the truths of religion in a language intelligible to
all.

Or one unlearned - One unacquainted with the nature of Christianity, or
the truths of the gospel.

He is convinced of all - He will be convinced by all that speak. He will
understand what is said; he will see its truth and force, and be will be
satisfied of the truth of Christianity. The word here rendered
"convinced" (ἐλέγχετἀι elengchetai) is rendered "reprove" in [Joh
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008), "And when he is come, he will
reprove the world of sin," etc. Its proper meaning is to "convict," to
show one to be wrong; and then to rebuke, reprove, admonish, etc. Here
it means, evidently, that the man would be convicted, or convinced of
his error and of his sin; he would see that his former opinions and
practice had been wrong; he would see and acknowledge the force and
truth of the Christian sentiments which should be uttered, and would
acknowledge the error of his former opinions and life. The following
verse shows that the apostle means something more than a mere convincing
of the understanding, or a mere conviction that his opinions had been
erroneous. He evidently refers to what is now known also as "conviction"
for sin; that is, a deep sense of the depravity of the heart, of the
errors and follies of the past life, accompanied with mental anxiety,
distress, and alarm. The force of truth, and the appeals which should be
made, and the observation of the happy effects of religion, would
convince him that he was a sinner, and show him also his need of a
Saviour.

He is judged by all - By all that speak; by all that they say. The
"effect" of what they say shall be, as it were, to pass a "judgment" on
his former life; or to condemn him. What is said will be approved by his
own conscience, and will have the effect to condemn him in his own view
as a lost sinner. This is now the effect of faithful preaching, to
produce deep self-condemnation in the minds of sinners.

[1 Corinthians 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">co1 14:25</span></span>

And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest - Made manifest to
himself in a surprising and remarkable manner. He shall be led to see
the "real" designs and motives of his heart. His conscience would be
awakened; he would recall his former course of life; he would see that
it was evil; and the present state of his heart would be made known to
himself. It is possible that he would "suppose that the speaker was
aiming directly at him, and "revealing" his feelings to others; for such
an effect is often produced. The convicted sinner often supposes that
the preacher particularly intends "him," and wonders that he has such an
acquaintance with his feelings and his life; and often supposes that he
is designing to disclose his feelings to the congregation. It is
possible that Paul here may mean that the prophets, by inspiration,
would be able to reveal some secret facts in regard to the stranger; or
to state the ill design which he might have had in coming into the
assembly; or to state some things in regard to him which could be known
only to himself; as was the case with Ananias and Sapphira ([Act
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#001), seq.); but perhaps it is better
to understand this in a more general sense, as describing the proper and
more common effect of truth, when it is applied by a man's own
conscience. Such effects are often witnessed now; and such effects show
the truth of religion; its adaptedness to people; the omniscience and
the power of God; the design of the conscience, and its use in the
conversion of sinners.

And so falling down on his face - The usual posture of worship or
reverence in eastern countries. It was performed by sinking on the knees
and hands, and then placing the face on the ground. This might be done
publicly; or the apostle may mean to say that it would lead him to do it
in private.

He will worship God - He will be converted, and become a Christian.

And report that God ... - Will become your friend, and an advocate for
the Christian religion. An enemy will be turned to a friend. Doubtless
this was often done. It is now often done. Paul's argument is, that they
should so conduct their public devotions as that they should be adapted
to produce this result.

[1 Corinthians 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">co1 14:26</span></span>

How is it then, brethren? - See the note at [Co1
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#015). What is the fact? What actually
occurs among you? Does that state of things exist which I have
described? Is there that order in your public worship which is demanded
and proper? It is implied in his asking this question that there might
be some things among them which were improper, and which deserved
reproof.

When ye come together - For worship.

Everyone of you ... - That is, all the things which are specified would
be found among them. It is, evidently, not meant that all these things
would be found in the same person, but would all exist at the same time;
and thus confusion and disorder would be inevitable. Instead of waiting
for an intimation from the presiding officer in the assembly, or
speaking in succession and in order, each one probably regarded himself
as under the influence of the Holy Spirit; as having an important
message to communicate, or as being called on to celebrate the praises
of God; and thus confusion and disorder would prevail. Many would be
speaking at the same time, and a most unfavorable impression would be
made on the minds of the strangers who should be present, [Co1
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#023). This implied reproof of the
Corinthians is certainly a reproof of those public assemblies where many
speak at the same time; or where a portion are engaged in praying, and
others in exhortation. Nor can it be urged that in such cases those who
engage in these exercises are under the influence of the Holy Spirit;
for, however true that may be, yet it is no more true than it was in
Corinth, and yet the apostle reproved the practice there. The Holy
Spirit is the author of order, and not of confusion [Co1
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033); and true religion prompts to
peace and regularity, and not to discord and tumult.

Hath a psalm - Is disposed to sing; is inclined to praise; and, however
irregular or improper, expresses his thanks in a public manner, see the
note at [Co1 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#015).

Hath a doctrine - Has some religious truth on his mind which be deems it
of special importance to inculcate, see the note at [Co1
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#006).

Hath a tongue - Has something made known to him in a foreign language,
or has a power of speaking a foreign language, and exercises it, though
it produces great confusion.

Hath a revelation - Some truth which has been particularly revealed to
him; perhaps an explanation of some mystery (Doddridge); or a revelation
ot some future event (Macknight); or a prophecy (Bloomfield); or a power
of explaining some of the truths couched in the types and figures of the
Old Testament. Grotius.

Hath an interpretation - An explanation of something that has been
uttered by another in a foreign language; See the note at [Co1
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010).

Let all things ... - Let this be the great principle, to promote the
edification of the church; See the note at [Co1
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#012). If this rule were followed, it
would prevent confusion and disorder.

[1 Corinthians 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">co1 14:27</span></span>

Let it be by two, or at the most by three - That is, two, or at most
three in one day, or in one meeting. So Grotius, Rosenmuller, Doddridge,
Bloomfield, and Locke, understand it. It is probable that many were
endowed with the gift of tongues; and it is certain that they were
disposed to exercise the gift even when it could be of no real
advantage, and when it was done only for ostentation. Paul had shown to
them [Co1 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#022), that the main design
of the gift of tongues was to convince unbelievers; he here shows them
that if that gift was exercised in the church, it should be in such a
way as to promote edification. They should not speak at the same time;
nor should they regard it as necessary that all should speak at the same
meeting. It should not be so as to produce disorder and confusion nor
should it be so as to detain the people beyond a reasonable time. The
speakers, therefore, in any one assembly should not exceed two or three.

And that by course - Separately; one after another. They should not all
speak at the same time.

And let one interpret - One who has the gift of interpreting foreign
languages, (Note, [Co1 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010)), so that
they may be understood, and the church be edified.

[1 Corinthians 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">co1 14:28</span></span>

But if there be no interpreter - If there be no one present who has the
gift of interpretation.

And let him speak to himself and to God - See the note at [Co1
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#002), note at [Co1
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#004). Let him commune with himself,
and with God; let him meditate on the truths which are revealed to him,
and let him in secret express his desires to God.

[1 Corinthians 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">co1 14:29</span></span>

Let the prophets - See the note at [Co1
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001).

Speak two or three - On the same days, or at the same meeting; see the
note at [Co1 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#027).

And let the other judge - The word "other" (οἱ ἄλλοι hoi alloi, "the
others"), Bloomfield supposes refers to the other prophets; and that the
meaning is, that they should decide whether what was said was dictated
by the Holy Spirit, or not. But the more probable sense, I think, is
that which refers it to the rest of the congregation, and which supposes
that they were to compare one doctrine with another, and deliberate on
what was spoken, and determine whether it had evidence of being in
accordance with the truth. It may be that the apostle here refers to
those who had the gift of discerning spirits, and that he meant to say
that they were to determine by what spirit the prophets who spoke were
actuated. It was possible that those who claimed to be prophets might
err, and it was the duty of all to examine whether that which was
uttered was in accordance with truth. And if this was a duty then, it is
a duty now; if it was proper even when the teachers claimed to be under
divine inspiration, it is much more the duty of the people now. No
minister of religion has a right to demand that all that he speaks shall
be regarded as truth, unless he can give good reasons for it: no man is
to be debarred from the right of canvassing freely, and comparing with
the Bible, and with sound reason, all that the minister of the gospel
advances. No minister who has just views of his office, and a proper
acquaintance with the truth, and confidence in it, would desire to
prohibit the people from the most full and free examination of all that
he utters. It may be added, that the Scripture everywhere encourages the
most full and free examination of all doctrines that are advanced; and
that true religion advances just in proportion as this spirit of candid,
and earnest, and prayerful examination prevails among a people; see the
note at [Act 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#011); compare [Th1
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#021).

[1 Corinthians 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">co1 14:30</span></span>

If anything be revealed to another - If, while one is speaking, an
important truth is revealed to another, or is suggested to his mind by
the Holy Spirit, which he feels it to be important to communicate.

Let the first hold his peace - That is, let him that was speaking
conclude his discourse, and let there not be the confusion arising from
two persons speaking. at the same time. Doddridge understands this as
meaning, that he to whom the revelation was made should sit still, until
the other was done speaking, and not rise and rudely interrupt him. But
this is to do violence to the language. So Macknight understands it,
that the one who was speaking was first to finish his discourse, and be
silent. before the other began to speak. But this is evidently a forced
construction. Locke understands it as meaning, that if, while one was
speaking, the meaning of what he said was revealed to another, the first
was to cease speaking until the other had interpreted or explained it.
But the obvious meaning of the passage is, that the man that was
speaking was to close his discourse and be silent. It does not follow,
however, that he was to be rudely interrupted. He might close his
discourse deliberately, or perhaps by an intimation from the person to
whom the revelation was made. At any rate, two were not to speak at the
same time, but the one who was speaking was to conclude before the other
addressed the assembly.

[1 Corinthians 14:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">co1 14:31</span></span>

For ye may all prophecy ... - There is time enough for all; there is no
need of speaking in confusion and disorder. Every person may have an
opportunity of expressing his sentiments at the proper time.

That all may learn - In such a manner that there may be edification.
This might be done if they would speak one at a time in their proper
order.

[1 Corinthians 14:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">co1 14:32</span></span>

And the spirits of the prophets - See in [Co1
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001) for the meaning of the word
prophets. The evident meaning of this is, that they were able to control
their inclination to speak; they were not under a necessity of speaking,
even though they might be inspired. There was no need of disorder. This
verse gives confirmation to the supposition, that the extraordinary
endowments of the Holy Spirit were subjected to substantially the same
laws as a man's natural endowments. They were conferred by the Holy
Spirit; but they were conferred on free agents, and did not interfere
with their free agency. And as a man, though of the most splendid
talents and commanding eloquence, has "control" over his own mind, and
is not "compelled" to speak, so it was with those who are here called
prophets. The immediate reference of the passage is to those who are
called "prophets" in the New Testament: and the interpretation should be
confined to them.

It is not improbable, however, that the same thing was true of the
prophets of the Old Testament; and that it is really true as a general
declaration of all the prophets whom God has inspired, that they had
control over their own minds, and could speak or be silent at pleasure.
In this the spirit of true inspiration differed essentially from the
views of the pagan, who regarded themselves as driven on by a wild,
controlling influence, that compelled them to speak even when they were
unconscious of what they said. Universally, in the pagan world, the
priests and priestesses supposed or feigned that they were under an
influence which was incontrollable; which took away their powers of
self-command, and which made them the mere organs or unconscious
instruments of communicating the will of the gods. The Scripture account
of inspiration is, however, a very different thing. In whatever way the
mind was influenced, or whatever was the mode in which the truth was
conveyed, yet it was not such as to destroy the conscious powers of free
agency, nor such as to destroy the individuality of the inspired person,
or to annihilate what was special in his mode of thinking, his style, or
his customary manner of expression.

[1 Corinthians 14:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">co1 14:33</span></span>

God is not the author of confusion - Margin, "Tumult," or "unquietness."
His religion cannot tend to produce disorder. He is the God of peace;
and his religion will tend to promote order. It is calm, peaceful,
thoughtful. It is not boisterous and disorderly.

As in all churches of the saints - As was everywhere apparent in the
churches. Paul here appeals to them, and says that this was the fact
wherever the true religion was spread, that it tended to produce peace
and order. This is as true now as it was then. And we may learn,
therefore:

\(1\) That where there is disorder, there is little religion. Religion
does not produce it; and the tendency of tumult and confusion is to
drive religion away.

\(2\) true religion will not lead to tumult, to outcries, or to
irregularity. It will not prompt many to speak or pray at once; nor will
it justify tumultuous and noisy assemblages.

\(3\) Christians should regard God as the author of peace. They should
always in the sanctuary demean themselves in a reverent manner, and with
such decorum as becomes people when they are in the presence of a holy
and pure God, and engaged in his worship.

\(4\) all those pretended conversions, however sudden and striking they
may be, which are attended with disorder, and confusion, and public
outcries, are to be suspected. Such excitement may be connected with
genuine piety, but it is no part of pure religion. That is calm,
serious, orderly, heavenly. No person who is under its influence is
disposed to engage in scenes of confusion and disorder. Grateful he may
be, and he may and will express his gratitude; prayerful he will be, and
he will pray; anxious for others he will be, and he will express that
anxiety; but it will be with seriousness, tenderness, love; with a
desire for the order of God's house, and not with a desire to break in
upon and disturb all the solemnities of public worship.

[1 Corinthians 14:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">co1 14:34</span></span>

Let your women keep silence ... - This rule is positive, explicit, and
universal. There is no ambiguity in the expressions; and there can be no
difference of opinion, one would suppose, in regard to their meaning.
The sense evidently is, that in all those things which he had specified,
the women were to keep silence; they were to take no part. He had
discoursed of speaking foreign languages, and of prophecy; and the
evident sense is, that in regard to all these they were to keep silence,
or were not to engage in them. These pertained solely to the male
portion of the congregation. These things constituted the business of
the public teaching; and in this the female part of the congregation
were to be silent. "They were not to teach the people, nor were they to
interrupt those who were speaking" - Rosenmuller. It is probable that,
on pretence of being inspired, the women had assumed the office of
public teachers.

In 1 Cor. 11, Paul had argued against their doing this in a certain
manner - without their veils [Co1
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#004), and he had shown, that "on that
account," and "in that manner," it was improper for them to assume the
office of public teachers, and to conduct the devotions of the church.
The force of the argument in 1 Cor. 11: is, that what he there states
would be a sufficient reason against the practice, even if there were no
other. It was contrary to all decency and propriety that they should
appear "in that manner" in public. He here argues against the practice
on every ground; forbids it altogether; and shows that on every
consideration it was to be regarded as improper for them even so much as
"to ask a question" in time of public service. There is, therefore, no
inconsistency between the argument in 1 Cor. 11: and the statement here;
and the force of the whole is, that "on every consideration" it was
improper, and to be expressly prohibited, for women to conduct the
devotions of the church. It does not refer to those only who claimed to
be inspired, but to all; it does not refer merely to acts of public
preaching, but to all acts of speaking, or even asking questions, when
the church is assembled for public worship. No rule in the New Testament
is more positive than this; and however plausible may be the reasons
which may be urged for disregarding it, and for suffering women to take
part in conducting public worship, yet the authority of the apostle Paul
is positive, and his meaning cannot be mistaken; compare [Ti1
2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#011).

To be under obedience - To be subject to their husbands; to acknowledge
the superior authority of the man; see the note at [Co1
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003).

As also saith the law - [Gen 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016),
"And thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee."

[1 Corinthians 14:35](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">co1 14:35</span></span>

And if they will learn anything - If anything has been spoken which they
do not understand; or if on any particular subject they desire more full
information, let them inquire of their husbands in their own dwelling.
They may there converse freely; and their inquiries will not be attended
with the irregularity and disorder which would occur should they
interrupt the order and solemnity of public worship.

For it is a shame - It is disreputable and shameful; it is a breach of
propriety. Their station in life demands modesty, humility, and they
should be free from the ostentation of appearing so much in public as to
take part in the public services of teaching and praying. It does not
become their rank in life; it is not fulfilling the object which God
evidently intended them to fill. He has appointed people to rule; to
hold offices; to instruct and govern the church; and it is improper that
women should assume that office upon themselves. This evidently and
obviously refers to the church assembled for public worship, in the
ordinary and regular acts of devotion. There the assembly is made up of
males and females, of old and young, and there it is improper for them
to take part in conducting the exercises. But this cannot be interpreted
as meaning that it is improper for females to speak or to pray in
meetings of their own sex, assembled for prayer or for benevolence; nor
that it is improper for a female to speak or to pray in a Sunday School.
Neither of these come under the apostle's idea of a church. And in such
meetings, no rule of propriety or of the Scriptures is violated in their
speaking for the edification of each other, or in leading in social
prayer. It may be added here, that on this subject the Jews were very
strenuous, and their laws were very strict. The Rabbis taught that a
woman should know nothing but the use of the distaff, and they were
specially prohibited from asking questions in the synagogue, or even
from reading. See Lightfoot. The same rule is still observed by the Jews
in the synagogues.

[1 Corinthians 14:36](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">co1 14:36</span></span>

What! came the word of God out from you? - The meaning of this is, "Is
the church at Corinth the "mother church?" Was it first established; or
has it been alone in sending forth the Word of God? You have adopted
customs which are unusual. You have permitted women to speak in a manner
unknown to other churches; see [Co1
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#016). You have admitted irregularity
and confusion unknown in all the others. You have allowed many to speak
at the same time, and have tolerated confusion and disorder. Have you
any "right" thus to differ from others? Have you any authority, as it
were, to dictate to them, to teach them, contrary to their uniform
custom, to allow these disorders? Should you not rather be conformed to
them, and observe the rules of the churches which are older than yours?"
The "argument" here is, that the church at Corinth was "not" the first
that was established; that it was one of the "last" that had been
founded; and that it could, therefore, claim no right to differ from
others, or to prescribe to them. The same argument is employed in [Co1
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#016); see Note.

Or came it unto you only? - As you are not the first of those who
believed, neither are you the only ones. God has sent the same gospel to
others, and it is traveling over the world. Others, therefore, have the
same right as you to originate customs and special habits; and as this
would be attended with confusion and disorder, you should all follow the
same rule, and the customs which do not prevail in other churches should
not be allowed in yours.

[1 Corinthians 14:37](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">co1 14:37</span></span>

If any man think himself to be a prophet - See the note at [Co1
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001). If any man claim to be divinely
endowed. Macknight renders it, "be really a prophet." But the more
correct meaning here is, doubtless, "If any man "profess" to be a
prophet; or is "reputed" to be a prophet." Bloomfield. The proper
meaning of the word δοκέω dokeō is to seem to oneself; to be of opinion,
to suppose, believe, etc.; and the reference here is to one who should
"regard himself," or who should believe and profess to be thus endowed.

Or spiritual - Regarding himself as under the extraordinary influence of
the Spirit.

Let him acknowledge ... - He will show that he is truly under the
influence of the Holy Spirit, by acknowledging my authority, and by
yielding obedience to the commands which I utter in the name and by the
authority of the Lord. All would probably be disposed to acknowledge the
right of Paul to speak to them; all would regard him as an apostle; and
all would show that God had influenced their hearts, if they listened to
his commands, and obeyed his injunctions. I do not speak by my own
authority, or in my own name, says Paul. I speak in the name of the
Lord; and to obey the commands of the Lord is a proof of being
influenced by his Spirit. True religion everywhere, and the most ardent
and enthusiastic zeal that is prompted by true religion, will show their
genuineness and purity by a sacred and constant regard for the commands
of the Lord. And that zeal which disregards those commands, and which
tramples down the authority of the Scriptures and the peace and order of
the church, gives demonstration that it is not genuine. It is false
zeal, and, however ardent, will not ultimately do good to the cause.

[1 Corinthians 14:38](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">co1 14:38</span></span>

But if any be ignorant ... - If anyone affects to be ignorant of my
authority, or whether I have a right to command. If he affects to doubt
whether I am inspired, and whether what I utter is in accordance with
the will of God.

Let him be ignorant - At his own peril, let him remain so, and abide the
consequences. I shall not take any further trouble to debate with him. I
have stated my authority. I have delivered the commands of God. And now,
if he disregards them, and still doubts whether all this is said by
divine authority, let him abide the consequences of rejecting the law of
God. I have given full proof of my divine commission. I have nothing
more to say on that head. And now, if he chooses to remain in ignorance
or incredulity, the fault is his own, and he must answer for it to God.

[1 Corinthians 14:39](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">co1 14:39</span></span>

Covet to prophesy - See the note at [Co1
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001). This is the "summing up" of all
that he had said. It was "desirable" that a man should wish to be able
to speak, under the teaching of the Holy Spirit, in such a manner as to
edify the church.

And forbid not ... - Do not suppose that the power of speaking foreign
languages is useless, or is to be despised, or that it is to be
prohibited. "In its own place" it is a valuable endowment; and on proper
occasions the talent should be exercised; see in [Co1
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#022).

[1 Corinthians 14:40](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">co1 14:40</span></span>

Let all things be done decently and in order - Let all things be done in
an "appropriate" and "becoming" manner; "decorously," as becomes the
worship of God. Let all be done in "order, regularly;" without
confusion, discord, tumult. The word used here (κατὰ τάξιν kata taxin)
is properly a military term, and denotes the order and regularity with
which an army is drawn up. This is a general rule, which was to guide
them. It was simple, and easily applied. There might be a thousand
questions started about the modes and forms of worship, and the customs
in the churches, and much difficulty might occur in many of these
questions; but here was a simple and plain rule, which might be easily
applied. Their good sense would tell them what became the worship of
God; and their pious feelings would restrain them from excesses and
disorders. This rule is still applicable, and is safe in guiding us in
many things in regard to the worship of God. There are many things which
cannot be subjected to "rule," or exactly prescribed; there are many
things which may and must be left to pious feeling, to good sense, and
to the views of Christians themselves, about what will promote their
edification and the conversion of sinners. The rule in such questions is
plain. Let all be done "decorously," as becomes the worship of the great
and holy God; let all be without confusion, noise, and disorder.

In view of this chapter, we may remark:

\(1\) That public worship should be in a language understood by the
people; the language which they commonly employ. Nothing can be clearer
than the sentiments of Paul on this. The whole strain of the chapter is
to demonstrate this, in opposition to making use of a foreign and
unintelligible language in any part of public worship. Paul specifics in
the course of the discussion every part of public worship; "public
preaching" [Co1 14:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#002), [Co1
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#005),[Co1
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#013), [Co1
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#019); "prayer" [Co1
14:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#014); "singing" [Co1
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#015); and insists that all should be
in a language that should be understood by the people. It would almost
seem that he had anticipated the sentiments and practice of the Roman
Catholic denomination. It is remarkable that a practice should have
grown up, and have been defended, in a church professedly Christian, so
directly in opposition to the explicit meaning of the New Testament.
Perhaps there is not even in the Roman Catholic denomination, a more
striking instance of a custom or doctrine in direct contradiction to the
Bible. If anything is plain and obvious, it is that worship, in order to
be edifying, should be in a language that is understood by the people.

Nor can that service be accepable to God which is not understood by
those who offer it; which conveys no idea to their minds, and which
cannot, therefore, be the homage of the heart. Assuredly, God does not
require the offering of unmeaningful words. Yet, this has been a grand
device of the great enemy of man. It has contributed to keep the people
in ignorance and superstition; it has prevented the mass of the people
from seeing how utterly unlike the New Testament are the sentiments of
the papists; and it has, in connection with the kindred doctrine that
the Scripture should be withheld from the people, contributed to
perpetuate that dark system, and to bind the human mind in chains. Well
do the Roman Catholics know, that if the Bible were given to the people,
and public worship conducted in a language which they could understand,
the system would soon fall. It could not live in the midst of light. It
is a system which lives and thrives only in darkness.

\(2\) preaching should be simple and intelligible. There is a great deal
of preaching which might as well be in a foreign tongue as in the
language which is actually employed. It is dry, abstruse, metaphysical,
remote from the common manner of expression, and the common habits of
thought among people. It may be suited to schools of philosophy, but it
cannot be suited to the pulpit. The preaching of the Lord Jesus was
simple, and intelligible even to a child. And nothing can be a greater
error, than for the ministers of the gospel to adopt a dry and
metaphysical manner of preaching. The most successful preachers have
been those who have been most remarkable for their simplicity and
clearness. Nor is simplicity and intelligibleness of manner inconsistent
with bright thought and profound sentiments. A diamond is the most pure
of all minerals; a river may be deep, and yet its water so pure that the
bottom may be seen at a great depth; and glass in the window is most
valuable the clearer and purer it is, when it is itself least seen, and
when it gives no obstruction to the light. If the purpose is that the
glass may be itself an ornament, it may be well to stain it; if to give
light, it should be pure. A very shallow stream may be very muddy; and
because the bottom cannot be seen, it is no evidence that it is deep. So
it is with style. If the purpose is to convey thought, to enlighten and
save the soul, the style should be plain, simple, pure. If it be to
bewilder and confound, or to be admired as unintelligible, or perhaps as
profound, then an abstruse and metaphysical, or a flowery manner may be
adopted in the pulpit.

\(3\) we should learn to value "useful" talent more than that which is
splendid and showy; [Co1 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#003). The
whole scope of this chapter goes to demonstrate that we should more
highly prize and desire that talent which may be "useful" to the church,
or which may be useful in convincing unbelievers [Co1
14:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#024), than that which merely
dazzles, or excites admiration. Ministers of the gospel who preach as
they should do, engage in their work to win souls to Christ, not to
induce them to admire eloquence; they come to teach people to adore the
great and dreadful God, not to be loud in their praises of a mortal man.

\(4\) ministers of the gospel should not aim to be admired. They should
seek to be useful. Their aim should not be to excite admiration of their
acute and profound talent for reasoning; of their clear and striking
power of observation; of their graceful manner; of their glowing and
fervid eloquence; of the beauty of their words, or the eloquence of
their well-turned periods. They should seek to build up the people of
God in holy faith, and so to present truth as that it shall make a deep
impression on mankind. No work is so important, and so serious in its
nature and results, as the ministry of the gospel; and in no work on
earth should there be more seriousness, simplicity, exactness, and
correctness of statement, and invincible and unvarying adherence to
simple and unvarnished truth. Of all places, the pulpit is the last, in
which to seek to excite admiration, or where to display profound
learning, or the powers of an abstract and subtle argumentation, "for
the sake" of securing a reputation. Cowper has drawn the character of
what a minister of the gospel should be. in the wellknown and most
beautiful passage in the "Task."

Would I describe a preacher, such as Paul.

Were he on earth, would hear, approve, and own,

Paul should himself direct me. I would trace.

His master-strokes, and draw from his design.

I would express him simple, grave, sincere;

In doctrine uncorrupt; in language plain;

And plain in manner; decent, solemn, chaste,

And natural in gesture; much impress'd.

Himself, as conscious of his awful charge,

And anxious mainly that the flock he feeds.

May feel it too; affectionate in look,

And tender in address, as well becomes.

A messenger of grace to guilty men.

He stablishes the strong, restores the weak,

Reclaims the wanderer, binds the broken heart,

And, arm'd himself in panoply complete.

Of heavenly temper, furnishes with arms,

Bright as his own, and trains, by every rule.

Of holy discipline, to glorious war,

The sacramental host of God's elect.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 15](co1015)

</div>
