<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1.md)  
  [Previous](co1010)  [Next](co1012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001.md)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 11:0</span></span>

The first verse in this chapter properly belongs to the preceding, and
is the conclusion of the discussion which the apostle had been carrying
on in that and the previous chapters. It has been improperly separated
from that chapter, and in reading should be read in connection with it.
The remainder of the chapter is properly divided into two parts:

I. A discussion respecting the impropriety of a woman's praying or
prophesying with her head uncovered [Co1
11:2-16](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#002.md); and,

II\. A reproof of their irregularities in the observance of the Lord's
Supper, 1Co. 11:17-34.

I. In regard to the first. it seems probable that some of the women who,
on pretence of being inspired, had prayed or prophesied in the
Corinthian church, had cast off their veils after the manner of the
pagan priestesses. This indecent and improper custom the apostle
reproves. He observes, therefore, that the pre-eminence belongs to man
over the woman, even as pre-eminence belonged to Christ over the man;
that it was a dishonor to Christ when a man prayed or prophesied with
his head covered, and in like manner it was regarded everywhere as
dishonorable and improper for a woman to lay aside the appropriate
symbol of her sex, and the emblem of subordination, and to be uncovered
in the presence of the man [Co1
11:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003.md); that if a woman was not
veiled, if she laid aside the appropriate emblem of her sex and of her
subordinate condition, she might as well part with her hair, which all
knew would be dishonorable and improper [Co1
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#006.md); that the woman had been created
for a subordinate station, and should observe it [Co1
11:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007.md); that she should have power on
her head because of the angels ([Co1
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#010.md); and yet, lest this should
depress her, and seem to convey the idea of her utter inferiority and
unimportance, he adds, that in the plan of salvation they are in many
respects on an equality with the man, that the same plan was adapted to
both, that the same blessings are appointed for both sexes, and the same
high hopes are held out to both [Co1
11:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#011.md); and that nature on this
subject was a good instructor, and showed that it was uncomely for a
woman to pray with her head uncovered, that her hair had been given her
for an ornament and for beauty, and that, as it would be as improper for
her to remove her veil as to cut off her hair, nature itself required
that this symbol of her subordination should be laid aside in public,
[Co1 11:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#013.md).

II\. Next, as to the irregularities in the observance of the Lord's
supper, the apostle observes [Co1
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#017.md), that he could not commend them
for what he was about to say. There had been and there were
irregularities among them, which it was his duty to reprove. In [Co1
11:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#018.md), he states what those
irregularities were. He then [Co1
11:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#023.md) states the true nature and
design of the Lord's Supper, as it was very evident that they had not
understood it, but supposed it was a common feast, such as they had been
accustomed to observe in honor of idols. In [Co1
11:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#027.md), he states the consequences
of observing this ordinance in an improper manner, and the proper way of
approaching it; and in [Co1 11:30-32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030.md)
observes that their improper mode of observing it was the cause of the
punishment which many of them had experienced. He then concludes by
directing them to celebrate the Lord's Supper "together;" to eat at home
when they were hungry; and not to abuse the Lord's Supper by making it
an occasion of feasting; and assures them that the other matters of
irregularity he would set in order when be should come among them.

[1 Corinthians 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 11:1</span></span>

Be ye followers of me - Imitate my example in the matter now under
discussion. As I deny myself; as I seek to give no offence to anyone; as
I endeavor not to alarm the prejudices of others, but in all things to
seek their salvation, so do you. This verse belongs to the previous
chapter, and should not have been separated from it. It is the close of
the discussion there.

Even as I also am of Christ - I make Christ my example. He is my model
in all things; and if you follow him, and follow me as far as I follow
him, you will not err. This is the only safe example; and if we follow
this, we can never go astray.

[1 Corinthians 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 11:2</span></span>

Now I praise you, brethren - Paul always chose to commend Christians
when it could be done, and never seemed to suppose that such praise
would be injurious to them. See the note at [Co1
1:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#004.md). On this occasion he was the
more ready to praise them as far as it could be done, because there were
some things in regard to them in which he would have occasion to reprove
them.

That ye remember me in all things - That you are disposed to regard my
authority and seek my direction in all matters pertaining to the good
order of the church. There can be little doubt that they had consulted
him in their letter ([Co1 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#001).md) about
the proper manner in which a woman ought to demean herself if she was
called upon, under the influence of divine inspiration, to utter
anything in public. The question seems to have been, whether, since she
was inspired, it was proper for her to retain the marks ef her
inferiority of rank, and remain covered; or whether the fact of her
inspiration did not release her from that obligation, and make it proper
that she should lay aside her veil, and appear as public speakers did
among people. To this the apostle refers, probably, in the phrase "all
things," that even in matters of this kind, pertaining to the good order
of the church, they were disposed to regard his authority.

And keep the ordinances - Margin, "Traditions" (τὰς παραδώσεις tas
paradōseis). The word does not refer to anything that had been delivered
down from a former generation, or from former times, as the word
"tradition" now usually signifies; but it means that which had been
"delivered to them (παραδίδωμι paradidōmi); that is, by the apostles."
The apostles had "delivered" to them certain doctrines, or rules,
respecting the good order and the government of the church; and they had
in general observed them, and were disposed still to do it. For this
disposition to regard his authority, and to keep what he had enjoined,
he commends them. He proceeds to specify what would be proper in regard
to the particular subject on which they had made inquiry.

[1 Corinthians 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 11:3</span></span>

But I would have you know - "I invite your attention particularly to the
following considerations, in order to form a correct opinion on this
subject." Paul does not at once answer the inquiry, and determine what
ought to be done; but he invites their attention to a series of remarks
on the subject, which led them to draw the conclusion which he wished to
establish. The phrase here is designed to call the attention to the
subject, like that used so often in the New Testament, "he that hath
ears to hear, let him hear."

That the head ... - The word "head," in the Scriptures, is designed
often to denote "master, ruler, chief." The word ראשׁ ro'sh is often
thus used in the Old Testament; see [Num
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#003.md); [Num
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#015.md); [Deu
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#013.md), [Deu
28:44](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#044.md); [Jdg
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#018.md); [Jdg
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#008.md), [Jdg
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#011.md); [Sa1
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#017.md); [Sa2
22:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#044.md). In the New Testament the word
is used in the sense of Lord, ruler, chief, in [Eph
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022.md); [Eph
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015.md); [Eph
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#023.md); [Col
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#010.md). Here it means that Christ is the
ruler, director, or Lord of the Christian man. This truth was to be
regarded in all their feelings and arrangements, and was never to be
forgotten. Every Christian should recollect the relation in which he
stands to him, as one that is suited to produce the strictest decorum,
and a steady sense of subordination.

Of every man - Every Christian. All acknowledge Christ as their Ruler
and Master. They are subject to him; and in all proper ways recognize
their subordination to him.

And the head of the woman is the man - The sense is, she is subordinate
to him, and in all circumstances - in her demeanor, her dress, her
conversation, in public and in the family circle - should recognize her
subordination to him. The particular thing here referred to is, that if
the woman is inspired, and speaks or prays in public, she should by no
means lay aside the usual and proper symbols of her subordination. The
danger was, that those who were under the influence of inspiration would
regard themselves as freed from the necessity of recognising that, and
would lay aside the "veil," the usual and appropriate symbol of their
occupying a rank inferior to the man. This was often done in the temples
of the pagan deities by the priestesses, and it would appear also that
it had been done by Christian females in the churches.

And the head of Christ is God - Christ, as Mediator, has consented to
assume a subordinate rank, and to recognize God the Father as superior
in office. Hence, he was obedient in all things as a Son; he submitted
to the arrangement required in redemption; he always recognized his
subordinate rank as Mediator, and always regarded God as the supreme
Ruler, even in the matter of redemption. The sense is, that Christ,
throughout his entire work, regarded himself as occupying a subordinate
station to the Father; and that it was proper from his example to
recognize the propriety of rank and station everywhere.

[1 Corinthians 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 11:4</span></span>

Every man praying or prophesying - The word "prophesying" here means,
evidently, "teaching;" or publicly speaking to the people on the subject
of religion; see the note at [Act
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#017.md). See also the subject considered
more at length in the notes on 1 Cor. 14. Whether these persons who are
here said to prophesy were all inspired, or claimed to be inspired, may
admit of a question. The simple idea here is, that they spoke in the
public assemblies, and professed to be the expounders of the divine
will.

Having his head covered - With a veil, or turban, or cap, or whatever
else is worn on the head. To remove the hat, the turban, or the covering
of the head, is a mark of respect for a superior when in his presence.

Dishonoreth his head - Does dishonor to Christ as his head [Co1
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#002.md); that is, he does not, in his
presence and in his service, observe the usual and proper custom by
which a subordinate station is recognized, and which indicates respect
for a superior. In the presence of a prince or a nobleman, it would be
considered as a mark of disrespect should the head be covered. So in the
presence of Christ, in whose name he ministers, it is a mark of
disrespect if the head is covered. This illustration is drawn from the
customs of all times and countries by which respect for a superior is
indicated by removing the covering from the head. This is one reason why
a man should not cover his head in public worship. Another is given in
[Co1 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007.md). Other interpretations of
the passage may be seen in Bloomfield's Critical Digest.

[1 Corinthians 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 11:5</span></span>

But every woman that prayeth or prophesieth - In the Old Testament
prophetesses are not unfrequently mentioned. Thus, Miriam is mentioned
[Exo 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020.md); Deborah [Jdg
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#004.md); Huldah [Kg2
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#014.md); Noadiah [Neh
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#014.md). So also in the New Testament
Anna is mentioned as a prophetess; [Luk
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#036.md). That there were females in the
early Christian church who corresponded to those known among the Jews in
some measure as endowed with the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, cannot
be doubted. What was their precise office, and what was the nature of
the public services in which they were engaged, is not however known.
That they prayed is clear; and that they publicly expounded the will of
God is apparent also; see the note on [Act
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#017.md). As the presumption is, however,
that they were inspired, their example is no warrant now for females to
take part in the public services of worship, unless they also give
evidence that they are under the influence of inspiration, and the more
especially as the apostle Paul has expressly forbidden their becoming
public teachers; [Ti1 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#012.md).

If it is now pled, from this example, that women should speak and pray
in public, yet it should be just so far only as this example goes, and
it should be only when they have the qualifications that the early
"prophetesses" had in the Christian church. If there are any such; if
any are directly inspired by God, there then will be an evident
propriety that they should publicly proclaim the will, and not till
then. It may be further observed, however, that the fact that Paul here
mentions the custom of women praying or speaking publicly in the church,
does not prove that it was right or proper. His immediate object now was
not to consider whether the practice was itself right, but to condemn
the manner of its performance as a violation of all the proper rules of
modesty and of subordination. On another occasion, in this very epistle,
he fully condemns the practice in any form, and enjoins silence on the
female members of the church in public; [Co1
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034.md).

With her head uncovered - That is, with the veil removed which she
usually wore. It would seem from this that the women removed their
veils, and wore their hair disheveled, when they pretended to be under
the influence of divine inspiration. This was the case with the pagan
priestesses; and in so doing, the Christian women imitated them. On this
account, if on no other, Paul declares the impropriety of this conduct.
It was, besides, a custom among ancient females, and one that was
strictly enjoined by the traditional laws of the Jews, that a woman
should not appear in public unless she were veiled. See this proved by
Lightfoot in loco.

Dishonoureth her head - Shows a lack of proper respect to man, to her
husband, to her father, to the sex in general. The veil is a token of
modesty and of subordinaion. It is regarded among Jews, and everywhere,
as an emblem of her sense of inferiority of rank and station. It is the
customary mark of her sex, and that by which she evinces her modesty and
sense of subordination. To remove that, is to remove the appropriate
mark of such subordination, and is a public act by which she thus shows
dishonor to the man. And as it is proper that the grades and ranks of
life should be recognized in a suitable manner, so it is improper that,
even on pretence of religion, and of being engaged in the service of
God, these marks should be laid aside.

For that is even all one as if she were shaven - As if her long hair,
which nature teaches her she should wear for a veil ([Co1
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#015), margin,.md) should be cut off.
Long hair is, by the custom of the times, and of nearly all countries, a
mark of the sex, an ornament of the female, and judged to be beautiful
and comely. To remove that is to appear, in this respect, like the other
sex, and to lay aside the badge of her own. This, says Paul, all would
judge to be improper. You yourselves would not allow it. And yet to lay
aside the veil - the appropriate badge of the sex, and of her sense of
subordination - would be an act of the same kind. It would indicate the
same feeling, the same forgetfulness of the proper sense of
subordination; and if that is laid aside, all the usual indications of
modesty and subordination might be removed also. Not even under
religious pretences, therefore, are the usual marks of sex, and of
propriety of place and rank, to be laid aside. Due respect is to be
shown, in dress, and speech, and deportment, to those whom God has
placed above us; and neither in language, in attire nor in habit are we
to depart from what all judge to he proprieties of life, or from what
God has judged and ordained to be the proper indications of the regular
gradations in society.

[1 Corinthians 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 11:6</span></span>

For if the woman be not covered - If her head be not covered with a
veil.

Let her also be shorn - Let her long hair be cut off. Let her lay aside
all the usual and proper indications of her sex and rank in life. If it
is done in one respect, it may with the same propriety be done in all.

But if it be a shame ... - If custom, nature, and habit; if the common
and usual feelings and views among people would pronounce this to be a
shame, the other would be pronounced to be a shame also by the same
custom and common sense of people.

Let her be covered - With a veil. Let her wear the customary attire
indicative of modesty and a sense of subordination. Let her not lay this
aside even on any pretence of religion.

[1 Corinthians 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 11:7</span></span>

For a man indeed ought not to cover his head - That is, with a veil; or
in public worship; when he approaches God, or when in His name he
addresses his fellow man. It is not fit and proper that he should be
covered. The reason why it is not proper, the apostle immediately
states.

Forasmuch as he is the image and glory of God - The phrase "the image of
God" refers to the fact that man was made in the likeness of his Maker
[Gen 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027.md); and proves that, though
fallen, there is a sense in which he is still the image of God. It is
not because man is truly or pure, and thus resembles his Creator; but it
evidently is because he was invested by his Maker with authority and
dominion; he was superior to all other creatures; [Gen
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028.md). This is still retained; and this
the apostle evidently refers to in the passage before us, and this he
says should be recognized and regarded. If he wore a veil or turban, it
would be a mark of servitude or inferiority. It was therefore improper
that he should appear in this manner; but he should he so clad as not to
obscure or hide the great truth that he was the direct representative of
God on the earth, and had a superiority to all other creatures.

And glory of God - The word "glory" in the classic writers means:

\(1\) Opinion, sentiment, etc.;

\(2\) fame, reputation.

Here it means, as it often does, splendor, brightness, or that which
stands forth to "represent" God, or by which the glory of God is known.
Man was created first; he had dominion given him; by him, therefore, the
divine authority and wisdom first shone forth; and this fact should be
recognized in the due subordination of rank, and even in the apparel and
attire which shall be worn. The impression of his rank and superiority
should be everywhere retained.

But the woman is the glory of the man - The honor, the ornament, etc.
She was made for him; she was made after he was; she was taken from him,
and was "bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh." All her comeliness,
loveliness, and purity are therefore an expression of his honor and
dignity, since all that comeliness and loveliness were made of him and
for him. This, therefore, ought to be acknowledged by a suitable manner
of attire; and in his presence this sense of her inferiority of rank and
subordination should be acknowledged by the customary use of the veil.
She should appear with the symbol of modesty and subjection, which are
implied by the head being covered This sense is distinctly expressed in
the following verse.

[1 Corinthians 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 11:8</span></span>

For the man is not of the woman - The man was not formed from the woman.

But the woman of the man - From his side; [Gen
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#018.md), [Gen
2:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#022.md).

[1 Corinthians 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 11:9</span></span>

Neither was the man created for the woman ... - This is a simple
statement of what is expressed in Genesis. The woman was made for the
comfort and happiness of the man. Not to be a slave, but a help-meet;
not to be the minister of his pleasures, but to be his aid and comforter
in life; not to be regarded as of inferior nature and rank, but to be
his friend, to divide his sorrows, and to multiply and extend his joys;
yet still to be in a station subordinate to him. He is to be the head:
the ruler; the presider in the family circle; and she was created to aid
him in his duties, to comfort him in his afflictions, to partake with
him of his pleasures. Her rank is therefore honorable, though it is
subordinate. It is, in some respects, the more honorable because it is
subordinate and as her happiness is dependent on him, she has the higher
claim to his protection and his tender care. The whole of Paul's idea
here is, that her situation and rank as subordinate should be recognized
by her at all times, and that in his presence it was proper that she
should wear the usual symbol of modesty and subordination, the veil.

[1 Corinthians 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 11:10</span></span>

For this cause ... - There is scarcely any passage in the Scriptures
which has more exercised the ingenuity of commentators than this verse.
The various attempts which have been made to explain it may be seen in
Pool, Rosenmuller, Bloomfield, etc. After all the explanations which
have been given of it, I confess, I do not understand it. It is not
difficult to see what the connection requires us to suppose in the
explanation. The obvious interpretation would be, that a woman should
have a veil on her head because of the angels who were supposed to be
present, observing them in their public worship; and it is generally
agreed that the word "power" (ἐξουσίαν exousian) denotes a veil, or a
covering for the head. But the word power does not occur in this sense
in any classic writer. Bretschneider understands it of a veil, as being
a defense or guard to the face, lest it should be seen by others. Some
have supposed that it was the name of a female ornament that was worn on
the head, formed of braids of hair set with jewels. Most commentators
agree that it means a "veil," though some think (see Bloomfield) that it
is called power to denote the veil which was worn by married women,
which indicated the superiority of the married woman to the maiden. But
it is sufficient to say in reply to this, that the apostle is not
referring to married women in contradistinction from those who are
unmarried, but is showing that all women who prophecy or pray in public
should be veiled. There can, perhaps, be no doubt that the word "power"
has reference to a veil, or to a covering for the head; but why it is
called power I confess I do not understand; and most of the comments on
the word are, in my view, egregious trifling.

Because of the angels - Some have explained this of good angels, who
were supposed to be present in their assemblies (see Doddridge); others
refer it to evil angels; and others to messengers or spies who, it has
been supposed, were present in their public assemblies, and who would
report greatly to the disadvantage of the Christian assemblies if the
women were seen to be unveiled. I do not know what it means; and I
regard it as one of the very few pass ages in the Bible whose meaning as
yet is wholly inexplicable. The most natural interpretation seems to me
to be this: "A woman in the public assemblies, and in speaking in the
presence of people, should wear a veil - the usual symbol of modesty and
subordination - because the angels of God are witnesses of your public
worship [Heb 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#013.md), and because they
know and appreciate the propriety of subordination and order in public
assemblies."

According to this, it would mean that the simple reason would be that
the angels were witnesses of their worship; and that they were the
friends of propriety, due subordination, and order; and that they ought
to observe these in all assemblies convened for the worship of God - I
do not know that this sense has been proposed by any commentator; but it
is one which strikes me as the most obvious and natural, and consistent
with the context. The following remarks respecting the ladies of Persia
may throw some light on this subject - "The head-dress of the women is
simple; their hair is drawn behind the head, and divided into several
tresses; the beauty of this head-dress consists in the thickness and
length of these tresses, which should fall even down to the heels, in
default of which, they lengthen them with tresses of silk. The ends of
these tresses they decorate with pearls and jewels, or ornaments of gold
or silver. The head is covered, "under" the veil or kerchief "(course
chef)," only by the end of a small "bandeau," shaped into a triangle;
this "bandeau," which is of various colors, is thin and light.

The "bandalette" is embroidered by the needle, or covered with jewelry,
according to the quality of the wearer. This is, in, my opinion, the
ancient "tiara," or "diadem," of the queens of Persia. Only married
women wear it; and it is the mark by which it is known that they are
under subjection "(oc'est la la marque a laquelle on reconnoit qu' elles
sont sous puissance o - power)." The girls have little "caps," instead
of this kerchief or tiara; they wear no veil at home, but let two
tresses of their hair fall under their cheeks. The caps of girls of
superior rank are tied with a row of pearls. Girls are not shut up in
Persia till they attain the age of six or seven years; before that age
they go out of the seraglio, sometimes with their father, so that they
may then be seen. I have seen some wonderfully pretty girls. They show
the neck and bosom; and more beautiful cannot be seen" - Chardin. "The
wearing of a veil by a married woman was a token of her being under
power. The Hebrew name of the veil signifies dependence. Great
importance was attached to this part of the dress in the East. All the
women of Persia are pleasantly apparelled. When they are abroad in the
streets, all, both rich and poor, are covered with a great veil, or
sheet of very fine white cloth, of which one half, like a forehead
cloth, comes down to the eyes, and, going over the head, reaches down to
the heels; and the other half muffles up the face below the eyes, and
being fastened with a pin to the left side of the head, falls down to
their very shoes, even covering their hands, with which they hold that
cloth by the two sides, so that, except the eyes, they are covered all
over with it. Within doors they have their faces and breasts uncovered;
but the Armenian women in their houses have always one half of their
faces covered with a cloth, that goes athwart their noses, and hangs
over their chin and breasts, except the maids of that nation, who,
within doors, cover only the chin until they are married" - Thevenot.

[1 Corinthians 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 11:11</span></span>

Nevertheless - Lest the man should assume to himself too much
superiority, and lest he should regard the woman as made solely for his
pleasure, and should treat her as in all respects inferior, and withhold
the respect that is due to her. The design of this verse and the
following is to show, that the man and woman are united in the most
tender interests; that the one cannot live comfortably without the
other; that one is necessary to the happiness of the other; and that
though the woman was formed from the man, yet it is also to be
remembered that the man is descended from the woman. She should
therefore be treated with proper respect, tenderness, and regard.

Neither is the man without the woman ... - The man and the woman were
formed for union and society. They are not in any respect independent of
each other. One is necessary to the comfort of the other; and this fact
should be recognized in all their contact.

In the Lord - By the arrangements or direction of the Lord. It is the
appointment and command of the Lord that they should be mutual helps,
and should each regard and promote the welfare of the other.

[1 Corinthians 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 11:12</span></span>

As the woman is of the man - In the original creation, she was formed
from the man.

So is the man also by the woman - Is born of the woman, or descended
from her. The sexes are dependent on each other, and should therefore
cultivate an indissoluble union.

But all things of God - All things were created and arranged by him.
This expression seems designed to suppress any spirit of complaint or
dissatisfaction with this arrangement; to make the woman contented in
her subordinate station, and to make the man humble by the consideration
that it is all owing to the appointment of God. The woman should
therefore be contented, and the man should not assume any improper
superiority, since the whole arrangement and appointment is of God.

[1 Corinthians 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 11:13</span></span>

Judge in yourselves - Or, "Judge among yourselves." I appeal to you. I
appeal to your natural sense of what is proper and right. Paul had used
various arguments to show them the impropriety of their females speaking
unveiled in public. He now appeals to their natural sense of what was
decent and right, according to established and acknowledged customs and
habits.

Is it comely ... - Is it decent, or becoming? The Grecian women, except
their priestesses, were accustomed to appear in public with a veil -
Doddridge. Paul alludes to that established and proper habit, and asks
whether it does not accord with their own views of propriety that women
in Christian assemblies should also wear the same symbol of modesty.

[1 Corinthians 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 11:14</span></span>

Doth not even nature itself - The word nature (φύσις phusis) denotes
evidently that sense of propriety which all men have, and which is
expressed in any prevailing or universal custom. That which is universal
we say is according to nature. It is such as is demanded by the natural
sense of fitness among people. Thus, we may say that nature demands that
the sexes should wear different kinds of dress; that nature demands that
the female should be modest and retiring; that nature demands that the
toils of the chase, of the field, of war - the duties of office, of
government and of professional life, should be discharged by people.
Such are in general the customs the world over; and if any reason is
asked for numerous habits that exist in society, no better answer can be
given than that nature, as arranged by God, has demanded it. The word in
this place, therefore, does not mean the constitution of the sexes, as
Locke, Whitby, and Pierce maintain; nor reason and experience, as
Macknight supposes; nor simple use and custom, as Grotius, Rosenmuller,
and most recent expositors suppose; but it refers to a deep internal
sense of what is proper and right; a sense which is expressed
extensively in all nations. showing what that sense is.

No reason can be given, in the nature of things, why the woman should
wear long hair and the man not; but the custom prevails extensively
everywhere, and nature, in all nations, has prompted to the same course.
"Use is second nature;" but the usage in this case is not arbitrary, but
is founded in an anterior universal sense of what is proper and right. A
few, and only a few, have regarded it as comely for a man to wear his
hair long. Aristotle tells us, indeed (Rhet. 1: - see Rosenmuller), that
among the Lacedemonians, freemen wore their hair long. In the time of
Homer, also, the Greeks were called by him καρηκομόωντες Ἀχαῖοι
karēkomoōntes Achaioi, long-haired Greeks; and some of the Asiatic
nations adopted the same custom. But the general habit among people has
been different. Among the Hebrews, it was regarded as disgraceful to a
man to wear his hair long, except he had a vow as a Nazarite, [Num
6:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#001.md); [Jdg
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#005.md); [Jdg
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#017.md); [Sa1
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#011.md). Occasionally, for affectation or
singularity, the hair was suffered to grow, as was the case with Absalom
[Sa2 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#026.md); but the traditional law of
the Jews on the subject was strict. The same rule existed among the
Greeks; and it was regarded as disgraceful to wear long hair in the time
of Aelian; Hist. lib. 9:c. 14. Eustath. on Hom. 2:v.

It is a shame unto him? - It is improper and disgraceful. It is doing
that which almost universal custom has said appropriately belongs to the
female sex.

[1 Corinthians 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 11:15</span></span>

It is a glory unto her - It is an ornament, and adorning. The same
instinctive promptings of nature which make it proper for a man to wear
short hair, make it proper that the woman should suffer hers to grow
long.

For a covering - Margin, "veil." It is given to her as a sort of natural
veil, and to indicate the propriety of her wearing a veil. It answered
the purposes of a veil when it was allowed to grow long, and to spread
over the shoulders and ever parts of the face, before the arts of dress
were invented or needed. There may also be an allusion here to the fact
that the hair of women naturally grows longer than that of men. See
Rosenmuller. The value which eastern females put on their long hair may
be learned from the fact that when Ptolemy Euergetes, king of Egypt, was
about to march against Seleucus Callinicus, his queen Berenice vowed, as
the most precious sacrifice which she could make, to cut off and
consecrate her hair if he returned in safety. "The eastern ladies," says
Harmer, "are remarkable for the length and the great number of the
tresses of their hair. The men there, on the contrary, wear very little
hair on their heads." Lady M. W. Montague thus speaks concerning the
hair of the women:" Their hair hangs at full length behind, divided into
tresses, braided with pearl or riband, which is always in great
quantity. I never saw in my life so many fine heads of hair. In one
lady's I have counted one hundred and ten of these tresses, all natural;
but it must be owned that every kind of beauty is more common here than
with us." The men there, on the contrary, shave all the hair off their
heads, excepting one lock; and those that wear hair are thought
effeminate. Both these particulars are mentioned by Chardin, who says
they are agreeable to the custom of the East: "the men are shaved; the
women nourish their hair with great fondness, which they lengthen, by
tresses and tufts of silk, down to the heels. The young men who wear
their hair in the East are looked upon as effeminate and infamous."

[1 Corinthians 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 11:16</span></span>

But if any man seem to be contentious - The sense of this passage is
probably this: "If any man, any teacher, or others, "is disposed" to be
strenuous about this, or to make it a matter of difficulty; if he is
disposed to call in question my reasoning, and to dispute my premises
and the considerations which I have advanced, and to maintain still that
it is proper for women to appear unveiled in public, I would add that in
Judea we have no such custom, neither does it prevail among any of the
churches. This, therefore, would be a sufficient reason why it should
not be done in Corinth, even if the abstract reasoning should not
convince them of the impropriety. It would be singular; would be
contrary to the usual custom; would offend the prejudices of many and
should, therefore, be avoided."

We have no such custom - We the apostles in the churches which we have
elsewhere founded; or we have no such custom in Judea. The sense is,
that it is contrary to custom there for women to appear in public
unveiled. This custom, the apostle argues, ought to be allowed to have
some influence on the church of Corinth, even though they should not be
convinced by his reasoning.

Neither the churches of God - The churches elsewhere. It is customary
there for the woman to appear veiled. If at Corinth this custom is not
observed, it will be a departure from what has elsewhere been regarded
as proper; and will offend these churches. Even, therefore, if the
reasoning is not sufficient to silence all cavils and doubts, yet the
propriety of uniformity in the habits of the churches, the fear of
giving offence should lead you to discountenance and disapprove the
custom of your females appearing in public without their veil.

[1 Corinthians 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 11:17</span></span>

Now in this that I declare - In this that I am about to state to you; to
wit, your conduct in regard to the Lord's Supper. Why this subject is
introduced here is not very apparent. The connection may be this. In the
subjects immediately preceding he had seen much to commend, and he was
desirous of commending them as far as it could be done. In [Co1
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#002.md) of this chapter he commends them
in general for their regard to the ordinances which he had appointed
when he was with them. But while he thus commended them, he takes
occasion to observe that there was one subject on which he could not
employ the language of approval or praise. Of their irregularities in
regard to the Lord's supper he had probably heard by rumor, and as the
subject was of great importance, and their irregularities gross and
deplorable, he takes occasion to state to them again more fully the
nature of that ordinance, and to reprove them for the manner in which
they had celebrated it.

That ye come together - You assemble for public worship.

Not for the better, but for the worse - Your meetings, and your
observance of the ordinances of the gospel, do not promote your
edification, your piety, spirituality, and harmony; but tend to
division, alienation, and disorder. You should assemble to worship God,
and promote harmony, love, and piety; the actual effect of your
assembling is just the reverse. In what way this was done he states in
the following verses. These evil consequences were chiefly two, first,
divisions and contentions; and, secondly, the abuse and profanation of
the Lord's Supper.

[1 Corinthians 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 11:18</span></span>

For first of all - That is, I mention as the first thing to be reproved.

When ye come together in the church - When you come together in a
religious assembly; when you convene for public worship. The word
"church" here does not mean, as it frequently does with us, a
"building." No instance of such a use of the word occurs in the New
Testament; but it means when they came together as a Christian assembly;
when they convened for the worship of God. These divisions took place
then; and from some cause which it seems then operated to produce
alienations and strifes.

I hear - I have learned through some members of the family of Chloe;
[Co1 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#011.md).

That there be divisions among you - Greek, as in the margin, Schisms.
The word properly means a rent, such as is made in cloth [Mat
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#016.md); [Mar
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#021.md), and then a division, a split, a
faction among people; [Joh 7:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#043.md); [Joh
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#010.md); [Joh
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#019.md). It does not mean here that they
had proceeded so far as to form separate churches, but that there was
discord and division in the church itself; see the notes on [Co1
1:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010.md).

And I partly believe it - I credit a part of the reports; I have reason
to think, that, though the evil may have been exaggerated, yet that it
is true at least in part. I believe that there are dissensions in the
church that should be reproved.

[1 Corinthians 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 11:19</span></span>

For there must be - It is necessary (δεῖ dei); it is to he expected;
there are reasons why there should be. What these reasons are he states
in the close of the verse; compare [Mat
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#007.md); [Pe2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001.md); [Pe2
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#002.md). The meaning is, not that
divisions are inseparable from the nature of the Christian religion, not
that it is the design and wish of the Author of Christianity that they
should exist, and not that they are physically impossible, for then they
could not be the subject of blame; but that such is human nature, such
are the corrupt passions of men, the propensity to ambition and strifes,
that they are to be expected, and they serve the purpose of showing who
are, and who are not, the true friends of God.

Heresies - Margin, "Sects." Greek Αἱρεσεις Haireseis see the note at
[Act 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#014.md). The words "heresy" and
"heresies" occur only in these places, and in [Gal
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#020.md); [Pe2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001.md). The Greek word occurs also in
[Act 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#017) (translated "sect".md); [Act
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#005.md); [Act
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#005.md); [Act
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#005.md); [Act
28:22](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#022.md), in all which places it denotes,
and is translated, "sect." We now attach to the word usually the idea of
a fundamental error in religion, or some "doctrine" the holding of which
will exclude from salvation. But there is no evidence that the word is
used in this signification in the New Testament. The only place where it
can be supposed to be so used, unless this is one, is in [Gal
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#020.md), where, however, the word
"contentions" or "divisions," would be quite as much in accordance with
the connection. That the word here does not denote error in doctrine,
but schism, division, or "sects," as it is translated in the margin, is
evident from two considerations:

\(1\) It is the proper philological meaning of the word, and its
established and common signification in the Bible.

\(2\) it is the sense which the connection here demands. The apostle had
made no reference to error of doctrine, but is discoursing solely of
"irregularity" in "conduct;" and the first thing which he mentions, is,
that there were schisms, divisions, strifes. The idea that the word here
refers to "doctrines" would by no means suit the connection, and would
indeed make nonsense. It would then read, "I hear that there are
divisions or parties among you, and this I cannot commend you for. For
it must he expected that there would be "fundamental errors of doctrine"
in the church." But Paul did not reason in this manner. The sense is,
"There are divisions among you. It is to be expected: there are causes
for it; and it cannot he avoided that there should be, in the present
state of human nature, divisions and sects formed in the church; and
this is to be expected in order that those who are true Christians
should be separated from those who are not." The foundation of this
necessity is not in the Christian religion itself, for that is pure, and
contemplates and requires union; but the existence of sects, and
denominations, and contentious may be traced to the following causes:

\(1\) The love of power and popularity. Religion may be made the means
of power; and they who have the control of the consciences of people,
and of their religious feelings and opinions, can control them
altogether.

\(2\) showing more respect to a religious teacher than to Christ; see
Notes on [Co1 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012.md).

\(3\) the multiplication of tests, and the enlargement of creeds and
confessions of faith. The consequence is, that every new doctrine that
is incorporated into a creed gives occasion for those to separate who
cannot accord with it.

\(4\) the passions of people - their pride, and ambition, and bigotry,
and unenlightened zeal. Christ evidently meant that his church should be
one; and that all who were his true followers should be admitted to her
communion, and acknowledged everywhere as his own friends. And the time
may yet come when this union shall be restored to his long distracted
church, and that while there may be an honest difference of opinion
maintained and allowed, still the bonds of Christian love shall secure
union of "heart" in all who love the Lord Jesus, and union of "effort"
in the grand enterprise in which all can unite - that of making war upon
sin, and securing the conversion of the whole world to God.

That they which are approved - That they who are approved of God, or who
are his true friends, and who are disposed to abide by his laws.

May be made manifest - May be known; recognized; seen. The effect of
divisions and separations would be to show who were the friends of
order, and peace, and truth. It seems to have been assumed by Paul, that
they who made divisions could not be regarded as the friends of order
and truth; or that their course could not be approved by God. The effect
of these divisions would be to show who they were. So in all divisions,
and all splitting into factions, where the great truths of Christianity
are held, and where the corruption of the mass does not require
separation, such divisions show who are the restless, ambitious, and
dissatisfied spirits; who they are that are indisposed to follow the
things that make for peace, and the laws of Christ enjoining union; and
who they are who are gentle and peaceful, and disposed to pursue the way
of truth, and love, and order, without contentions and strifes. This is
the effect of schisms in the church; and the whole strain of the
argument of Paul is to reprove and condemn such schisms, and to hold up
the authors of them to reproof and condemnation; see [Rom
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#017.md), "Mark them which cause
divisions, and avoid them."

[1 Corinthians 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 11:20</span></span>

When ye come together therefore ... - When you are assembled as a
church, compare [Heb 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#025.md), and see
the note on [Act 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001.md). Christians were
constantly in the habit of assembling for public worship. It is probable
that at this early period all the Christians in Corinth were accustomed
to meet in the same place. The apostle here particularly refers to their
"assembling" to observe the ordinance of the Lord's Supper. At that
early period it is probable that this was done on every Lord's Day.

This is not ... - Margin, "Ye cannot eat." The meaning of this
expression seems to be this. "Though you come together professedly to
worship God, and to partake of the Lord's Supper, yet this cannot be the
real design which you have in view. It cannot be that such practices as
are allowed among you can be a part of the celebration of that supper,
or consistent with it. Your greediness [Co1
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#021.md); your intemperance [Co1
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#021.md); your partaking of the food
separately and not in common, cannot be a celebration of the Lord's
Supper. Whatever, therefore, you may profess to be engaged in, yet
really and truly you are not celebrating the Lord's Supper."

The Lord's supper - That which the Lord Jesus instituted to commemorate
his death. It is called "the Lord's," because it is his appointment, and
is in honor of him; it is called "supper" (δεῖπνον deipnon), because the
word denotes the evening repast; it was instituted in the evening; and
it is evidently most proper that it should be observed in the after part
of the day. With most churches the time is improperly changed to the
morning - a custom which has no sanction in the New Testament; and which
is a departure from the very idea of a supper.

[1 Corinthians 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 11:21</span></span>

For in eating - When you eat, having professedly come together to
observe this ordinance. In order to understand this, it seems necessary
to suppose that they had in some way made the Lord's supper either
connected with a common feast, or that they regarded it as a mere common
festival to be observed in a way similar to the festivals among the
Greeks. Many have supposed that this was done by making the observance
of the supper follow a festival, or what were afterward called "love
feasts" ἀγάπαι agapai - "Agapae"). Many have supposed that that custom
was derived from the fact that the Saviour instituted the supper after a
festival, a feast in which he had been engaged with his disciples, and
that thence the early Christians derived the custom of observing such a
festival, or common meal, before they celebrated the Lord's Supper. But
it may be observed, that the passover was not a mere preliminary
festival, or feast.

It had no resemblance to the so called love feasts. It was itself a
religious ordinance; a direct appointment of God; and was never regarded
as designed to be preliminary to the observance of the Lord's Supper,
but was always understood as designed to be superseded by that. Besides,
I know not that there is the slightest evidence, as has been often
supposed, that the observance of the Lord's Supper was preceded, in the
times of the apostles, by such a festival as a love feast. There is no
evidence in the passage before us; nor is any adduced from any other
part of the New Testament. To my mind it seems altogether improbable
that the disorders in Corinth would assume this form - that they would
first observe a common feast, and then the Lord's Supper in the regular
manner. The statement before us leads to the belief that all was
irregular and improper; that they had entirely mistaken the nature of
the ordinance, and had converted it into an occasion of ordinary
festivity, and even intemperance; that they had come to regard it as a
feast in honor of the Saviour on some such principles as they observed
feasts in honor of idols, and that they observed it in some such manner;
and that all that was supposed to make it unlike those festivals was,
that it was in honor of Jesus rather than an idol, and was to be
observed with some reference to his authority and name.

Everyone taketh before other his own supper - That is, each one is
regardless of the needs of the others; instead of making even a meal in
common, and when all could partake together, each one ate by himself,
and ate that which he had himself brought. They had not only erred,
therefore, by misunderstanding altogether the nature of the Lord's
supper, and by supposing that it was a common festival like those which
they had been accustomed to celebrate; but they had also entirely
departed from the idea that it was a festival to be partaken of in
common, and at a common table. It had become a scene where every man ate
by himself; and where the very idea that there was anything like a
"common" celebration, or a celebration "together," was abandoned. There
is allusion here, doubtless, to what was a custom among the Greeks, that
when a festival was celebrated, or a feast made, it was common for each
person to provide, and carry a part of the things necessary for the
entertainment. These were usually placed in common, and were partaken of
alike by all the company. Thus, Xenophon (Mem. lib. 3:cap. xiv.) says of
Socrates, that he was much offended with the Athenians for their conduct
at their common suppers, where some prepared for themselves in a
delicate and sumptuous manner, while others were poorly provided for.
Socrates endeavored, he adds, to shame them out of this indecent custom
by offering his provisions to all the company.

And one is hungry - Is deprived of food. It is all monopolized by
others.

And another is drunken - The word used here (μεθύω methuō) means
properly to become inebriated, or intoxicated; and there is no reason
for understanding it here in any other sense. There can be no doubt that
the apostle meant to say, that they ate and drank to excess; and that
their professed celebration of the Lord's Supper became a mere revel. It
may seem remarkable that such scenes should ever have occurred in a
Christian church, or that there could have been such an entire
perversion of the nature and design of the Lord's Supper. But we are to
remember the following things:

\(1\) These persons had recently been pagans, and were grossly ignorant
of the nature of true religion when the gospel was first preached among
them.

\(2\) they had been accustomed to such revels in honor of idols under
their former modes of worship, and it is the less surprising that they
transferred their views to Christianity.

\(3\) when they had once so far misunderstood the nature of Christianity
as to suppose the Lord's Supper to be like the feasts which they had
formerly celebrated, all the rest followed as a matter of course. The
festival would be observed in the same manner as the festivals in honor
of idolaters; and similar scenes of gluttony and intemperance would
naturally follow.

\(4\) we are to bear in mind, also, that they do not seem to have been
favored with pious, wise, and prudent teachers.

There were false teachers; and there were those who prided themselves on
their wisdom, and who were self-confident, and who doubtless endeavored
to model the Christian institutions according to their own views; and
they thus brought them, as far as they could, to a conformity with pagan
customs and idolatrous rites, We may remark here:

\(1\) We are not to expect perfection at once among a people recently
converted from paganism.

\(2\) we see how prone people are to abuse even the most holy rites of
religion, and hence, how corrupt is human nature.

\(3\) we see that even Christians, recently converted, need constant
guidance and superintendence; and that if left to themselves they soon,
like others, fall into gross and scandalous offences.

[1 Corinthians 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 11:22</span></span>

What! - This whole verse is designed to convey the language of severe
rebuke for their having so grossly perverted the design of the Lord's
Supper.

Have ye not houses ... - Do you not know that the church of God is not
designed to be a place of feasting and revelry; nor even a place where
to partake of your ordinary meals? Can it be, that you will come to the
places of public worship, and make them the scenes of feasting and riot?
Even on the supposition that there had been no disorder; no revelry; no
intemperance; yet on every account it was grossly irregular and
disorderly to make the place of public worship a place for a festival
entertainment.

Or despise ye the church of God - The phrase "church of God" Grotius
understands of the place. But the word church (ἐκκλησία ekklēsia) is
believed not to be used in that sense in the New Testament; and it is
not necessary to suppose it here. The sense is, that their conduct was
such as if they had held in contempt the whole church of God, in all
places, with all their views of the sacredness and purity of the Lord's
supper.

And shame them that have not - Margin, "Are poor." Something must here
be understood in order to make out the sense. Probably it meant
something like "possessions, property, conveniences, accomodations." The
connection would make it most natural to understand "houses to eat and
drink in;" and the sense then would be, "Do you thus expose to public
shame those who have no accommodations at home; who are destitute and
poor? You thus reflect publicly upon their poverty and want, while you
bring your own provisions and fare sumptuously, and while those who are
thus unable to provide for themselves are thus seen to be poor and
needy." It is hard enough, the idea is, to be poor, and to be destitute
of a home. But it greatly aggravates the matter to be "publicly treated"
in that manner; to be exposed publicly to the contempt which such a
situation implies. Their treatment of the poor in this manner would be a
public exposing them to shame; and the apostle regarded this as
particularly dishonorable, and especially in a Christian church, where
all were professedly on an equality.

What shall I say to you? ... - How shall I sufficiently express my
surprise at this, and my disapprobation at this course? It cannot be
possible that this is right. It is not possible to conceal surprise and
amazement that this custom exists, and is tolerated in a Christian
church.

[1 Corinthians 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 11:23</span></span>

For ... - In order most effectually to check the evils which existed,
and to bring them to a proper mode of observing the Lord's Supper, the
apostle proceeds to state distinctly and particularly its design. They
had mistaken its nature. They supposed it might be a common festival.
They had made it the occasion of great disorder. He therefore adverts to
the solemn circumstances in which it was instituted; the particular
object which it had in view - the commemoration of the death of the
Redeemer, and the purpose which it was designed to subserve, which was
not that of a festival, but to keep before the church and the world a
constant remembrance of the Lord Jesus until he should again return,
[Co1 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#026.md). By this means the apostle
evidently hoped to recall them from their irregularities, and to bring
them to a just mode of celebrating this holy ordinance. He did not,
therefore, denounce them even for their irregularity and gross disorder;
he did not use harsh, violent, vituperative language, but he expected to
reform the evil by a mild and tender statement of the truth, and by an
appeal to their consciences as the followers of the Lord Jesus.

I have received of the Lord - This cannot refer to tradition, or mean
that it had been communicated to him through the medium of the other
apostles; but the whole spirit and scope of the passage seems to mean
that he had derived the knowledge of the institution of the Lord's
supper "directly" from the Lord himself. This might have been when on
the road to Damascus, though that does not seem probable, or it may have
been among the numerous revelations which at various times had been made
to him; compare [Co2 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007.md). The reason
why he here says that he had received it directly from the Lord is,
doubtless, that he might show them that it was of divine authority. "The
institution to which I refer is what I myself received an account of
"from personal and direct communication with the Lord Jesus himself, who
appointed it." It is not, therefore, of human authority. It is not of my
devising, but is of divine warrant, and is holy in its nature, and is to
be observed in the exact manner prescribed by the Lord himself."

That which also I delivered ... - Paul founded the church at Corinth;
and of course he first instituted the observance of the Lord's Supper
there.

The same night in which he was betrayed - By Judas; see [Mat
26:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#023.md), [Mat
26:48-50](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#048.md). Paul seems to have mentioned
the fact that it was on the very night on which he was betrayed, in
order to throw around it the idea of greater solemnity. He wished
evidently to bring before their minds the deeply affecting circumstances
of his death; and thus to show them the utter impropriety of their
celebrating the ordinance with riot and disorder, The idea is, that in
order to celebrate it in a proper manner, it was needful "to throw
themselves as much as possible into the very circumstances in which it
was instituted;" and one of these circumstances most suited to affect
the mind deeply was the fact that he was betrayed by a professed friend
and follower. It is also a circumstance the memory of which is eminently
suited to prepare the mind for a proper celebration of the ordinance
now.

Took bread - Evidently the bread which was used at the celebration of
the paschal supper. He took the bread which happened to be before him -
such as was commonly used. It was not a "wafer" such as the papists now
use; but was the ordinary bread which was eaten on such occasions; see
the note on [Mat 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026.md).

[1 Corinthians 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co1 11:24</span></span>

And when he had given thanks - See the note on [Mat
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026.md). Matthew reads it, "and blessed
it." The words used here are, however, substantially the same as there;
and this fact shows that since this was communicated to Paul "directly"
by the Saviour, and in a manner distinct from that by which Matthew
learned the mode of the institution, the Saviour designed that the exact
form of the words should be used in its observance, and should thus be
constantly borne in mind by his people.

Take eat ... - See the note on [Mat
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026.md).

[1 Corinthians 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">co1 11:25</span></span>

After the same manner - In like manner; likewise. With the same
circumstances, and ceremonies, and designs. The purpose was the same.

When he had supped - That is, all this occurred after the observance of
the usual paschal supper. It could not, therefore, be a part of it, nor
could it have been designed to be a festival or feast merely. The
apostle introduces this evidently in order to show them that it could
not be, as they seemed to have supposed, an occasion of feasting. It was
after the supper, and was therefore to be observed in a distinct manner.

Saying, This cup ... - See the note at [Mat
26:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#027.md).

Is the New Testament - The new covenant which God is about to establish
with people. The word "testament" with us properly denotes a "will" - an
instrument by which a man disposes of his property after his death. This
is also the proper classic meaning of the Greek word used here, διαθήκη
(diathēkē). But this is evidently not the sense in which the word is
designed to be used in the New Testament. The idea of a "will" or
"testament," strictly so called, is not that which the sacred writers
intend to convey by the word. The idea is evidently that of a compact,
agreement, covenant, to which there is so frequent reference in the Old
Testament, and which is expressed by the word בּרית berı̂yth (Berith), a
compact, a covenant, Of that word the proper translation in Greek would
have been συνθηκη sunthēkē a covenant, agreement. But it is remarkable
that that word never is used by the Septuagint to denote the covenant
made between God and man.

That translation uniformly employs for this purpose the word διαθήκη
diathēkē, a will, or a testament, as a translation of the Hebrew word,
where there is a reference to the covenant which God is represented as
making with people. The word συνθηκη sunthēkē is used by them but three
times [Isa 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015.md); [Isa
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001.md); [Dan
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#006.md), and in neither instance with any
reference to the covenant which God is represented as making with man.
The word διαθήκη diathēkē, as the translation of בּרית berı̂yth (Berith),
occurs more than two hundred times. (See Trommius' Concord.) Now this
must have evidently been of design. What the reason was which induced
them to adopt this can only be conjectured. It may have been that as the
translation was to be seen by the Gentiles as well as by the Jews (if it
were not expressly made, as has been affirmed by Josephus and others,
for the use of Ptolemy), they were unwilling to represent the eternal
and infinite Yahweh as entering into a "compact, an agreement" with his
creature man. They, therefore, adopted a word which would represent him
as expressing "his will" to them in a book of revelation. The version by
the Septuagint was evidently in use by the apostles, and by the Jews
everywhere. The writers of the New Testament, therefore, adopted the
word as they found it; and spoke of the new dispensation as a new
"testament" which God made with man. The meaning is, that this was the
new compact or covenant which God was to make with man in
contradistinction from that made through Moses.

In my blood - Through my blood; that is, this new compact is to be
sealed with my blood, in illusion to the ancient custom of sealing an
agreement by a sacrifice; see the note at [Mat
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028.md).

This do ye - Partake of this bread and wine; that is, celebrate this
ordinance.

As oft as ye drink it - Not prescribing any time; and not even
specifying the frequency with which it was to be done; but leaving it to
themselves to determine how often they would partake of it. The time of
the Passover had been fixed by positive statute; the more mild and
gentle system of Christianity left it to the followers of the Redeemer
themselves to determine how often they would celebrate his death. It was
commanded them to do it; it was presumed that their love to him would be
so strong as to secure a frequent observance; it was permitted to them,
as in prayer, to celebrate it on any occasion of affliction, trial, or
deep interest when they would feel their need of it, and when they would
suppose that its observance would be for the edification of the Church.

In remembrance of me - This expresses the whole design of the ordinance.
It is a simple memorial, or remembrancer; designed to recall in a
striking and impressive manner the memory of the Redeemer. It does this
by a tender appeal to the senses - by the exhibition of the broken
bread, and by the wine. The Saviour knew how prone people would be to
forget him, and he, therefore, appointed this ordinance as a means by
which his memory should be kept up in the world. The ordinance is
rightly observed when it recalls the memory of the Saviour; and when its
observance is the means of producing a deep, and lively, and vivid
impression on the mind, of his death for sin. This expression, at the
institution of the supper, is used by Luke [Luk
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#019.md); though it does not occur in
Matthew, Mark, or John.

[1 Corinthians 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">co1 11:26</span></span>

For as often - Whenever you do this.

Ye eat this bread - This is a direct and positive refutation of the
doctrine of the papists that the bread is changed into the real body of
the Lord Jesus. Here it is expressly called "bread" - bread still -
bread after the consecration. Before the Saviour instituted the
ordinance he took "bread" - it was bread then: it was "bread" which he
"blessed" and "broke;" and it was bread when it was given to them; and
it was bread when Paul says here that they ate. How then can it be
pretended that it is anything else but bread? And what an amazing and
astonishing absurdity it is to believe that that bread is changed into
the flesh and blood of Jesus Christ (transubstantiation or
consubstantiation)!

Ye do show the Lord's death - You set forth, or exhibit in an impressive
manner, the fact that he was put to death; you exhibit the emblems of
his broken body and shed blood, and your belief of the fact that he
died. This shows that the ordinance was to be so far public as to be a
proper showing forth of their belief in the death of the Saviour. It
should be public. It is one mode of professing attachment to the
Redeemer; and its public observance often has a most impressive effect
on those who witness its observance.

Till he come - Until he returns to judge the world. This demonstrates:

\(1\) That it was the steady belief of the primitive church that the
Lord Jesus would return to judge the world; and,

\(2\) That it was designed that this ordinance should be perpetuated,
and observed to the end of time. In every generation, therefore, and in
every place where there are Christians, it is to be observed, until the
Son of God shall return; and the necessity of its observance shall cease
only when the whole body of the redeemed shall be permitted to see their
Lord, and there shall be no need of those emblems to remind them of him,
for all shall see him as he is.

[1 Corinthians 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">co1 11:27</span></span>

Wherefore - (ὥστε hōste). So that, or it follows from what has been
said. If this be the origin and intention of the Lord's Supper, then it
follows that whoever partakes of it in an improper manner is guilty of
his body and blood. The design of Paul is to correct their improper mode
of observing this ordinance; and having showed them the true nature and
design of the institution, he now states the consequences of partaking
of it in an improper manner.

Shall eat this bread - See [Co1 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#026.md).
Paul still calls it bread, and shows thus that he was a stranger to the
doctrine that the bread was changed into the very body of the Lord
Jesus. If the papal doctrine of transubstantiation had been true, Paul
could not have called it bread. The Romanists do not believe that it is
bread, nor would they call it such; and this shows how needful it is for
them to keep the Scriptures from the people, and how impossible to
express their dogmas in the language of the Bible. Let Christians adhere
to the simple language of the Bible, and there is no danger of their
falling into the errors of the papists.

Unworthily - Perhaps there is no expression in the Bible that has given
more trouble to weak and feeble Christians than this. It is certain that
there is no one that has operated to deter so many from the communion;
or that is so often made use of as an excuse for not making a profession
of religion. The excuse is, "I am unworthy to partake of this holy
ordinance. I shall only expose myself to condemnation. I must therefore
wait until I become more worthy, and better prepared to celebrate it."
It is important, therefore, that there should he a correct understanding
of this passage. Most persons interpret it as if it were "unworthy," and
not "unworthily," and seem to suppose that it refers to their personal
qualifications, to their "unfitness" to partake of it, rather than to
the manner in which it is done. It is to he remembered, therefore. that
the word used here is an "adverb," and not an "adjective," and has
reference to the manner of observing the ordinance, and not to their
personal qualifications or fitness. It is true that in ourselves we are
all "unworthy" of an approach to the table of the Lord; "unworthy" to be
regarded as his followers; "unworthy" of a title to everlasting life:
but it does not follow that we may not partake of this ordinance in a
worthy, that is, a proper manner, with a deep sense of our sinfulness,
our need of a Saviour, and with some just views of the Lord Jesus as our
Redeemer. Whatever may be our consciousness of personal unworthiness and
unfitness - and that consciousness cannot be too deep - yet we may have
such love to Christ, and such a desire to be saved by him, and such a
sense of his worthiness, as to make it proper for us to approach and
partake of this ordinance. The term "unworthily" (ἀναξίως anaxiōs) means
properly "in an unworthy or improper" manner "in a manner unsuitable to
the purposes for which it was designed or instituted;" and may include
the following things, namely:

\(1\) Such an irregular and indecent observance as existed in the church
of Corinth, where even gluttony and intemperance prevailed under the
professed design of celebrating the Lord's Supper.

\(2\) an observance of the ordinance where there should be no
distinction between it and common meals (Note on [Co1
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029).md); where they did not regard it
as designed to show forth the death of the Lord Jesus. It is evident
that where such views prevailed, there could be no proper qualification
for this observance; and it is equally clear that such ignorance can
hardly be supposed to prevail now in those lands which are illuminated
by Christian truth.

\(3\) when it is done for the sake of mockery, and when the purpose is
to deride religion, and to show a marked contempt for the ordinances of
the gospel. It is a remarkable fact that many infidels have been so full
of malignity and bitterness against the Christian religion as to observe
a mock celebration of the Lord's Supper. There is no profounder depth of
depravity than this; there is nothing that can more conclusively or
painfully show the hostility of man to the gospel of God. It is a
remarkable fact, also, that not a few such persons have died a most
miserable death. Under the horrors of an accusing conscience, and the
anticipated destiny of final damnation, they have left the world as
frightful monuments of the justice of God. It is also a fact that not a
few infidels who have been engaged in such unholy celebrations have been
converted to that very gospel which they were thus turning into ridicule
and scorn. Their consciences have been alarmed; they have shuddered at
the remembrance of the crime; they have been overwhelmed with the
consciousness of guilt, and have found no peace until they have found it
in that blood whose shedding they were thus profanely celebrating.

Shall be guilty - (ἔνοχοι enochoi). This word properly means obnoxious
to punishment for personal crime. It always includes the idea of
ill-desert, and of exposure to punishment on account of crime or
ill-desert; [Mat 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022.md); compare [Exo
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#003.md); [Exo
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007.md); [Num
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#018.md); [Num
35:27](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#027.md); [Lev
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#009.md); see also [Deu
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#010.md); [Mat
26:66](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#066.md). "Of the body and blood of the
Lord." Commentators have not been agreed in regard to the meaning of
this expression. Doddridge renders it, "Shall be counted guilty of
profaning and affronting in some measure that which is intended to
represent the body and blood of the Lord." Grotius renders it, "He does
the same thing as if he should slay Christ." Bretschneider (Lexicon)
renders it, "Injuring by crime the body of the Lord." Locke renders it,
"Shall be guilty of a misuse of the body and blood of the Lord;" and
supposes it means that they should be liable to the punishment due to
one who made a wrong use of the sacramental body and blood of Christ in
the Lord's Supper. Rosenmuller renders it, "He shall be punished for
such a deed as if he had affected Christ himself with ignominy."

Bloomfield renders it, "He shall be guilty respecting the body, that is,
guilty of profaning the symbols of the body and blood of Christ, and
consequently shall be amenable to the punishment due to such an abuse of
the highest means of grace." But it seems to me that this does not
convey the fulness of the meaning of the passage. The obvious and
literal sense is evidently that they should by such conduct be involved
in the sin of putting the Lord Jesus to death. The phrase "the body and
blood of the Lord," in this connection, obviously, I think, refers to
his death, to the fact that his body was broken, and his blood shed, of
which the bread and wine were symbols; and to be guilty of that, means
to be guilty of putting him to death; that is, to be involved in the
crime, or to do a thing which should involve the same criminality as
that. To see this, we are to remember:

\(1\) That the bread and wine were symbols or emblems of that event, and
designed to set it forth.

\(2\) to treat with irreverence and profaneness the bread which was an
emblem of his broken body, was to treat with irreverence and profaneness
the body itself; and in like manner the wine, the symbol of his blood.

\(3\) those, therefore who treated the symbols of his body and blood
with profaneness and contempt were "united in spirit" with those who put
him to death. They evinced the same feelings toward the Lord Jesus that
his murderers did. They treated him with scorn, profaneness, and
derision; and showed that with the same spirit they would have joined in
the act of murdering the Son of God. They would evince their hostility
to the Saviour himself as far as they could do, by showing contempt for
the memorials of his body and blood. The apostle does by no means,
however, as I understand him, mean to say that any of the Corinthians
had been thus guilty of his body and blood. He does not charge on them
this murderous intention. But he states what is the fair and obvious
construction which is to be put on a wanton disrespect for the Lord's
supper. And the design is to guard them, and all others, against this
sin. There can be no doubt that those who celebrate his death in mockery
and derision are held guilty of his body and blood. They show that they
have the spirit of his murderers; they evince it in the most awful way
possible; and they who would thus join in a profane celebration of the
Lord's Supper would have joined in the cry, "Crucify him, crucify him,"
For it is a most fearful and solemn act to trifle with sacred things;
and especially to hold up to derision and scorn, the bitter sorrows by
which the Son of God accomplished the redemption of the world.

[1 Corinthians 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">co1 11:28</span></span>

But let a man examine himself - Let him search and see if he have the
proper qualifications - if he has knowledge to discern the Lord's body
(note, [Co1 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029).md); if he has true
repentance for his sins; true faith in the Lord Jesus; and a sincere
desire to live the life of a Christian, and to be like the Son of God,
and be saved by the merits of his blood. Let him examine himself, and
see whether he have the right feelings of a communicant, and can
approach the table in a proper manner. In regard to this we may observe:

\(1\) That this examination should include the great question about his
personal piety, and about his particular and special fitness for this
observance. It should go back into the great inquiry whether he has ever
been born again; and it should also have special reference to his
immediate and direct preparation for the ordinance. He should not only
be able to say in general that he is a Christian, but he should be able
to say that he has then a particular preparation for it. He should be in
a suitable frame of mind for it. He should have personal evidence that
he is a penitent; that he has true faith in the Lord Jesus; that he is
depending on him, and is desirous of being saved by him.

\(2\) this examination should be minute and particular. It should extend
to the words, the thoughts, the feelings, the conduct. We should inquire
whether in our family and in our business; whether among Christians, and
with the world, we have lived the life of a Christian. We should examine
our private thoughts; our habits of secret prayer and of searching the
Scriptures. Our examination should be directed to the inquiry whether we
are gaining the victory over our easily besetting sins and becoming more
and more conformed to the Saviour. It should, in short, extend to all
our Christian character; and everything which goes to make up or to mar
that character should be the subject of faithful and honest examination.

\(3\) it should be done because:

\(a\) It is well to pause occasionally in life, and take an account of
our standing in the sight of God. People make advances in business and
in property only when they often examnine their accounts, and know just
how they stand,

\(b\) Because the observance of the Lord's Supper is a solemn act, and
there will be fearful results if it is celebrated in an improper manner.

\(c\) Because self-examination supposes seriousness and calmness, and
prevents precipitation and rashness - states of mind entirely
unfavorable to a proper observance of the Lord's Supper.

\(d\) Because by self-examination one may search out and remove those
things that are offensive to God, and the sins which so easily beset us
may be known and abandoned.

\(e\) Because the approach to the table of the Lord is a solemn approach
to the Lord himself; is a solemn profession of attachment to him; is an
act of consecration to his service in the presence of angels and of
people; and this should be done in a calm, deliberate and sincere
manner; such a manner as may be the result of a prayerful and honest
self-examination.

And so let him eat ... - And as the result of such examination, or after
such an examination; that is, let the act of eating that bread always be
preceded by a solemn self-examination. Bloomfield renders it, "and then,
only then." The sense is plain, that the communion should always be
preceded by an honest and prayerful self-examination.

[1 Corinthians 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">co1 11:29</span></span>

For he that eateth ... - In order to excite them to a deeper reverence
for this ordinance, and to a more solemn mode of observing it, Paul in
this verse states another consequence of partaking of it in an improper
and irreverent manner; compare [Co1
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#027.md).

Eateth and drinketh damnation - This is evidently a figurative
expression, meaning that by eating and drinking improperly he incurs
condemnation; which is here expressed by eating and drinking
condemnation itself. The word "damnation" we now apply, in common
language, exclusively to the future and final punishment of the wicked
in hell. But the word used here does not of necessity refer to that; and
according to our use of the word now, there is a harshness and severity
in our translation which the Greek does not require, and which probably
was not conveyed by the word "damnation" when the translation was made.
In the margin it is correctly rendered "judgment." The word here used
(κρῖμα krima) properly denotes judgment; the result of judging, that is,
a sentence; then a sentence by which one is condemned, or condemnation;
and then punishment; see [Rom 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008.md);
[Rom 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#002.md). It has evidently the sense
of judgment here; and means, that by their improper manner of observing
this ordinance, they would expose themselves to the divine displeasure,
and to punishment. And it refers, I think, to the punishment or judgment
which the apostle immediately specifies, [Co1
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030.md), [Co1
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#032.md). It means a manifestation of the
divine displeasure which might be evinced in this life; and which, in
the case of the Corinthians, was manifested in the judgments which God
had brought upon them. It cannot be denied, however, that a profane and
intentionally irreverent manner of observing the Lord's Supper will meet
with the divine displeasure in the eternal world, and aggravate the doom
of those who are guilty of it. But it is clear that this was not the
punishment which the apostle had here in his eye. This is apparent:

\(1\) Because the Corinthians did eat unworthily, and yet the judgments
inflicted on them were only temporal, that is, weakness, sickness, and
temporal death [Co1 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030.md); and,

\(2\) Because the reason assigned for these judgments is, that they
might not be condemned with the wicked; that is, as the wicked are in
hell, [Co1 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#032.md). Whitby. Compare [Pe1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017.md).

Not discerning the Lord's body - Not discriminating" μὴ διακρίνων mē
diakrinōn between the bread which is used on this occasion and common
and ordinary food. Not making the proper difference and distinction
between this and common meals. It is evident that this was the leading
offence of the Corinthians (see the notes at [Co1
11:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#020).md), and this is the proper idea
which the original conveys. It does not refer to any intellectual or
physical power to perceive that that bread represented the body of the
Lord; not to any spiritual perception which it is often supposed that
piety has to distinguish this; not to any view which faith may be
supposed to have to discern the body of the Lord through the elements;
but to the fact that they did not "distinguish" or "discriminate"
between this and common meals. They did not regard it in a proper
manner, but supposed it to be simply an historical commemoration of an
event, such as they were in the habit of observing in honor of an idol
or a hero by a public celebration. They, therefore, are able to "discern
the Lord's body" in the sense intended here, who with a serious mind,
regard it as an institution appointed by the Lord Jesus to commemorate
his death; and who "distinguish" thus between this and ordinary meals
and all festivals and feasts designed to commemorate other events. In
other words, who deem it to be designed to show forth the fact that his
body was broken for sin, and who desire to observe it as such. It is
evident that all true Christians may have ability of this kind, and need
not incur condemnation by any error in regard to this. The humblest and
obscurest follower of the Saviour, with the feeblest faith and love, may
regard it as designed to set forth the death of his Redeemer; and
observing it thus, will meet with the divine approbation.

[1 Corinthians 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">co1 11:30</span></span>

For this cause - On account of the improper manner of celebrating the
Lord's Supper; see [Co1 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#021.md).

Many are weak - (ἀσθενεῖς astheneis). Evidently referring to prevailing
bodily sickness and disease. This is the natural and obvious
interpretation of this passage. The sense clearly is, that God had sent
among them bodily distempers as an expression of the divine displeasure
and judgment for their improper mode of celebrating the Lord's Supper.
That it was not uncommon in those times for God in an extraordinary
manner to punish people with calamity, sickness, or death for their sins
is evident from the New Testament; see the [Co1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005.md) note; [Act
5:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#001.md); [Act
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#011.md) notes; [Ti1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#020.md) note; and perhaps [Jo1
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016.md) note; and [Jam
5:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014.md) notes. It may possibly have
been the case that the intemperance and gluttony which prevailed on
these occasions was the direct cause of no small part of the bodily
disease which prevailed, and which in some cases terminated in death.

And many sleep - Have died. The death of Christians in the Scriptures is
commonly represented under the image of "sleep;" Dan, [Co1
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#002.md); [Joh
11:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#011.md); [Co1
15:51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051.md); [Th1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#014.md); [Th1
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#010.md). Perhaps it may be implied by the
use of this mild term here, instead of the harsher word "death," that
these were true Christians. This sentiment is in accordance with all
that Paul states in regard to the church at Corinth. Notwithstanding all
their irregularities, he does not deny that they were sincere
Christians, and all his appeals and reasonings proceed on that
supposition, though there was among them much ignorance and
irregularity. God often visits his own people with trial; and though
they are his children, yet this does not exempt them from affliction and
discipline on account of their imperfections, errors, and sins. The
"practical lesson" taught by this is, that Christians should serve God
with purity; that they should avoid sin in every form; and that the
commission of sin will expose them, as well as others, to the divine
displeasure. The reason why this judgment was inflicted on the
Corinthians was, that there might be a suitable impression made of the
holy nature of that ordinance, and that Christians might be led to
observe it in a proper manner. If it be asked whether God ever visits
his people now with his displeasure for their improper manner of
observing this ordinance, we may reply:

\(1\) That we have no reason to suppose that he inflicts "bodily"
diseases and corporeal punishments on account of it. But,

\(2\) There is no reason to doubt that the improper observance of the
Lord's Supper, like the improper observance of any other religious duty,
will be followed with the expression of God's displeasure, and with a
spiritual blightling on the soul. This may be evinced in the following
modes:

\(a\) In hardening the heart by an improper familiarity with the most
sacred and solemn ordinances of religion.

\(b\) Increased coldness and deadness in the service of God. If the
ordinances of the gospel are not the means of making us better, they are
the means of making us worse.

\(c\) The loss of the favor of God, or of those pure, and spiritual, and
elevated joys which we might have obtained by a proper observance of the
ordinance.

There is no reason to doubt that God may make it the occasion of
manifesting his displeasure. It may be followed by a lack of spiritual
comfort and peace; by a loss of communion with God; and by a withholding
of those comforts from the soul which might have been enjoyed, and which
are imparted to those who observe it in a proper manner. The general
principle is, that an improper discharge of any duty will expose us to
his displeasure, and to the certain loss of all those favors which might
have resulted from a proper discharge of the duty, and to the tokens of
the divine displeasure. And this is as true of prayer, or of any other
religious duty, as of an improper observance of the Lord's Supper.

[1 Corinthians 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">co1 11:31</span></span>

For if we would judge ourselves - If we would examine ourselves, [Co1
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#028.md); if we would exercise a strict
scrutiny over our hearts and feelings, and conduct, and come to the
Lord's Table with a proper spirit, we should escape the condemnation to
which they are exposed who observe it in an improper manner. If we would
exercise proper "severity" and "honesty" in determining our own
character and fitness for the ordinance, we should not expose ourselves
to the divine displeasure.

We should not be judged - We should not be exposed to the expression of
God's disapprobation. He refers here to the punishment which had come
upon the Corinthians for their improper manner of observing the
ordinance; and he says that if they had properly examined themselves,
and had understood the nature of the ordinance, that they would have
escaped the judgments that had come upon them. This is as true now as it
was then. If we wish to escape the divine displeasure; if we wish the
communion to be followed with joy, and peace, and growth in grace, and
not with blighting and spiritual barrenness, we should exercise a severe
judgment on our character, and feelings, and motives; and should come to
it with a sincere desire to honor Christ, and to advance in the divine
life.

[1 Corinthians 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">co1 11:32</span></span>

But when we are judged - This is added, evidently, to console those who
had been afflicted on account of their improper manner of observing the
Lord's Supper. The sense is, that though they were thus afflicted by
God; though he had manifested his displeasure at the manner in which
they had observed the ordinance, yet the divine judgment in the case was
not inexorable. They were not regarded by God as wholly strangers to
piety, and would not be lost forever. They should not be alarmed,
therefore, as if there was no mercy for them; but they should rather
regard their calamities as the chastening of the Lord on his own
children, and as designed for their salvation.

We are chastened of the Lord - It is "his" act; and it is not vengeance
and wrath; but it is to be regarded as the chastisement of a father's
hand, in order that we should not be condemned with the wicked. "We are
under the discipline" (παιδευόμεθα paideuometha) of the Lord; we are
dealt with as children, and are corrected as by the hand of a father;
compare [Heb 12:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#005.md), and [Co2
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#009.md). The design of God's correcting
his children is, that they should be "reclaimed," and not "destroyed."

That we should not be condemned with the world - It is implied here:

\(1\) That the world - those who were not Christians, would be
condemned;

\(2\) That Paul regarded the Corinthians, whom he addressed, and who had
even been guilty of this improper manner of observing the Lord's Supper,
and who had been punished for it as true Christians; and,

\(3\) That the purpose which God had in view in inflicting these
judgments on them was, that they might be purified, and enlightened, and
recovered from their errors, and saved. This is the design of God in the
calamities and judgments which he brings on his own children - And so
now, if he afflicts us, or leaves us to darkness, or follows the
communion with the tokens of his displeasure, it is, that we may be
recovered to a deeper sense of our need of him; to juster views of the
ordinance; and to a more earnest wish to obtain his favor.

[1 Corinthians 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">co1 11:33</span></span>

When ye come together to eat - Professedly to eat the Lord's Supper.

Tarry one for another - Do not be guilty of disorder, intemperance, and
gluttony; see the note at [Co1 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#021.md).
Doddridge understands this of the feast that he supposes to have
preceded the Lord's Supper. But the more obvious interpretation is, to
refer it to the Lord's Supper itself; and to enjoin perfect order,
respect, and sobriety. The idea is, that the table was common for the
rich and the poor; and that the rich should claim no priority or
precedence over the poor.

[1 Corinthians 11:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">co1 11:34</span></span>

And if any man hunger ... - The Lord's Supper is not a common feast; it
is not designed as a place where a man may gratify his appetite. It is
designed as a simple "commemoration," and not as a "feast." This remark
was designed to correct their views of the supper, and to show them that
it was to be distinguished from the ordinary idea of a feast or
festival.

That ye come not together unto condemnation - That the effect of your
coming together for the observance of the Lord's Supper be not to
produce condemnation; see the note at [Co1
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029.md).

And the rest will I set in order ... - Probably he refers here to other
matters on which he had been consulted; or other things which he knew
required to be adjusted. The other matters pertaining to the order and
discipline of the church I will defer until I can come among you, and
personally arrange them. It is evident from this, that Paul at this time
purposed soon to go to Corinth; see [Co2
1:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#015.md). It was doubtless true that
there might be many things which it was desirable to adjust in the
church there, which could not be so well done by letter. The main
things, therefore, which it was needful to correct immediately, he had
discussed in this letter; the other matters he reserved to be arranged
by himself when he should go among them. Paul was disappointed in his
expectations of returning among them as soon as he had intended (see
[Co2 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#017).md), and under this
disappointment he forwarded to them another epistle. If all Christians
would follow implicitly his directions here in regard to the Lord's
Supper, it would be an ordinance full of comfort. May all so understand
its nature, and so partake of it, that they shall meet the approbation
of their Lord, and so that it may be the means of saving grace to their
souls.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 12](co1012.md)

</div>
