<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1.md)  
  [Previous](co1009)  [Next](co1011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001.md)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 10:0</span></span>

In regard to the design of 1 Cor. 10, commentators have not been agreed.
Some have supposed that there is no connection with the preceding, but
that this is a digression. The ancient Greek expositors generally, and
some of the moderns, as Grotius, supposed that the connection was this:
Paul had in the previous chapter described himself as mortifying his
flesh, and keeping his body under, that he might gain the prize. In this
chapter they suppose that his object is to exhort the Corinthians to do
the same; and that in order to do this he admonishes them not to be
lulled into security by the idea of the many spiritual gifts which had
been conferred upon them. This admonition he enforces by the example of
the Jews, who had been highly favored also, but who had nevertheless
been led into idolatry. This is also the view of Doddridge, Calvin, and
others. Macknight regards the chapter as an independent discussion of
the three questions, which he supposes had been submitted to Paul:

\(1\) Whether they might innocently go with their friends into the pagan
temples, and partake of the feasts which were there made in honor of the
idol.

\(2\) whether they might buy and eat meat sold in the markets which had
been sacrificed to idols.

\(3\) whether, when invited to the houses of the pagans, they might
partake of the meat sacrificed to idols, and which was set before them
as a common meal - I regard this chapter as having a very close
connection with [Co1 8:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001.md). In the
close of [Co1 8:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001.md). [Co1
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013.md), Paul had stated, when examining
the question whether it was right to eat meat offered in sacrifice to
idols, that the grand principle on which he acted, and on which they
should act, was that of "self-denial." To illustrate this he employs 1
Cor. 9, by showing how "he" acted on it in reference to a maintenance;
showing that it was this principle that led him to decline a support to
which he was really entitled. Having illustrated that, he returns in
this chapter to the subject which he was discussing in [Co1
8:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001.md); and the design of this chapter
is further to explain and enforce the sentiments advanced there, and to
settle some other inquiries pertaining to the same general subject.

The first point, therefore, on which he insists is, "the danger of
relapsing into idolatry" - a danger which would arise should they be in
the habit of frequenting the temples of idols, and of partaking of the
meats offered in sacrifice; 1Co. 10:1-24. Against this he had cautioned
them in general, in [Co1 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#007.md), [Co1
8:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#009.md). This danger he now sets forth
by a variety of illustrations. the first shows them that the Jews had
been highly favored, had been solemnly consecrated to Moses and to God,
and had been under the divine protection and guidance [Co1
10:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001.md); yet that this had not kept
them from the displeasure of God when they sinned; [Co1
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#005.md). He shows that notwithstanding
their privileges, they had indulged in inordinate desires [Co1
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#006.md); that they had become idolaters
[Co1 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#007.md) that they had been guilty of
licentiousness [Co1 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#008.md); that they
had tempted their leader and guide [Co1
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#009.md); that they had complained [Co1
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#010.md); and that, as a consequence of
this, many of them had been destroyed.

In view of all this, Paul cautions the Corinthians not to be
self-confident or to feel secure; and not to throw themselves in the way
of temptation by partaking of the feasts of idolatry; [Co1
10:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#012.md). This danger he further
illustrates [Co1 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#015.md), [Co1
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#024.md) by showing that if they partook
of those sacrifices, they in fact became identified with the worshippers
of idols. This he proved by showing that in the Christian communion,
those who partook of the Lord's Supper were identified with Christians
[Co1 10:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#016.md); that in the Jewish
sacrifices the same thing occurred, and that those who partook of them
were regarded as Jews, and as worshippers of the same God with them [Co1
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#018.md); and that the same thing must
occur, in the suture of the case, by partaking of the sacrifices offered
to idols. They were really partaking of that which had been offered to
devilS; and against any such participation Paul would solemnly admonish
them; [Co1 10:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#019.md). Going on the
supposition, therefore, that there was nothing wrong in itself in
partaking of the meat that had been thus killed in sacrifice, yet Paul
says [Co1 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#023.md), that it was not
expedient thus to expose themselves to danger; and that the grand
principle should be to seek the comfort and edification of others; [Co1
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#024.md). Paul thus strongly and
decisively admonishes them not to enter the temples of idols to partake
of those feasts; not to unite with idolaters in their celebration; not
to endanger their piety by these temptations.

There were, however, two other questions on the subject which it was
important to decide, and which had probably been submitted to him in the
letter which they had sent for counsel and advice. The first was,
whether it was right to purchase and eat the meat which had been
sacrificed, and which was exposed indiscriminately with other meat in
the market; [Co1 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#025.md). To this Paul
replies, that as no evil could result from this, as it could not be
alleged that they purchased it as meat sacrificed to idols, and as all
that the earth contained belonged to the Lord, it was not wrong to
purchase and to use it. Yet if even this was pointed out to them as
having been sacrificed to idols, he then cautioned them to abstain from
it; [Co1 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#028.md). The other question
was, whether it was right for them to accept the invitation of a pagan,
and to partake of meat then that had been offered in sacrifice; [Co1
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#027.md). To this a similar answer was
returned. The general principle was, that no questions were to be asked
in regard to what was set before them; but if the food was expressly
pointed out as having been offered in sacrifice, then to partake of it
would be regarded as a public recognition of the idol; [Co1
10:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#028.md). Paul then concludes the
discussion by stating the noble rule that is to guide in all this: that
everything is to be done to the glory of God [Co1
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#031.md); and that the great effort of
the Christian should be so to act in all things as to honor his
religion, as not to lead others into sin; [Co1
10:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#032.md).

[1 Corinthians 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 10:16</span></span>

The cup of blessing which we bless - The design of this verse and the
following verses seems to be, to prove that Christians, by partaking of
the Lord's Supper, are solemnly set apart to the service of the Lord
Jesus; that they acknowledge Him as their Lord, and dedicate themselves
to him, and that as they could not and ought not to be devoted to idols
and to the Lord Jesus at the same time, so they ought not to participate
in the feasts in honor of idols, or in the celebrations in which
idolaters would be engaged; see [Co1
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#021.md). He states, therefore:

\(1\) That Christians are "united" and dedicated to Christ in the
communion; [Co1 10:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#016.md).

\(2\) that this was true of the Israelites, that they were one people,
devoted by the service of the altar to the same God, [Co1
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#018.md).

\(3\) that though an idol was nothing, yet the pagan actually sacrificed
to devils, and Christians ought not to partake with them; [Co1
10:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#019.md). The phrase "cup of blessing"
evidently refers to the wine used in the celebration of the Lord's
Supper. it is called "the cup of blessing" because over it Christians
praise or bless God for his mercy in providing redemption. It is not
because it is the means of conveying a blessing to the souls of those
who partake of it - though that is true - but because thanksgiving,
blessing, and praise were rendered to God in the celebration, for the
benefits of redemption; see Note, [Mat
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026.md). Or it may mean, in accordance
with a well known Hebraism, "the blessed cup;" the cup that is blessed.
This is the more literal interpretation; and it is adopted by Calvin,
Beza, Doddridge, and others.

Which we bless - Grotius, Macknight, Vatablus, Bloomfield, and many of
the early church fathers suppose that this means, "over which we bless
God;" or, "for which we bless God." But this is to do violence to the
passage. The more obvious signification is, that there is a sense in
which it may be said that the cup is blessed, and that by prayer and
praise it is set apart and rendered in some sense sacred to the purposes
of religion. it cannot mean that the cup has undergone any physical
change, or that the wine is anything but wine; but that it has been
solemnly set apart to the service of religion, and by prayer and praise
designated to be used for the purpose of commemorating the Saviour's
love. That may be said to be blessed which is set apart to a sacred use
([Gen 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#003.md); [Exo
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#011).md); and in this sense the cup may
be said to be blessed; see [Luk 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#016.md),
"And he took the five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up to
heaven he blessed them," etc.; compare [Gen
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#009.md); [Gen
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#023.md), [Gen
27:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#033.md), [Gen
27:41](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#041.md); [Gen
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#001.md); [Lev
9:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#022.md); [Sa2
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#018.md); [Kg1
8:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#041.md).

Is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? - Is it not the emblem
by which the blood of Christ is exhibited, and the means by which our
union through that blood is exhibited? Is it not the means by which we
express our attachment to him as Christians; showing our union to him
and to each other; and showing that we partake in common of the benefits
of his blood? The main idea is, that by partaking of this cup they
showed that they were united to him and to each other; and that they
should regard themselves as set apart to him. We have communion with one
κοινωνία koinōnia,) that which is in "common," that which pertains to
all, that which evinces fellowship) when we partake together; when all
have an equal right, and all share alike; when the same benefits or the
same obligations are extended to all. And the sense here is, that
Christians "partake alike" in the benefits of the blood of Christ; they
share the same blessings; and they express this together, and in common,
when they partake of the communion.

The bread ... - In the communion. It shows, since we all partake of it.
that we share alike in the benefits which are imparted by means of the
body of the Redeemer. In like manner it is implied that if Christians
should partake with idolaters in the feasts offered in honor of idols,
that they would be regarded as partaking with them in the services of
idols, or as united to them, and therefore such participation was
improper.

[1 Corinthians 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 10:17</span></span>

For we - We Christians. "Being many." Greek "The many" (οἱ πολλοί hoi
polloi). This idea is not, as our translation would seem to indicate,
that Christians were numerous, but that "all" (for οἱ πολλοί hoi polloi
is here evidently used in the sense of παντες pantes, "all") were
united, and constituted one society.

Are one bread - One loaf; one cake. That is, we are united, or are one.
There is evident allusion here to the fact that the loaf or cake was
composed of many separate grains of wheat, or portions of flour united
in one; or, that as one loaf was broken and partaken by all, it was
implied that they were all one. We are all one society; united as one,
and for the same object. Our partaking of the same bread is an emblem of
the fact that we are one. In almost all nations the act of eating
together has been regarded as a symbol of unity or friendship.

And one body - One society; united together.

For we are all partakers ... - And we thus show publicly that we are
united, and belong to the same great family. The argument is, that if we
partake of the feasts in honor of idols with their worshippers, we shall
thus show that we are a part of their society.

[1 Corinthians 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 10:18</span></span>

Behold Israel - Look at the Jews. The design here is to illustrate the
sentiment which he was establishing, by a reference to the fact that
among the Jews those who partook of the same sacrifices were regarded as
being one people, and as worshipping one God. So, if they partook of the
sacrifices offered to idols, they would be regarded also as being
fellow-worshippers of idols with them.

After the flesh - See [Rom 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#001.md). The
phrase "after the flesh" is designed to denote the Jews who were not
converted to Christianity; the natural descendants of Israel, or Jacob.

Are not they which eat of the sacrifices - A portion of the sacrifices
offered to God was eaten by the offerer, and another portion by the
priests. Some portions of the animal, as the fat, were burnt; and the
remainder, unless it was a holocaust, or whole burnt-offering, was then
the property of the priests who had officiated, or of the persons who
had brought it; [Exo 29:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#013.md), [Exo
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#022.md); Lev, [Lev
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#004.md), [Lev
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#010.md), [Lev
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#015.md); [Lev
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#009.md); [Lev
7:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#003.md); [Lev
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#026.md). The right shoulder and the
breast was the part which was assigned to the priests; the remainder
belonged to the offerer.

Partakers of the altar - Worshippers of the same God. They are united in
their worship, and are so regarded. And in like manner, if you partake
of the sacrifices offered to idols, and join with their worshippers in
their temples, you will be justly regarded as "united" with them in
their worship, and partaking with them in their abominations.

[1 Corinthians 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 10:19</span></span>

What say I then? - This is in the present tense; τί οὖν φημι ti oun
phēmi, what do I say? What is my meaning? What follows from this? Do I
mean to say that an idol is anything; that it has a real existence? Does
my reasoning lead to that conclusion; and am I to be understood as
affirming that an idol is of itself of any consequence? It must be
recollected that the Corinthian Christians are introduced by Paul [Co1
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004.md) as saying that they knew that an
idol was nothing in the world. Paul did not directly contradict that;
but his reasoning had led him to the necessity of calling the propriety
of their attending on the feasts of idols in question; and he introduces
the matter now by asking these questions, thus leading the mind to it
rather than directly affirming it at once. "Am I in this reasoning to be
understood as affirming that an idol is anything, or that the meat there
offered differs from other meat? No; you know, says Paul, that this is
not my meaning. I admit that an idol in itself is nothing; but I do not
admit, therefore, that it is right for you to attend in their temples;
for though the "idol" itself - the block of wood or stone - is nothing,
yet the offerings are really made to devils; and I would not have you
engage in such a service;" [Co1
10:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020.md).

That the idol is anything? - That the block of wood or stone is a real
living object of worship, to be dreaded or loved? See the note at [Co1
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004.md).

Or that which is offered in sacrifice to idols is anything? - Or that
the meat which is offered "differs" from that which is not offered; that
the mere act of offering it changes its qualities? I do not admit or
suppose this.

[1 Corinthians 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 10:20</span></span>

But - The negative here is omitted, but is understood. The ellipsis of a
negative after an interrogative sentence is common in the Classical
writers as well as in the Scriptures. Bloomfield. The sense is, "No; I
do not say this, but I say that there are reasons why you should not
partake of those sacrifices; and one of those reasons is, that they have
been really offered to devils."

They sacrifice to devils - (δαιμονίοις daimoniois, "demons"). The pagans
used the word demon either in a good or a bad sense. They applied it
commonly to spirits that were supposed to be inferior to the supreme
God; genii; attending spirits; or, as they called them, divinities, or
gods. A part were in their view good, and a part evil. Socrates supposed
that such a demon or genius attended him, who suggested good thoughts to
him, and who was his protector. As these beings were good and well
disposed, it was not supposed to be necessary to offer any sacrifices in
order to appease them. But a large portion of those genii were supposed
to be evil and wicked, and hence, the necessity of attempting to appease
their wrath by sacrifices and bloody offerings. It was therefore true,
as the apostle says, that the sacrifices of the pagan were made, usually
at least, to devils or to evil spirits.

Many of these spirits were supposed to be the souls of departed people,
who were entitled to worship after death, having been enrolled among the
gods. The word "demons," among the Jews, was employed only to designate
evil beings. It is not implied in their writings to good angels or to
blessed spirits, but to evil angels, to idols, to false gods. Thus, in
the Septuagint the word is used to translate אלילים Elilim, "idols" [Psa
95:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#005.md); [Isa
65:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#010.md); and שׁד shēd, Shaid, as in [Deu
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#017.md), in a passage which Paul has
here almost literally used, "They sacrificed unto devils, not to God."
No where in the Septuagint is it used in a good sense. In the New
Testament the word is uniformly used also to denote "evil spirits," and
those usually which had taken possession of people in the time of the
Saviour; [Mat 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022.md); [Mat
9:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#033.md); [Mat
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#008.md); [Mat
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#018.md); [Mar
1:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#034.md), [Mar
1:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#039.md), et al. See also Campbell on the
Gospels, Pre. Dissertation vi. part 1, Section 14-16. The precise force
of the original is not, however, conveyed by our translation. It is not
true that the pagans sacrificed to "devils," in the common and popular
sense of that word, meaning thereby the apostate angel and the spirits
under his direction; for the pagans were as ignorant of their existence
as they were of the true God; and it is not true that they designed to
worship such beings. But it is true:

\(1\) That they did not worship the supreme and the true God. They were
not acquainted with his existence; and they did not profess to adore
him.

\(2\) they worshipped "demons;" beings that they regarded as inferior to
the true God; created spirits, or the spirits of people that had been
enrolled among the number of the gods.

\(3\) it was true that many of these beings were supposed to be malign
and evil in their nature, and that their worship was designed to
deprecate their wrath. So that, although an idol was nothing in itself,
the gold or wood of which it was made was inanimate, and incapable of
aiding or injuring them; and although there were no real beings such as
the pagans supposed - no genii or inferior gods; yet they "designed" to
offer sacrifice to such beings, and to deprecate their wrath. To join
them in this, therefore, would be to express the belief that there were
such beings, and that they ought to be worshipped, and that their wrath
should be deprecated.

I would not that ye should have fellowship with devils - I would not
that you should have communion with demons. I would not have you express
a belief of their existence; or join in worship to them; or partake of
the spirit by which they are supposed to be actuated - a spirit that
would be promoted by attendance on their worship. I would not have you,
therefore, join in a mode of worship where such beings are acknowledged.
You are solemnly dedicated to Christ; and the homage due to him should
not be divided with homage offered to devils, or to imaginary beings.

[1 Corinthians 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 10:21</span></span>

Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord ... - This does not mean that they
had no physical ability to do this, or that it was a natural
impossibility; for they certainly had power to do it. But it must mean
that they could not "consistently" do it. It was not fit, proper,
decent. They were solemnly bound to serve and obey Christ, they had
devoted themselves to him, and they could not, consistently with these
obligations, join in the worship of demons. This is a striking instance
in which the word "cannot" is used to denote not natural but moral
inability.

And the cup of devils - Demons; [Co1
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020.md). In the feasts in honor of the
gods, wine was poured out as a libation, or drank by the worshippers;
see Virgil, Aeneas viii. 273. The custom of drinking "toasts" at feasts
and celebrations arose from this practice of pouring out wine, or
drinking in honor of the pagan gods; and is a practice that still
partakes of the nature of paganism. It was one of the abominations of
paganism to suppose that their gods would be pleased with the
intoxicating drink. Such a pouring out of a libation was usually
accompanied with a prayer to the idol god, that he would accept the
offering; that he would be propitious; and that he would grant the
desire of the worshipper. From that custom the habit of expressing a
sentiment, or proposing a toast, uttered in drinking wine, has been
derived. The toast or sentiment which now usually accompanies the
drinking of a glass in this manner, if it means anything, is now also a
"prayer." But to whom? To the god of wine? To a pagan deity? Can it be
supposed that it is a prayer offered to the true God; the God of purity?
Has Yahweh directed that prayer should be offered to Him in such a
manner? Can it be acceptable to Him? Either the sentiment is unmeaning,
or it is a prayer offered to a pagan god, or it is mockery of Yahweh;
and in either case it is improper and wicked. And it may as truly be
said now of Christians as in the time of Paul. "Ye cannot consistently
drink the cup of the Lord at the communion table, and the cup where a
prayer is offered to a false god, or to the dead, or to the air; or
when, if it means anything, it is a mockery of Jehovah." Now can a
Christian with any more consistency or propriety join in such
celebrations, and in such unmeaning or profane libations, than he could
go into the temple of an idol, and partake of the idolatrous
celebrations there?

And of the table of devils - Demons. It is not needful to the force of
this that we should suppose that the word means necessarily evil
spirits. They were not God; and to worship them was idolatry. The
apostle means that Christians could not consistently join in the worship
that was offered to them, or in the feasts celebrated in honor of them.

[1 Corinthians 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 10:22</span></span>

Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? - That is, shall we, by joining in
the worship of idols, "provoke" or "irritate" God, or excite him to
anger? This is evidently the meaning of the word παραζηλοῦμεν
parazēloumen, rendered "provoke to jealousy." The word קנא qaana',
usually rendered by this word by the Septuagint, has this sense in [Deu
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021.md); [Kg1
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#022.md); [Ezr
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#003.md); [Psa
78:58](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#058.md). There is a reference here,
doubtless, to the truth recorded in [Exo
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005.md). that God "is a jealous God," and
that he regards the worship of idols as a direct affront to himself. The
sentiment of Paul is, that to join in the worship of idols, or in the
observance of their feasts, would be to participate in that which had
ever been regarded by God with special abhorrence, and which more than
anything else tended to provoke his wrath. We may observe, that any
course of life that tends to alienate the affections from God, and to
fix them on other beings or objects, is a sin of the same kind as that
referred to here. Any inordinate love of friends, of property, of honor,
has substantially the same idolatrous nature, and will tend to provoke
him to anger. And it may be asked of Christians now, whether they will
by such inordinate attachments provoke the Lord to wrath? whether they
will thus excite his displeasure, and expose themselves to his
indignation? Very often Christians do thus provoke him. They become
unduly attached to a friend, or to wealth, and God in anger takes away
that friend by death, or that property by the flames, or they conform to
the world, and mingle in its scenes of fashion and gaiety, and forget
God; and in displeasure he visits them with judgments, humbles them, and
recalls them to Himself.

Are we stronger than he? - This is given as a reason why we should not
provoke his displeasure. We cannot contend successfully with Him; and it
is therefore madness and folly to contend with God, or to expose
ourselves to the effects of His indignation.

[1 Corinthians 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 10:23</span></span>

All things are lawful for me - See the note at [Co1
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#012.md). This is a repetition of what he
had said before; and it is here applied to the subject of eating the
meat that had been offered to idols. The sense is," Though it may be
admitted that it was strictly "lawful" to partake of that meat, yet
there were strong reasons why it was inexpedient; and those reasons
ought to have the binding force of law."

All things edify not - All things do not tend to build up the church,
and to advance the interests of religion; and when they do not have this
effect, they are not expedient, and are improper. Paul acted for the
welfare of the church. His object was to save souls. Anything that would
promote that object was proper; anything which would hinder it, though
in itself it might not be strictly unlawful, was in his view improper.
This is a simple rule, and might be easily applied by all. If a man has
his heart on the conversion of people and the salvation of the world, it
will go far to regulate his conduct in reference to many things
concerning which there may be no exact and positive law. It will do much
to regulate his dress; his style of living; his expenses; his
entertainments; his mode of contact with the world. He may not be able
to fix his finger on any positive law, and to say that this or that
article of dress is improper; that this or that piece of furniture is
absolutely forbidden; or that this or that manner of life is contrary to
any explicit law of Yahweh; but he may see that it will interfere with
his great and main purpose, "to do good on the widest scale possible;"
and therefore to him it will be inexpedient and improper. Such a grand
leading purpose is a much better guide to direct a man's life than would
be exact positive statutes to regulate everything, even if such minute
statutes were possible.

[1 Corinthians 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co1 10:24</span></span>

Let no man seek his own - This should be properly interpreted of the
matter under discussion, though the direction assumes the form of a
general principle. Originally it meant, "Let no man, in regard to the
question about partaking of the meat offered in sacrifice to idols,
consult his own pleasure, happiness, or convenience; but let him, as the
leading rule on the subject, ask what will be for the welfare of others.
Let him not gratify his own taste and inclinations, regardless of their
feelings, comfort, and salvation; but let him in these things have a
primary reference to their welfare." He may dispense with these things
without danger or injury; He cannot indulge in them without endangering
the happiness or purity of others. His duty therefore requires him to
abstain. The injunction, however, has a general form, and is applicable
to all Christians, and to all cases "of a similar kind." It does not
mean that a man is not in any instance to regard his own welfare,
happiness, or salvation; it does not mean that a man owes no duty to
himself or family; or that he should neglect all these to advance the
welfare of others; but the precept means, that "in cases like that under
consideration," when there is no positive law, and when a man's example
would have a great influence, he should be guided in his conduct, not by
a reference to his own ease, comfort or gratification, but by a
reference to the purity and salvation of others. And the observance of
this simple rule would make a prodigious change in the church and the
world.

But every man another's wealth - The word "wealth" is not in the Greek.
Literally, "that which is of another;" the word τὸ to referring to
anything and everything that pertains to his comfort, usefulness,
happiness, or salvation - The sentiment of the whole is, "when a man is
bound and directed by no positive law, his grand rule should be the
comfort and salvation of others." This is a simple rule; it might be
easily applied; and this would be a sort of balance-wheel in the various
actions and plans of the world. If every man would adopt this rule, he
could not be in much danger of going wrong; he would be certain that he
would not live in vain.

[1 Corinthians 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">co1 10:25</span></span>

Whatsoever is sold in the shambles - In the market. The meat of animals
offered in sacrifice would be exposed there to sale as well as other
meat. The apostle says that it might be purchased, since the mere fact
that it had been offered in sacrifice could not change its quality, or
render it unfit for use. They were to abstain from attending on the
feasts of the idols in the temple, from partaking of meat that had been
offered them, and from celebrations observed expressly in honor of
idols; but lest they should become too scrupulous, the apostle tells
them that if the meat was offered indiscriminately in the market with
other meat, they were not to hesitate to purchase it, or eat it.

Asking no question for conscience' sake - Not hesitating or doubting, as
if it might possibly have been offered in sacrifice. Not being
scrupulous, as if it were possible that the conscience should be
defiled. This is a good rule still, and may be applied to a great many
things. But:

\(1\) That which is purchased should be in itself lawful and right. It
would not be proper for a man to use ardent spirits or any other
intoxicating drinks because they were offered for sale, any more than it
would be to commit suicide because people offered pistols, and
bowie-knives, and halters to sell.

\(2\) there are many things now concerning which similar questions may
be asked; as, e. g. is it right to use the productions of slave-labor,
the sugar, cotton, etc., that are the price of blood? Is it right to use
that which is known to be made on Sunday; or that which it is known a
man has made by a life of dishonesty and crime? The consciences of many
persons are tender on all such questions; and the questions are not of
easy solution. Some rules may perhaps be suggested arising from the case
before us:

\(a\) If the article is exposed indiscriminately with others in the
market, if it be in itself lawfill, if there is no ready mark of
distinction, then the apostle would direct as not to hesitate.

\(b\) If the use and purchase of the article would go directly and
knowingly to countenance the existence of slavery, to encourage a breach
of Sunday, or to the continuance of a course of dishonest living, then
it would seem equally clear that it is not right to purchase or to use
it. If a man abhors slavery, and violations of Sunday, and dishonesty,
then how can he knowingly partake of that which goes to patronize and
extend these abominations?

\(c\) If the article is expressly pointed out to him as an article that
has been made in this manner, and his partaking of it will be construed
into a participation of the crime, then he ought to abstain; see [Co1
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#028.md). No man is at liberty to
patronize slavery, Sunday violations, dishonesty, or licentiousness, in
any form. Every man can live without doing it; and where it can be done
it should be done. And perhaps there will be no other way of breaking up
many of the crimes and cruelties of the earth than for good people to
act conscientiously, and to refuse to partake of the avails of sin, and
of gain that results from oppression and fraud.

[1 Corinthians 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">co1 10:26</span></span>

For the earth is the Lord's - This is quoted from [Psa
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001.md). The same sentiment is also found
in [Psa 50:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#011.md), and in [Deu
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#014.md). It is here urged as a reason
why it; is right to partake of the meat offered in the market. It all
belongs to the Lord. It does not really belong to the idol, even though
it has been offered to it. It may, therefore, be partaken of as his
gift, and should be received with gratitude.

And the fulness thereof - All that the earth produces belongs to Him. He
causes if to grow; and He has given it to be food for man; and though it
may have been devoted to an idol, yet its nature is not changed. It is
still the gift of God; still the production of His hand; still the fruit
of His goodness and love.

[1 Corinthians 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">co1 10:27</span></span>

If any of them that believe not - That are not Christians; that are
still pagans.

Bid you to a feast - Evidently not a feast in the temple of an idol, but
at his own house. If he asks you to partake of his hospitality.

And ye be disposed to go - Greek, "And you will to go." It is evidently
implied here that it would be not improper to go. The Saviour accepted
such invitations to dine with the Pharisees (see the note at [Luk
11:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#037).md); and Christianity is not
designed to abolish the courtesies of social life; or to break the bonds
of contact; or to make people misanthropes or hermits. It allows and
cultivates, under proper Christian restraints, the contact in society
which will promote the comfort of people, and especially that which may
extend the usefulness of Christians. It does not require, therefore,
that we should withdraw from social life, or regard as improper the
courtesies of society; see the note at [Co1
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#010.md).

Whatsoever is set before you ... - Whether it has been offered in
sacrifice or not; for so the connection requires us to understand it.

Eat - This should be interpreted strictly. The apostle says "eat," not
"drink;" and the principle will not authorize us to "drink" whatever is
set before us, asking no questions for conscience sake; for while it was
matter of indifference in regard to eating, whether the meat had been
sacrificed to idols or not, it is not a matter of indifference whether a
man may drink intoxicating liquor. That is a point on which the
"conscience" should have much to do; and on which its honest decisions,
and the will of the Lord, should be faithfully and honestly regarded.

[1 Corinthians 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">co1 10:28</span></span>

But if any man - If any fellow guest; any scrupulous fellow Christian
who may be present. That the word "any" (τις tis) refers to a fellow
guest seems evident; for it is not probable that the host would point
out any part of the food on his own table, of the lawfulness of eating
which he would suppose there was any doubt. Yet there might be present
some scrupulous fellow Christian who would have strong doubts of the
propriety of partaking of the food, and who would indicate it to the
other guests.

For his sake that showed it - Do not offend him; do not lead him into
sin;, do not pain and wound his feelings.

And for conscience' sake - Eat not, out of respect to the conscientious
scruples of him that told thee that it had been offered to idols. The
word "conscience" refers to the conscience of the informer [Co1
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#029.md); still he should make it a
matter of conscience not to wound his weak brethren, or lead them into
sin.

For the earth is the Lord's ... - See [Co1
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#026.md). These words are missing in many
mss. (see Mill's Greek Testament), and in the Vulgate, Syriac, Coptic,
and Arabic versions; and are omitted by Griesbach. Grotius says that
they should be omitted. There might easily have been a mistake in
transcribing them from [Co1 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#026.md). The
authority of the mss., however, is in favor of retaining them; and they
are quoted by the Greek fathers and commentators. If they are to be
retained, they are to be interpreted, probably, in this sense; "There is
no "necessity" that you should partake of this food. All things belong
to God; and he has made ample provision for your needs without
subjecting you to the necessity of eating this. Since this is the case,
it is best to regard the scruples of those who have doubts of the
propriety of eating this food, and to abstain."

[1 Corinthians 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">co1 10:29</span></span>

Conscience, I say, not thine own - I know that you may have no scruples
on the subject. I do not mean that with you this need be a matter of
conscience. I do not put it on that; ground, as if an idol were
anything, or as if it were in itself wrong, or as if the quality of the
meat so offered had been changed; but I put it on the ground of not
wounding the feelings of those who are scrupulous, or of leading them
into sin.

For why is my liberty ... - There is much difficulty in this clause; for
as it now stands, it seems to be entirely contradictory to what the
apostle had been saying. He had been urging them to have respect to
other people's consciences, and in some sense to give up their liberty
to their opinions and feelings. Macknight and some others understand it
as an objection: "Perhaps you will say, But why is my liberty to be
ruled by another man's conscience?" Doddridge supposes that this and
[Co1 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#030.md) come in as a kind of
parenthesis, to prevent their extending his former caution beyond what
he designed. "I speak only of acts obvious to human observation: for as
to what immediately lies between God and my own soul, why is my liberty
to be judged, arraigned, condemned at the bar of another man's
conscience?" But it is probable that this is not an objection. The sense
may be thus expressed: "I am free; I have "liberty" to partake of that
food, if I please; there is no law against it, and it is not morally
wrong: but if I do, when it is pointed out to me as having been
sacrificed to idols, my liberty - the right which I exercise - will be
"misconstrued, misjudged, condemned" (for so the word κρίνεται krinetai
seems to be used here) by others. The weak and scrupulous believer will
censure, judge, condemn me as regardless of what is proper, and as
disposed to fall in with the customs of idolaters; and will suppose that
I cannot have a good conscience. Under these circumstances, why should I
act so as to expose myself to this censure and condemnation? It is
better for me to abstain, and not to use this liberty in the case, but
to deny myself for the sake of others."

[1 Corinthians 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">co1 10:30</span></span>

For if I by grace be a partaker - Or rather, "If I partake by grace; if
by the grace and mercy of God, I have a right to partake of this; yet
why should I so conduct as to expose myself to the reproaches and evil
surmises of others? Why should I lay myself open to be blamed on the
subject of eating, when there are so many bounties of Providence for
which I may be thankful, and which I may partake of without doing
injury, or exposing myself in any manner to be blamed?"

Why am I evil spoken of - Why should I pursue such a course as to expose
myself to blame or censure?

For that for which I give thanks - For my food. The phrase "for which I
give thanks" seems to be a periphrasis for "food," or for that of which
he partook to nourish life. It is implied that he always gave thanks for
his food; and that this was with him such a universal custom, that the
phrase "for which I give thanks" might be used as convenient and
appropriate phraseology to denote his ordinary food. The idea in the
verse, then, is this: "By the favor of God, I have a right to partake of
this food. But if I did, I should be evil spoken of, and do injury. And
it is unnecessary. God has made ample provision elsewhere for my
support, for which I may be thankful. I will not therefore expose myself
to calumny and reproach, or be the occasion of injury to others by
partaking of the food offered in sacrifice to idols."

[1 Corinthians 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">co1 10:31</span></span>

Whether therefore ye eat or drink - This direction should be strictly
and properly applied to the case in hand; that is, to the question about
eating and drinking the things that had been offered in sacrifice to
idols. Still, however, it contains a general direction that is
applicable to eating and drinking at all times; and the phrase
"whatsoever ye do" is evidently designed by the apostle to make the
direction universal.

Or whatsoever ye do - In all the actions and plans of life; whatever he
your schemes, your desires, your doings, let all be done to the glory of
God.

Do all to the glory of God - The phrase "the glory of God" is equivalent
to the honor of God; and the direction is, that we should so act in all
things as to "honor" him as our Lawgiver, our Creator, our Redeemer; and
so as to lead others by our example to praise him and to embrace His
gospel. A child acts so as to honor a father when he always cherishes
reverential and proper thoughts of him; when he is thankful for his
favors; when he keeps his laws; when he endeavors to advance his plans
and his interests; and when he so acts as to lead all around him to
cherish elevated opinions of the character of a father. He "dishonorers"
him when he has no respect to his authority; when he breaks his laws;
when he leads others to treat him with disrespect. In like manner, we
live to the glory of God when we honor him in all the relations which he
sustains to us; when we keep his laws; when we partake of his favors
with thankfulness, and with a deep sense of our dependence; when we pray
unto him; and when we so live as to lead those around us to cherish
elevated conceptions of his goodness, and mercy, and holiness. Whatever
plan or purpose will tend to advance His kingdom, and to make him better
known and loved, will be to His glory. We may observe in regard to this:

\(1\) That the rule is "universal." It extends to everything. If in so
small matters as eating and drinking we should seek to honor God,
assuredly we should in all other things.

\(2\) it is designed that this should be the constant rule of conduct,
and that we should be often reminded of it. The acts of eating and
drinking must be performed often; and the command is attached to that
which must often occur, that we may be often reminded of it, and that we
may be kept from forgetting it.

\(3\) it is intended that we should honor God in our families and among
our friends. We eat with them; we share together the bounties of
Providence; and God designs that we should honor Him when we partake of
His mercies, and that thus our daily enjoyments should be sanctified by
a constant effort to glorify Him.

\(4\) we should devote the strength which we derive from the bounties of
His hand to His honor and in His service. He gives us food; He makes it
nourishing; He invigorates our frame; and that strength should not be
devoted to purposes of sin, and profligacy, and corruption. it is an act
of high dishonor to God, when he gives us strength, that we should at
once devote that strength to pollution and to sin.

\(5\) this rule is designed to be one of the chief directors of our
lives. It is to guide all our conduct, and to constitute a "test" by
which to try our actions. Whatever can be done to advance the honor of
God is right; whatever cannot be done with that end is wrong. Whatever
plan a man can form that will have this end is a good plan; whatever
cannot be made to have this tendency, and that cannot be commended,
continued, and ended with a distinct and definite desire to promote His
honor, is wrong, and should be immediately abandoned.

\(6\) what a change would it make in the world if this rule were every
where followed! How differently would even professing Christians live!
How many of their plans would they be constrained at once to abandon!
And what a mighty revolution would it at once make on earth should all
the actions of people begin to be performed to promote the glory of God!

\(7\) it may be added that sentiments like that of the apostle were
found among the Jews, and even among pagans. Thus, Maimonides, as cited
by Grotius, says, "Let everything be in the name of Heaven," that is, in
the name of God. Capellus cites several of the rabbinical writers who
say that all actions, even eating and drinking, should be done "in the
name of God." See the "Critici Sacri." Even the pagan writers have
something that resembles this. Thus, Arrian [Eph
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#019.md) says, "Looking unto God in all
things small and great.' Epictetus, too, on being asked how anyone may
eat so as to please God, answered, "By eating justly, temperately, and
thankfully."

[1 Corinthians 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">co1 10:32</span></span>

Give none offence - Be inoffensive; that is, do not act so as to lead
others into sin; see the note at [Rom
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#013.md).

Neither to the Jews ... - To no one, though they are the foes of God or
strangers to him. To the Jews be inoffensive, because they think that
the least approach to idol worship is to be abhorred. Do not so act as
to lead them to think that you connive at or approve idol worship, and
so as to prejudice them the more against the Christian religion, and
lead them more and more to oppose it. In other words, do not attend the
feasts in honor of idols.

Nor to the Gentiles - Greek "Greeks." To the pagans who are unconverted.
They are attached to idol worship. They seek every way to justify
themselves in it. Do not countenance them in it, and thus lead them into
the sin of idolatry.

Nor to the church of God - To Christians. Many of them are weak. They
may not be as fully instructed as you are. Your example would lead them
into sin. Abstain, therefore, from things which, though they are in
themselves strictly "lawful," may yet be the occasion of leading others
into sin, and endangering their salvation.

[1 Corinthians 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">co1 10:33</span></span>

Even as I ... - Paul here proposes his own example as their guide. The
example which he refers to is that which he had exhibited as described
in this and the preceding chapters. His main object had been to please
all people; that is, not to alarm their prejudices, or needlessly to
excite their opposition (see the note at [Co1
9:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#019).md), while he made known to them
the truth, and sought their salvation - It is well when a minister can
without ostentation appeal to his own example, and urge others to a life
of self-denial and holiness, by his own manner of living, and by what he
is himself in his daily walk and conversation.

[1 Corinthians 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 10:1</span></span>

Moreover, brethren - But, or now (δε de). This verse, with the following
illustrations [Co1 10:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001.md), is properly
connected in Paul's argument with the statements which he had made in
[Co1 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#008.md), etc., and is designed to
show the danger which would result from their partaking of the feasts
that were celebrated in honor of idols. It is not improbable, as Mr.
Locke supposes, that the Corinthians might have urged that they were
constantly solicited by their pagan friends to attend those feasts; that
in their circumstances it was scarcely possible to avoid it; that there
could be no danger of their relapsing into idolatry; and their doing so
could not be offensive to God, since they were known to be Christians;
since they had been baptized, and purified from sin; since they were
devoted to his service; since they knew that an idol was nothing in the
world; and since they had been so highly favored, as the people of God,
with so many extraordinary endowments, and were so strongly guarded
against the possibility of becoming idolaters. To meet these
considerations, Paul refers them to the example of the ancient Jews.
They also were the people of God. They had been solemnly dedicated to
Moses and to God. They had been especially favored with spiritual food
from heaven, and with drink miraculously, poured from the rock. Yet
notwithstanding this, they had forgotten God, had become idolaters, and
had been destroyed. By their example, therefore, Paul would warn the
Corinthians against a similar danger.

I would not that ye should be ignorant - A large part of the church at
Corinth were Gentiles. It could hardly be supposed that they were well
informed respecting the ancient history of the Jews. Probably they had
read these things in the Old Testament; but they might not have them
distinctly in their recollection. Paul brings them distinctly before
their minds, as an illustration and an admonition. The sense is, "I
would not have you unmindful or forgetful of these things; I would have
you recollect this case, and suffer their example to influence your
conduct. I would not have you suppose that even a solemn consecration to
God and the possession of distinguished tokens of divine favor are a
security against the danger of sin, and even apostasy; since the example
of the favored Jews shows that even in such circumstances there is
danger."

How that all our fathers - That is, the fathers of the Jewish community;
the fathers of us who are Jews. Paul speaks here as being himself a Jew,
and refers to his own ancestors as such. The word "all" here seems to be
introduced to give emphasis to the fact that even those who were
destroyed [Co1 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#005.md) also had this
privilege. It could not be pretended that they had not been devoted to
God, since all of them had been thus consecrated professedly to his
service. The entire Jewish community which Moses led forth from Egypt
had thus been devoted to him.

Were under the cloud - The cloud - the "Shechinah" - the visible symbol
of the divine presence and protection that attended them out of Egypt.
This went before them by day as a cloud to guide them, and by night it
became a pillar of fire to give them light; [Exo
13:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021.md). In the dangers of the Jews,
when closely pressed by the Egyptians, it went beHinD them, and became
dark to the Egyptians, but light to the Israelites, thus constituting a
defense; [Exo 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#020.md). In the
wilderness, when traveling through the burning desert, it seems to have
been expanded over the camp as a covering, and a defense from the
intense rays of a burning sun; [Num
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#034.md), "And the cloud of Jehovah was
upon them by day;" [Num 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#014.md), "Thy
cloud standeth over them." To this fact the apostle refers here. It was
a symbol of the divine favor and protection; comp [Isa
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005.md). It was a guide, a shelter, and a
defense. The Jewish Rabbis say that "the cloud encompassed the camp of
the Israelites as a wall encompasses a city, nor could the enemy come
near them." Pirke Eleazer, chapter 44, as quoted by Gill. The
probability is, that the cloud extended over the whole camp of Israel,
and that to those at. a distance it appeared as a pillar.

And all passed through the sea - The Red Sea, under the guidance of
Moses, and by the miraculous interposition of God; [Exo
14:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021.md). This was also a proof of the
divine protection and favor, and is so adduced by the apostle. His
object is to accumulate the evidences of the divine favor to them, and
to show that they had as many securities against apostasy as the
Corinthians had, on which they so much relied.

[1 Corinthians 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 10:2</span></span>

And were all baptized - In regard to the meaning of the word "baptized,"
see the note at [Mat 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#006.md). We are not
to suppose that the rite of baptism, as we understand it, was formally
administered by Moses, or by any other person, to the Jews, for there is
not the least evidence that any such rite was then known, and the very
circumstances here referred to forbid such an interpretation. They were
baptized "in the cloud" and "in the sea," and this cannot be understood
as a religious rite administered by the hand of man. It is to be
remembered that the word "baptism" has two senses - the one referring to
the application of water as a religious rite, in whatever mode it is
done; and the other the sense of "dedicating, consecrating, initiating
into," or bringing under obligation to. And it is evidently in this
latter sense that the word is used here, as denoting that they were
devoted to Moses as a leader, they were brought under his laws, they
became bound to obey him, they were placed under his protection and
guidance by the miraculous interposition of God. This was done by the
fact that their passing through the sea, and under the cloud, in this
manner, brought them under the authority and direction of Moses as a
leader, and was a public recognition of their being his followers, and
being bound to obey his laws.

Unto Moses - (εἰς eis). This is the same preposition which is used in
the form of baptism prescribed in [Mat
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019.md). See the note at that place. It
means that they were thus devoted or dedicated to Moses; they received
and acknowledged him as their ruler and guide; they professed subjection
to his laws, and were brought under his authority. They were thus
"initiated into" his religion, and thus recognized his divine mission,
and bound themselves to obey his injunctions - Bloomfield.

In the cloud - This cannot be proved to mean that they were enveloped
and, as it were, "immersed" in the cloud, for there is no evidence that
the cloud thus enveloped them, or that they were immersed in it as a
person is in water. The whole account in the Old Testament leads us to
suppose that the cloud either passed before them as a pillar, or that it
had the same form in the rear of their camp, or that it was suspended
over them, and was thus the symbol of the divine protection. It would be
altogether improbable that the dark cloud would pervade the camp. It
would thus embarrass their movements, and there is not the slightest
intheation in the Old Testament that it did. Nor is there any
probability in the supposition of Dr. Gill and others, that the cloud.
as it passed from the rear to the front of the camp, "let down a
plentiful rain upon them, whereby they were in such a condition as if
they had been all over dipped in water." Because:

\(1\) There is not the slightest intheation of this in the Old
Testament.

\(2\) The supposition is contrary to the very design of the cloud. It
was not a natural cloud, but was a symbol of the divine presence and
protection. It was not to give rain on the Israelites, or on the land,
but it was to guide, and to be an emblem of the care of God.

\(3\) it is doing violence to the Scriptures to introduce suppositions
in this manner without the slightest authority. It is further to be
observed, that this supposition does by no means give any aid to the
cause of the Baptist after all. In what conceivable sense were they,
even on this supposition, "immersed?" Is it "immersion in water" when
one is exposed to a shower of rain? We speak of being "sprinkled or
drenched" by rain, but is it not a violation of all propriety of
language to say that a man is "immersed" in a shower? If the
supposition, therefore, is to be admitted, that rain fell from the cloud
as it passed over the Jews, and that this is meant here by "baptism unto
Moses," then it would follow that "sprinkling" would be the mode
referred to, since this is the only form that has resemblance to a
falling shower. But the supposition is not necessary. Nor is it needful
to suppose that water was applied to them at all. The thing itself is
improbable; and the whole case is met by the simple supposition that the
apostle means that they were initiated in this way into the religion of
Moses, recognized his divine mission, and under the cloud became his
followers and subject to his laws. And if this interpretation is
correct, then it follows that the word "baptize" does not of necessity
mean to "immerse." (See Editors' Notes on [Mat
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#006.md) and [Mat
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016)..md)

And in the sea - This is another expression that goes to determine the
sense of the word "baptize." The sea referred to here is the Red Sea,
and the event was the passage through that sea. The fact in the case
was, that the Lord caused a strong east wind to blow all night, and made
the sea dry land, and the waters were divided [Exo
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021.md), and the waters were a wall unto
them on the right hand and on the left, [Exo
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#022.md). From this whole narrative it is
evident that they passed through the sea without being "immersed" in it.
The waters were driven into high adjacent walls for the very purpose
that they might pass between them dry and safe. There is the fullest
proof that they were not submerged in the water. Dr. Gill supposes that
the water stood up above their heads, and that "they seemed to be
immersed in it." This might be true; but this is to give up the idea
that the word baptize means always to immerse in water, since it is a
fact, according to this supposition, that they were not thus immersed,
but only seemed to be. And all that can be meant, therefore, is, that
they were in this manner initiated into the religion of Moses, convinced
of his divine mission, and brought under subjection to him as their
leader, lawgiver, and guide. This passage is a very important one to
prove that the word baptism does not necessarily mean entire immersion
in water. It is perfectly clear that neither the cloud nor the waters
touched them. "They went through the midst of the sea on dry ground." It
remains only to be asked whether, if immersion was the only mode of
baptism known in the New Testament, the apostle Paul would have used the
word not only so as not necessarily to imply that, but as necessarily to
mean something else? (See Editors' Notes on [Mat
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#006.md) and [Mat
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016)..md)

[1 Corinthians 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 10:3</span></span>

And did all eat the same spiritual meat - That is, "manna." [Exo
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#015.md), [Exo
16:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#035.md); [Neh
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#015.md), [Neh
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#020.md). The word meat here is used in
the old English sense of the word, to denote "food" in general. They
lived on "manna." The word "spiritual" here is evidently used to denote
that which was given by the Spirit, or by God; that which was the result
of his miraculous gift, and which was not produced in the ordinary way,
and which was not the gross food on which people are usually supported.
It had an excellency and value from the fact that it was the immediate
gift of God, and is thus called "angels food." [Psa
78:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#025.md). It is called by Josephus
"divine and extraordinary food." Ant. [Psa
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#001.md). In the language of the
Scriptures, that which is distinguished for excellence, which is the
immediate gift of God, which is unlike that which is gross and of
earthly origin, is called "spiritual," to denote its purity, value, and
excellence. Compare [Rom 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014.md); [Co1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001.md); [Co1
15:44](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#044.md), [Co1
15:46](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#046.md); [Eph
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003.md). The idea of Paul here is, that
all the Israelites were nourished and supported in this remarkable
manner by food given directly by God; that they all had thus the
evidence of the divine protection and favor, and were all under his
care.

[1 Corinthians 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 10:4</span></span>

And did all drink the same spiritual drink - The idea here is
essentially the same as in the previous verse, that they had been highly
favored of God, and enjoyed tokens of the divine care and guardianship.
That was manifested in the miraculous supply of water in the desert,
thus showing that they were under the divine protection, and were
objects of the divine favor. There can be no doubt that by "spiritual
drink" here, the apostle refers to the water that was made to gush from
the rock that was smitten by Moses. [Exo
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#006.md); [Num
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#011.md). Why this is called "spiritual"
has been a subject on which there has been much difference of opinion.
It cannot be because there was anything special in the nature of the
water, for it was evidently real water, suited to allay their thirst.
There is no evidence, as many have supposed, that there was a reference
in this to the drink used in the Lord's Supper. But it must mean that it
was bestowed in a miraculous and supernatural manner; and the word
"spiritual" must be used in the sense of supernatural, or that which is
immediately given by God. Spiritual blessings thus stand opposed to
natural and temporal blessings, and the former denote those which are
immediately given by God as an evidence of the divine favor. That the
Jews used the word "spiritual" in this manner is evident from the
writings of the Rabbis. Thus, they called the manna "spiritual food"
(Yade Mose in Shemor Rabba, fol. 109. 3); and their sacrifices they
called "spiritual bread" (Tzeror Hammer, fol. 93. 2). - Gill. The drink,
therefore, here referred to was that bestowed in a supernatural manner
and as a proof of the divine favor.

For they drank of that spiritual Rock - Of the waters which flowed from
that Rock. The Rock here is called "spiritual," not from anything
special in the nature of the rock, but because it was the source to them
of supernatural mercies, and became thus the emblem and demonstration of
the divine favor, and of spiritual mercies conferred upon them by God.

That followed them - Margin. "Went with" ἀκολουθούσης akolouthousēs.
This evidently cannot mean that the rock itself literally followed them,
any more than that they literally drank the rock, for one is as
expressly affirmed, if it is taken literally, as the other. But as when
it is said they "drank of the rock," it must mean that they drank of the
water that flowed from the rock; so when it is said that the "rock
followed" or accompanied them, it must mean that the water that flowed
from the rock accompanied them. This figure of speech is common
everywhere. Thus, the Saviour said [Co1
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#025.md), "This cup is the new
testament," that is, the wine in this cup represents my blood, etc.; and
Paul says [Co1 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#025.md), [Co1
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#027.md), "whosoever shall drink this cup
of the Lord unworthily," that is, the wine in the cup, etc., and "as
often as ye drink this cup," etc., that is, the wine contained in the
cup. It would be absurd to suppose that the rock that was smitten by
Moses literally followed them in the wilderness; and there is not the
slightest evidence in the Old Testament that it did. Water was twice
brought out of a rock to supply the needs of the children of Israel.
Once at Mount Horeb, as recorded in [Exo
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#006.md), in the wilderness of Sin, in the
first year of their departure from Egypt. The second time water was
brought from a rock about the time of the death of Miriam at Kadesh, and
probably in the 40th year of their departure from Egypt, [Num
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001.md). It was to the former of these
occasions that the apostle evidently refers. In regard to this we may
observe:

\(1\) That there must have been furnished a large quantity of water to
have supplied the needs of more than two million people.

\(2\) it is expressly stated [Deu
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#021).md), that "the brook נחל nachal,
stream, torrent, or river, see [Num
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#005.md); [Jos
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#004.md), [Jos
15:47](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#047.md); [Kg1
8:65](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#065.md); [Kg2
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#007).md) descended out of the mount," and
was evidently a stream of considerable size.

\(3\) mount Horeb was higher than the adjacent country, and the water
that thus gushed from the rock, instead of collecting into a pool and
becoming stagnant, would flow off in the direction of the sea.

\(4\) the sea to which it would naturally flow would be the Red Sea, in
the direction of the Eastern or Elanitic branch of that sea.

\(5\) the Israelites would doubtless, in their journeyings, be
influenced by the natural direction of the water, or would not wander
far from it, as it was daily needful for the supply of their needs.

\(6\) at the end of thirty-seven years we find the Israelites at
Ezion-geber, a seaport on the eastern branch of the Red Sea, where the
waters probably flowed into the sea; [Num
33:36](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#036.md). In the 40th year of their
departure from Egypt, they left this place to go into Canaan by the
country of Edom, and were immediately in distress again by the lack of
water. It is thus probable that the water from the rock continued to
flow, and that it constituted a stream, or river; that it was near their
camp all the time until they came to Ezion-geber; and that thus,
together with the daily supply of manna, it was a proof of the
protection of God, and an emblem of their dependence. If it be said that
there is now no such stream to be found there, it is to be observed that
it is represented as miraculous, and that it would be just as reasonable
to look for the daily descent of manna there in quantities sufficient to
supply more than two million people, as to expect to find the gushing
and running river of water. The only question is, whether God can work a
miracle, and whether there is evidence that he has done it. This is not
the place to examine that question. But the evidence is as strong that
he performed this miracle as that he gave the manna, and neither of them
is inconsistent with the power, the wisdom, or the benevolence of God.

And that Rock was Christ - This cannot be intended to be understood
literally, for it was not literally true. The rock from which the water
flowed was evidently an ordinary rock, a part of Mount Horeb; and all
that this can mean is, that that rock, with the stream of water thus
gushing from it, was a representation of the Messiah. The word was is
thus often used to denote similarity or representation, and is not to be
taken literally. Thus, in the institution of the Lord's Supper, the
Saviour says of the bread, "This is my body," that is, it represents my
body. Thus, also of the cup, "This cup is the new testament in my
blood," that is, it represents my blood, [Co1
11:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#024.md). Thus, the gushing fountain
of water might be regarded as a representation of the Messiah, and of
the blessings which result from him. The apostle does not say that the
Israelites knew that this was designed to be a representation of the
Messiah, and of the blessings which flow from him, though there is
nothing improbable in the supposition that they so understood and
regarded it, since all their institutions were probably regarded as
typical. But he evidently does mean to say that the rock was a vivid and
affecting representation of the Messiah; that the Jews did partake of
the mercies that flow from him; and that even in the desert they were
under his care, and had in fact among them a vivid representation of him
in some sense corresponding with the emblematic representation of the
same favors which the Corinthian and other Christians had in the Lord's
Supper. This representation of the Messiah, perhaps, was understood by
Paul to consist in the following things:

\(1\) Christians, like the children of Israel, are passing through the
world as pilgrims, and to them that world is a wilderness - a desert.

\(2\) they need continued supplies, as the Israelites did, in their
journey. The world, like that wilderness, does not meet their
necessities, or supply their needs.

\(3\) that rock was a striking representation of the fulness of the
Messiah, of the abundant grace which he imparts to his people.

\(4\) it was an illustration of their continued and constant dependence
on him for the daily supply of their needs. It should be observed that
many expositors understand this literally. Bloomfield translates it:
"and they were supplied with drink from the spiritual Rock which
followed them, even Christ." So Rosenmuller, Calvin, Glass, etc. In
defense of this interpretation, it is said, that the Messiah is often
called "a rock" in the Scriptures; that the Jews believe that the "angel
of Jehovah" who who attended them ([Exo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002), and other places.md) was the
Messiah; and that the design of the apostle was, to show that this
"attending Rock," the Messiah, was the source of all their blessings,
and particularly of the water that gushed from the rock. But the
interpretation suggested above seems to me to be most natural. The
design of the apostle is apparent. It is to show to the Corinthians, who
relied so much on their privileges, and felt themselves so secure, that
the Jews had the very same privileges - had the highest tokens of the
divine favor and protection, were under the guidance and grace of God,
and were partakers constantly of that which adumbrated or typified the
Messiah, in a manner as real, and in a form as much suited to keep up
the remembrance of their dependence, as even the bread and wine in the
Lord's Supper.

[1 Corinthians 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 10:5</span></span>

But with many of them ... - That is, with their conduct. They rebelled
and sinned, and were destroyed. The design of the apostle here is, to
remind them that although they enjoyed so many privileges, yet they were
destroyed; and thus to admonish the Corinthians that their privileges
did not constitute an absolute security from danger, and that they
should be cautious against the indulgence of sin. The phrase rendered
here "with many" ἐν τοῖς πλείων en tois pleiōn should have been rendered
"with most of them," literally" with the many; and it means that with
the greater part of them God was not well pleased; that is, he was
pleased with but few of them.

Was not well pleased - Was offended with their ingratitude and
rebellion.

For they were overthrown ... - That is, by the pestilence, by wars, or
died by natural and usual diseases, so that they did not reach the land
of Canaan. But two men of that generation, Caleb and Joshua, were
permitted to enter the land of promise; [Num
14:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#029.md).

[1 Corinthians 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 10:6</span></span>

Now these things - The judgments inflicted on them by God for their
sins.

Were our examples - Greek: "types" (τύποι tupoi). Margin, "figures."
They were not designed to be types of us, but they are to be held up as
furnishing an admonition to us, or a warning that we do not sin in the
same way. The same God directs our affairs that ordered theirs; and if
we sin as they did, we also must expect to be punished, and excluded
from the favor of God, and from heaven.

Lust after evil things - Desire those things which are forbidden, and
which would be injurious. They lusted after flesh, and God granted them
their desires, and the consequence was a plague, and the destruction of
multitudes [Exo 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#004.md). So Paul infers
that the Corinthian Christians should not lust after, or desire the meat
offered in sacrifice to idols, lest it should lead them also to sin and
ruin.

[1 Corinthians 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 10:7</span></span>

Neither be ye idolaters - This caution is evidently given in view of the
danger to which they would be exposed if they partook of the feasts that
were celebrated in honor of idols in their temples. The particular
idolatry which is referred to here is, the worship of the golden calf
that was made by Aaron [Exo 32:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001.md).

As it is written - [Exo 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#006.md).

The people sat down to eat and to drink - To worship the golden calf.
They partook of a feast in honor of that idol. I have already observed
that it was common to keep a feast in honor of an idol, and that the
food which was eaten on such an occasion was mainly the meat which had
been offered in sacrifice to it. This instance was particularly to the
apostle's purpose, as he was cautioning the Corinthians against the
danger of participating in the feasts celebrated in the pagan temples.

And rose up to play - (παίζειν paizein). The Hebrew word used in [Exo
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#006) (צחק tsaachaq.md) means "to laugh,
to sport, to jest, to mock, to insult" [Gen
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#009.md); and then to engage in dances
accompanied with music, in honor of an idol. This was often practiced,
as the worship of idols was celebrated with songs and dances. This is
particularly affirmed of this instance of idol worship [Exo
32:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#019.md); and this was common among
ancient idolaters; and this mode of worship was even adopted by David
before the ark of the Lord; [Sa2 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#005.md);
[Ch1 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#008.md); [Ch1
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#029.md). All that the word "to play"
here necessarily implies is, that of choral songs and dances,
accompanied with revelry in honor of the idol. It was, however, the fact
that such worship was usually accompanied with much licentiousness; but
that is not necessarily implied in the use of the word. Most of the
oriental dances were grossly indecent and licentious, and the word here
may be designed to include such indelicacy and licentiousness.

[1 Corinthians 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 10:8</span></span>

Neither let us commit fornication ... - The case referred to here was
that of the licentious contact with the daughters of Moab, referred to
in [Num 25:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001.md).

And fell in one day - Were slain for their sin by the plague that
prevailed.

Three and twenty thousand - The Hebrew text in [Num
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#009.md), is twenty-four thousand. In
order to reconcile these statements, it may be observed that perhaps
23,000 fell directly by the plague, and 1,000 were slain by Phinehas and
his companions (Grotius); or it may be that the number was between
23,000 and 24,000, and it might be expressed in round numbers by either
- Macknight. At all events, Paul has not exceeded the truth. There were
at least 23,000 that fell, though there might have been more. The
probable supposition is, that the 23,000 fell immediately by the hand of
God in the plague, and the other thousand by the judges; and as Paul's
design was particularly to mention the proofs of the immediate divine
displeasure, he refers only to those who fell by that, in illustration
of his subject - There was a particular reason for this caution in
respect to licentiousness:

\(1\) It was common among all idolaters; and Paul in cautioning them
against idolatry, would naturally warn them of this danger.

\(2\) it was common at Corinth. It was the prevalent vice there. To
"Corinthianize" was a term synonymous among the ancients with
licentiousness.

\(3\) so common was this at Corinth, that, as we have seen (see the
introduction), not less than 1,000 prostitutes were supported in a
single temple there; and the city was visited by vast multitudes of
foreigners, among other reasons on account of its facilities for this
sin. Christians, therefore, were in a special manner exposed to it; and
hence, the anxiety of the apostle to warn them against it.

[1 Corinthians 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 10:9</span></span>

Neither let us tempt Christ ... - The word "tempt," when applied to man,
means to present motives or inducements to sin; when used with reference
to God, it means to try his patience, to provoke his anger, or to act in
such a way as to see how much he will bear, and how long he will endure
the wickedness and perverseness of people. The Israelites tempted him,
or "tried his patience and forbearance," by rebellion, complaining,
impatience, and dissatisfaction with his dealings. In what way the
Corinthians were in danger of tempting Christ is not known, and can only
be conjectured. It may be that the apostle cautions them against
exposing themselves to temptation in the idol temples - placing
themselves, as it were, under the unhappy influence of idolatry, and
thus needlessly trying the strength of their religion, and making an
experiment on the grace of Christ, as if he were bound to keep them even
in the midst of dangers into which they needlessly ran. They would have
the promise of grace to keep them only when they were in the way of
their duty, and using all proper precautions. To go beyond this, to
place themselves in needless danger, to presume on the grace of Christ
to keep them in all circumstances, would be to tempt him, and provoke
him to leave them; see the note at [Mat
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#007.md).

As some of them also tempted - There is evidently here a word to be
understood, and it may be either "Christ" or "God." The construction
would naturally require the former; but it is not certain that the
apostle meant to say that the Israelites tempted Christ. The main idea
is that of temptation, whether it is of Christ or of God; and the
purpose of the apostle is to caution them against the danger of tempting
Christ, from the fact that the Israelites were guilty of the sin of
tempting their leader and protector, and thus exposing themselves to his
anger. It cannot be denied, however, that the more natural construction
of this place is that which supposes that the word "Christ" is
understood here rather than "God." In order to relieve this
interpretation from the difficulty that the Israelites could not be said
with any propriety to have tempted "Christ," since he had not then come
in the flesh, two remarks may be made.

First, by the "angel of the covenant," and the "angel of his presence"
[Exo 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020.md), [Exo
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#023.md); [Exo
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#034.md); [Exo
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#002.md); [Num
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#016.md); [Isa
63:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#009.md); [Heb
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#026.md), that went with them, and
delivered them from Egypt, there is reason to think the sacred writers
understood the Messiah to be intended; and that he who subsequently
became incarnate was he whom they tempted. And secondly, We are to bear
in mind that the term "Christ" has acquired with us a signification
somewhat different from that which it originally had in the New
Testament. We use it as "a proper name," applied to Jesus of Nazareth.
But it is to be remembered that it is the mere Greek word for the Hebrew
"Anointed," or the "Messiah;" and by retaining this signification of the
word here, no small part of the difficulty will be avoided; and the
expression then will mean simply that the Israelites tempted "the
Messiah;" and the idea will be that he who conducted them, and against
whom they sinned, and whom they tempted, was "the Messiah," who
afterward became incarnate; an idea that is in accordance with the
ancient ideas of the Jews respecting this personage, and which is not
forbidden, certainly, in any part of the Bible.

And were destroyed of serpents - Fiery serpents; see [Num
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#006.md).

[1 Corinthians 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 10:10</span></span>

Neither murmur ye - Do not repine at the allotments of Providence, or
complain of His dealings.

As some of them also murmured - [Num
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#002.md). The ground of their complaining
was, that they had been disappointed; that they had been brought out of
a land of plenty into a wilderness of want; and that instead of being
conducted at once to the land of promise, they were left to perish in
the desert. They therefore complained of their leaders, and proposed to
return again into Egypt.

And were destroyed of the destroyer - That is, they were doomed to die
in the wilderness without seeing the land of Canaan; [Exo
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#029.md). The "destroyer" here is
understood by many to mean the "angel of death," so often referred to in
the Old Testament, and usually called by the Jews "Sammael." The work of
death, however, is attributed to an angel in [Exo
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023.md); compare [Heb
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#028.md). It was customary for the
Hebrews to regard most human events as under the direction of angels. In
[Heb 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014.md), he is described as he "that
had the power of death;" compare the Book of Wisdom 18:22, 25. The
simple idea here, however, is, that they died for their sin, and were
not permitted to enter the promised land,

[1 Corinthians 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 10:11</span></span>

For ensamples - Greek: "types" (τύποι tupoi). The same word which is
used in [Co1 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#006.md). This verse is a
repetition of the admonition contained in that verse, in order to
impress it more deeply on the memory; see the note at [Co1
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#006.md). The sense is, not that these
things took place simply and solely to be examples, or admonitions, but
that their occurrence illustrated great principles of human nature and
of the divine government; they showed the weakness of men, and their
liability to fall into sin, and their need of the divine protection, and
they might thus be used for the admonition of succeeding generations.

They are written for our admonition - They are recorded in the writings
of Moses, in order that we and all others might be admonished not to
confide in our own strength. The admonition did not pertain merely to
the Corinthians, but had an equal applicability to Christians in all
ages of the world.

Upon whom the ends of the world are come - This expression is equivalent
to that which so often occurs in the Scriptures, as, "the last time,"
"the latter day," etc.; see it fully explained in the notes on [Act
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#017.md). It means the last dispensation;
or, that period and mode of the divine administration under which the
affairs of the world would be wound up. There would be no mode of
administration beyond that of the gospel. But it by no means denotes
necessarily that the continuance of this period called "the last times,"
and "the ends of the world" would be brief, or that the apostle believed
that the world would soon come to an end. It might be the last period,
and yet be longer than any one previous period, or than all the previous
periods put together. There may be a last dynasty in an empire, and yet
it may be longer than any previous dynasty, or than all the previous
dynasties put together. The apostle Paul was at special pains in 2 Thes.
2 to show, that by affirming that the last time had come, he did not
mean that the world would soon come to an end.

[1 Corinthians 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 10:12</span></span>

Wherefore - As the result of all these admonitions. Let this be the
effect of all that we learn from the unhappy self-confidence of the
Jews, to admonish us not to put reliance on our own strength.

That thinketh he standeth - That supposes himself to be firm in the love
of God, and in the knowledge of his truth; that regards himself as
secure, and that will be therefore disposed to rely on his own strength.

Take heed lest he fall - Into sin, idolatry, or any other form of
iniquity. We learn here:

\(1\) That a confidence in our own security is no evidence that we are
safe.

\(2\) such a confidence may be one of the strongest evidences that we
are in danger. Those are most safe who feel that they are weak and
feeble, and who feel their need of divine aid and strength. They will
then rely on the true source of strength; and they will be secure.

\(3\) all professed Christians should be admonished. All are in danger
of falling into sin, and of dishonoring their profession; and the
exhortation cannot be too often or too urgently pressed, that they
should take heed lest they fall into sin. The leading and special idea
of the apostle here should not he forgotten or disregarded. It is, that
Christians in their favored moments, when they are permitted to approach
near to God, and when the joys of salvation fill their hearts, should
exercise special caution. For:

\(a\) Then the adversary will be especially desirous to draw away their
thoughts from God, and to lead them into sin, as their fall would most
signally dishonor religion;

\(b\) Then they will be less likely to be on their guard, and more
likely to feel themselves strong, and not to need caution and
solicitude.

Accordingly, it often happens that Christians, after they have been
especially favored with the tokens of the divine favor, soon relapse
into their former state, or fall into some sin that grieves the hearts
of their brethren, or wounds the cause of religion. So it is in
revivals; so it is in individuals. Churches that are thus favored are
filled with joy, and love, and peace. Yet they become self-confident and
elated; they lose their humility and their sense of their dependence;
they cease to be watchful and prayerful, supposing that all is safe; and
the result often is, that a season of revival is succeeded by a time of
coldness and declension. And thus, too, it is with individuals. Just the
opposite effect is produced from what should be, and from what need be.
Christians should then be especially on their guard; and if they then
availed themselves of their elevated advantages, churches might be
favored with continued revivals and ever-growing piety; and individuals
might be filled with joy, and peace, and holiness, and ever-expanding
and increasing love.

[1 Corinthians 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 10:13</span></span>

There hath no temptation taken you - What temptation the apostle refers
to here is not quite certain. It is probable, however, that he refers to
such as would, in their circumstances, have a tendency to induce them to
forsake their allegiance to their Lord, and to lead them into idolatry
and sin. These might be either open persecutions, or afflictions on
account of their religion; or they might be the various allurements
which were spread around them from the prevalence of idolatry. They
might be the open attacks of their enemies, or the sneers and the
derision of the frivilous and the great. The design of the apostle
evidently is, to show them that, if they were faithful, they had nothing
to fear from any such forms of temptation, but that God was able to
bring them through them all. The sentiment in the verse is a very
important one, since the general principle here stated is as applicable
to Christians now as it was to the Corinthians.

Taken you - Seized upon you, or assailed you. As when an enemy grasps
us, and attempts to hold us fast.

But such as is common to man - εἰ μὴ ἀνθρώπινος ei mē anthrōpinos. Such
as is "human." Margin, "Moderate." The sense is evident. It means such
as human nature is liable to, and has been often subjected to; such as
the human powers, under the divine aid may be able to resist and repel.
The temptations which they had been subjected to were not such as would
be suited to angelic powers, and such as would require angelic strength
to resist; but they were such as human nature had been often subjected
to, and such as man had often contended with successfully. There is,
therefore, here a recognition of the doctrine that man has natural
ability to resist all the temptations to which he is subject; and that
consequently, if he yields, he is answerable for it. The "design" of the
apostle is to comfort the Corinthians, and to keep their minds from
despondency. He had portrayed their danger; he had shown them how others
had fallen; and they might be led to suppose that in such circumstances
they could not be secure. He therefore tells them that they might still
be safe, for their temptations were such as human nature had often been
subject to, and God was able to keep them from falling.

But God is faithful - This was the only source of security; and this was
enough. If they looked only to themselves, they would fall. If they
depended on the faithfulness of God, they would be secure. The sense is,
not that God would keep them without any effort of their own; not that
he would secure them if they plunged into temptation; but that if they
used the proper means, if they resisted temptation, and sought his aid,
and depended on his promises, then he would be faithful. This is
everywhere implied in the Scriptures; and to depend on the faithfulness
of God, otherwise than in the proper use of means and in avoiding the
places of temptation, is to tempt him, and provoke him to wrath; see the
notes on Matt. 4.

Who will not suffer you to be tempted ... - This is a general promise,
just as applicable to all Christians as it was to the Corinthians. It
implies:

\(1\) That all the circumstances, causes, and agents that lead to
temptation are under the control of God. Every man that tempts another;
every fallen spirit that is engaged in this; every book, picture, place
of amusement; every charm of music, and of song; every piece of indecent
statuary; and every plan of business, of gain or ambition, are all under
the control of God. He can check them; he can control them; he can
paralyze their influence; he can destroy them; compare [Mat
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#013.md).

\(2\) when people are tempted, it is because God suffers or permits it.
He Himself does not tempt human beings [Jam
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#013.md); He does not infuse evil thoughts
into the mind; He does not create an object of temptation to place in
our way, but He suffers it to be placed there by others. When we are
tempted, therefore, we are to remember that it is because He allows or
permits it; not because He does it. His agency is that of sufferance,
not of creation. We are to remember, too, that there is some good reason
why it is thus permitted; and that it may be turned in some way to his
glory, and to our advancement in virtue.

\(3\) there is a certain extent to which we are able to resist
temptation. There is a limit to our power. There is a point beyond which
we are not able to resist it. We do not have the strength of angels.

\(4\) that limit will, in all cases, be beyond the point to which we are
tempted. If not, there would be no sin in falling, anymore than there is
sin in the oak when it is prostrated before the tempest.

\(5\) if people fall into sin, under the power of temptation, they only
are to blame. They have strength to resist all the temptations that
assail them, and God has given the assurance that no temptation shall
occur which they shall not be able, by His aid, to resist. In all
instances, therefore, where people fall into sin; in all the yielding to
passion, to allurement, and to vice, man is to blame, and must be
responsible to God. And this is especially true of Christians, who,
whatever may be said of others, cannot plead that there was not power
sufficient to meet the temptation, or to turn aside its power.

But will with the temptation ... - He will, at the same time that He
allows the trial or temptation to befall us, make a way of deliverance;
He will save us from being entirely overcome by it.

That ye may be able to bear it - Or that you may be able to bear up
under it, or endure it. God knows what His people are able to endure,
and as He has entire control of all that can affect them, He will adapt
all trials to their strength, and will enable them to bear all that is
appointed to them. This is a general promise, and is as applicable to
other Christians as it was to the Corinthians. It was to them a positive
promise, and to all in the same circumstances it may be regarded as such
now. It may be used, therefore:

\(1\) As a ground of encouragement to those who are in temptation and
trial. God knows what they are able to endure; and he will sustain them
in their temptations. It matters not how severe the trial; or how long
it may be continued; or how much they may feel their own feebleness; yet
He who has appointed the trial is abundantly able to uphold them. They
may, therefore, repose their all upon Him, and trust to His sustaining
grace.

\(2\) it may be used as an argument, that none who are true Christians,
and who are thus tried, shall ever fall away, and be lost. The promise
is positive and certain, that a way shall be made for their escape, and
they shall be able to bear it. God is faithful to them; and though he
might suffer them to be tempted beyond what they are able to bear, yet
He will not, but will secure an egress from all their trials. With this
promise in view, how can it be believed that any true Christians who are
tempted will be suffered to fall away and perish? If they do, it must be
from one of the following causes; either because God is not faithful; or
because He will permit them to be tempted above what they are able to
bear; or because He will not make a way for their escape. Since no
Christian can believe either of these, it follows that they who are
converted shall be kept unto salvation.

[1 Corinthians 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 10:14</span></span>

Wherefore - In view of the dangers and temptations that beset you; in
view of your own feebleness and the perils to which you would be exposed
in the idol temples, etc.

Flee from idolatry - Escape from the service of idols; from the feasts
celebrated in honor of them; from the temples where they are worshipped.
This was one of the dangers to which they were especially exposed; and
Paul therefore exhorts them to escape from everything that would have a
tendency to lead them into this sin. He had told them, indeed, that God
was faithful; and yet he did not expect that God would keep them without
any effort of their own. He therefore exhorts them to flee from all
approaches to it, and from all the customs which would have a tendency
to lead them into idolatrous practices. He returns, therefore, in this
verse, to the particular subject discussed in [Co1
8:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001.md) - the propriety of partaking of
the feasts in honor of idols; and shows the danger which would follow
such a practice. That danger he sets forth in view of the admonitions
contained in this chapter, from [Co1
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001.md) to [Co1
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#012.md). The remainder of the chapter is
occupied with a discussion of the question stated in [Co1
8:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001.md), whether it was right for them
to partake of the meat which was used in the feasts of idolaters.

[1 Corinthians 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 10:15</span></span>

I speak as to wise men ... - I speak to people qualified to understand
the subject; and present reasons which will commend themselves to you.
The reasons referred to are those which occupy the remainder of the
chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 11](co1011.md)

</div>
