<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1015)  [Next](co2000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 16:0</span></span>

The doctrinal part of this Epistle was closed at the end of 1 Cor. 15;
see the introduction. Before closing the Epistle, Paul adverts to some
subjects of a miscellaneous nature, and particularly to the subject of a
collection for the poor and persecuted Christians in Judea, on which his
heart was much set, and to which he several times refers in his
epistles; see the note on [Co1 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001).
This subject he had suggested to them when he was with them, and they
had expressed, some time before, the utmost readiness to make the
collection, and Paul had commended their readiness when he was urging
the same subject in Macedonia; see [Co2
9:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#001). It is evident, however, that
for some cause, perhaps owing to the divisions and contentions in the
church, this collection had not yet been made. Paul, therefore, calls
their attention to it, and urges them to make it, and to forward it
either by him alone, or with others, whom they might designate, to
Judea; [Co1 16:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001).

In connection with this, he expresses his intention of coming to
Corinth, and perhaps of passing the winter with them. He was then in
Ephesus. He was expecting to go to Macedonia, probably on the business
of the collection. He purposed not to visit them on his way to
Macedonia, but on his return. He had formerly intended to pass through
Corinth on his way to Macedonia, and had perhaps given them such an
intheation of his purpose; [Co2
1:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#016). But from some cause (see the
notes on [Co2 1:15-23](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#015)), he tells the
Corinthians that he had abandoned the purpose of seeing them on the way
to Macedonia, though he still intended to go to Macedonia, and would see
them on his return; [Co1 16:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#005). At
that time there was a state of things in Ephesus which required his
presence. His labors were greatly blessed; and, as a consequence which
often attends the successful preaching of the gospel, there was much
opposition.

He had resolved, therefore, to remain in Ephesus until Pentecost; [Co1
16:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#008). In the meantime, to show them
his deep interest in them, he informed them that Timothy was coming
among them, for whom he asked a kind and cordial reception, and assured
them that he had endeavored to persuade Apollos to visit them, but was
not able; [Co1 16:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010). Paul then
urges them to watch, and be firm, and live in love [Co1
16:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#013); and then besought them to
show particular attention to the family of Stephanas, the first-fruits
of Achaia [Co1 16:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#015); and expresses
his gratitude that Stephanas, and Fortunatus, and Achaicus had come to
him at Ephesus; [Co1 16:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#017). They
were probably the persons by whom the Corinthians had sent their letter
[Co1 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001), and by whom Paul sent this
Epistle. He then closes the whole epistle with Christian salutations;
with an expression of regard in his own handwriting; with a solemn
charge to love the Lord Jesus Christ, as the great thing to be done, and
with the assurance that, if not done, it would expose the soul to a
dreadful curse when the Lord should come; with an invocation of the
grace of the Lord Jesus to be with them; and with a tender expression of
his own love to them all; [Co1
16:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#019).

[1 Corinthians 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 16:1</span></span>

Now concerning the collection for the saints - The use of the article
here shows that he had mentioned it to them before, and that it was a
subject which they would readily understand. It was not new to them, but
it was needful only to give some instructions in regard to the manner in
which it should be done, and not in regard to the occasion for the
collection, or the duty of making it. Accordingly, all his instructions
relate simply to the manner in which the collection should be made. The
word rendered "collection" (λογία logia) does not occur anywhere else in
the New Testament, and is not found in the classic writers. It is from
λέγω legō, to collect, and, undoubtedly, here refers to a contribution,
or collection of money for a charitable purpose. The word "saints"
(ἁγίους hagious) here refers, doubtless, to "Christians;" to the
persecuted Christians in Judea. There were many there; and they were
generally poor, and exposed to various trials. In regard to the meaning
of this word, and the circumstances and occasion of this collection; see
the notes on [Rom 15:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025).

As I have given order - (διέταξα dietaxa). As I have directed, enjoined,
commanded, arranged. It does not mean that he had assumed the authority
to tax them, or that he had commanded them to make a collection, but
that he had left directions as to the best manner and time in which it
should be done. The collection was voluntary and cheerful in all the
churches [Rom 15:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#026); [Co2
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#002); and Paul did not assume authority
to impose it on them as a tax. Nor was it necessary. Self-denial and
liberality were among the distinguishing virtues of the early
Christians; and to be a Christian then implied that a man would freely
impart of his property to aid the poor and the needy. The order related
solely to the manner of making the collection; and as Paul had suggested
one mode to the churches in Galatia, he recommended the same now to the
Corinthians.

To the churches of Galatia - Galatia was a province in Asia Minor. On
its situation, see the note on [Act
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006). There were evidently several
churches planted in that region; see [Gal
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#002). At what time he gave this order
to the churches there is not mentioned; though it was doubtless on
occasion of a visit to the churches there; see [Act
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006).

[1 Corinthians 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 16:2</span></span>

Upon the first day of the week - Greek, "On one of the Sabbaths." The
Jews, however, used the word Sabbath to denote the week; the period of
seven days; [Mat 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#001); [Mar
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#009); [Luk
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#012); [Luk
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#001); [Joh
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#001), [Joh
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019); compare [Lev
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#015); [Deu
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#009). It is universally agreed that
this here denotes the first day of the week, or the Lord's Day.

Let every one of you - Let the collection be universal. Let each one
esteem it his duty and his privilege to give to this object. It was not
to be confined to the rich only, but was the common duty of all. The
poor, as well as the rich, were expected to contribute according to
their ability.

Lay by him in store - (παρ ̓ ἑαυτῷ τιθέτω θησαυρίζων par' heautō tithetō
thēsaurizōn). Let him lay up at home, treasuring up as he has been
prospered. The Greek phrase, "by himself," means, probably, the same as
at home. Let him set it apart; let him designate a certain portion; let
him do this by himself, when he is at home, when he can calmly look at
the evidence of his prosperity. Let him do it not under the influence of
pathetic appeals, or for the sake of display when he is with others; but
let him do it as a matter of principle, and when he is by himself. The
phrase in Greek, "treasuring up," may mean that each one was to put the
part which he had designated into the common treasury. This
interpretation seems to be demanded by the latter part of the verse.
They were to lay it by, and to put it into the common treasury, that
there might be no trouble of collecting when he should come. Or it may,
perhaps, mean that they were individually to treasure it up, having
designated in their own mind the sum which they could give, and have it
in readiness when he should come. This was evidently to be done not on
one Sunday only, but was to be done on each Lord's Day until he should
come.

As God hath prospered him - The word "God" is not in the original, but
it is evidently understood, and necessary to the sense. The word
rendered "hath prospered" (εὐοδῶται euodōtai) means, properly, to set
forward on one's way; to prosper one's journey; and then to prosper, or
be prospered. This is the rule which Paul lays down here to guide the
Christians at Corinth in giving alms, a rule that is as applicable now,
and as valuable now, as it was then.

That there be no gatherings when I come - No collections λογίαι logiai,
[Co1 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001)). The apostle means that
there should be no trouble in collecting the small sums; that it should
all be prepared; that each one might have laid by what he could give;
and that all might be ready to be handed over to him, or to whomsoever
they might choose to send with it to Jerusalem; [Co1
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#003) - In view of this important
verse, we may remark:

\(1\) That there is here clear proof that the first day of the week was
observed by the church at Corinth as holy time. If it was not, there can
have been no propriety in selecting that day in preference to any other
in which to make the collection. It was the day which was set apart to
the duties of religion, and therefore an appropriate day for the
exercise of charity and the bestowment of alms. There can have been no
reason why this day should have been designated except that it was a day
set apart to religion, and therefore deemed a proper day for the
exercise of benevolence toward others.

\(2\) this order extended also to the churches in Galatia, proving also
that the first day of the week was observed by them, and was regarded as
a day proper for the exercise of charity toward the poor and the
afflicted. And if the first day of the week was observed, by apostolic
authority, in those churches, it is morally certain that it was observed
by others. This consideration, therefore, demonstrates that it was the
custom to observe this day, and that it was observed by the authority of
the early founders of Christianity.

\(3\) Paul intended that they should be systematic in their giving, and
that they should give from principle, and not merely under the impulse
of feeling.

\(4\) Paul designed that the habit of doing good with their money should
be constant. He, therefore, directed that it should be on the return of
each Lord's Day, and that the subject should be constantly before their
minds.

\(5\) it was evident that Paul in this way would obtain more for his
object than he would if he waited that they should give all at once. He
therefore directed them honestly to lay by each week what they could
then give, and to regard it as a sacred treasure. How much would the
amount of charities in the Christian churches be swelled if this were
the practice now, and if all Christians would lay by in store each week
what they could then devote to sacred purposes.

\(6\) the true rule of giving is, "as the Lord hath prospered us." If he
has prospered us, we owe it to him as a debt of gratitude. And according
to our prosperity and success, we should honestly devote our property to
God.

\(7\) it is right and proper to lay by of our wealth for the purposes of
benevolence on Sunday. It is right to do good then [Mat
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#012); and one of the appropriate
exercises of religion is to look at the evidence of our prosperity with
a view to know what we may be permitted to give to advance the kingdom
of the Lord Jesus.

\(8\) if every Christian would honestly do this every week, it would do
much to keep down the spirit of worldliness that now prevails everywhere
in the Christian church; and if every Christian would conscientiously
follow the direction of Paul here, there would be no lack of funds for
any well-directed plan for the conversion of the world.

[1 Corinthians 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 16:3</span></span>

Whomsoever ye shall approve by your letters - There has been great
variety of opinion in regard to the proper construction of this verse.
Macknight supposes that the "letters" here referred to were not letters
either to or from the apostle, but letters signed and sent by the
congregation at Corinth, designating their appointment and their
authority. With this interpretation Doddridge coincides; and this is
required by the usual pointing of the Greektext, where the comma is
inserted after the word letters, as in our translation. But a different
interpretation has been proposed by inserting the comma after the word
"approve," so that it shall read, "Whom you approve, or designate, them
I will send with letters to convey your charity to Jerusalem." This is
followed by Griesbach, Locke, Rosenmuller, Bloomfield, Beza, Hammond,
Grotius, Whitby, etc. Certainly this accords better with the design of
the passage. For it is evident (see [Co1
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#004)) that, though Paul was willing to
go, yet he was not expecting to go. If he did not go, what was more
natural than that he should offer to give them letters of commendation
to his brethren in Judea? Mill has doubted whether this construction is
in accordance with Greek usage, but the names above cited are sufficient
authority on that subject. The proper construction, therefore, is, that
Paul would give them letters to his friends in Jerusalem, and certify
their appointment to dispense the charity, and commend the persons sent
to the favor and hospitality of the church there. "Your liberality."
Margin, "Gift." Your donation; your alms. The Greek word χάριν charin,
usually signifies grace, or favor. Here it means an act of grace or
favor; kindness; a favor conferred; benefaction: compare [Co2
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#004), [Co2
8:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#006), [Co2
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#019).

[1 Corinthians 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 16:4</span></span>

And if it be meet ... - If it be judged desirable and best. If my
presence can further the object; or will satisfy you better; or will be
deemed necessary to guide and aid those who may be sent, I will be
willing to go also. For some appropriate and valuable remarks in regard
to the apostle Paul's management of pecuniary matters, so as not to
excite suspicion, and to preserve a blameless reputation, see Paley's
Horae Paulinae, chapter iv. No. 1, 3. Note.

[1 Corinthians 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 16:5</span></span>

Now I will come unto you - I purpose to come unto you. He had expected
to see them on his way to Macedonia, but, on some account, had been
induced to abandon that design. See the notes at [Co2
1:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#015).

When I shall pass through Macedonia - When I shall have passed through
Macedonia. He proposed to go to Macedonia first, and, having passed
through that country, visiting the churches, to go to Corinth. For the
situation of Macedonia, see the notes at [Act
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#009).

For I do pass through Macedonia - I design to do it. It is my present
intention. Though he had abandoned, from some cause, the design of
passing through Corinth on his way to Macedonia, yet he had not given up
the design itself. It was still his intention to go there.

[1 Corinthians 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 16:6</span></span>

That ye may bring me on my journey - That you may accompany me, or aid
me, and furnish me the means of going on my journey. It was customary
for the apostles to be attended by some members of the churches and
friends in their travels. See the note at [Act
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#023).

On my journey ... - Probably to Judea. This was evidently his intention.
But wherever he should go, it would be gratifying to him to have their
aid and companionship.

[1 Corinthians 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 16:7</span></span>

For I will not see you now by the way - On the way to Macedonia.
Something had occurred to change his mind, and to induce him to go to
Macedonia by another way.

But I trust to tarry a while with you - That is, on my return from
Macedonia, [Co1 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#005). Greek, "I hope
to remain with you a little while.

If the Lord permit - The apostle did not use the language of certainty
and of confidence. He felt his dependence on God, and regarded all as
under his direction; see the same form of expression in [Co1
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#019), and the note on that place.

[1 Corinthians 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 16:8</span></span>

But I will tarry at Ephesus - This passage proves that this letter was
written from Ephesus. It is by such indications as this usually that we
are able to determine the place where the Epistles were written. In
regard to the situation of Ephesus, see the note on [Act
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#019).

Until Pentecost - This was a Jewish festival occurring fifty days after
the Passover, and hence called the Pentecost. See the note at [Act
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001). As there were Jews at Corinth,
and doubtless in the church, they would understand the time which Paul
referred to; and as he was a Jew, he naturally used their mode of
reckoning time where it would be understood. Doubtless the great
festivals of the Jews were well known among most of the cities of
Greece, as there were Jews in them all who were scrupulous in their
observances. It is no improbable supposition, also, that Christians
everywhere regarded this day with deep interest, as being the day on
which the Holy Spirit descended on the apostles and on the people of
Jerusalem, Acts 2.

[1 Corinthians 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 16:9</span></span>

For a great door - There is abundant opportunity for usefulness. The
word "door" is used evidently to denote an occasion or an opportunity
for doing anything. It is the means by which we have entrance or access;
and hence denotes facility in doing anything when there is no
obstruction; see [Act 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#027); [Co2
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#012); [Col
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#003).

And effectual - That is, effective, or adapted to success; presenting
opportunity for great effects. There is abundant opportunity to preach
the gospel; there is attention to what is spoken, and great interest in
it; there is great encouragement to labor. It is possible that this was
one of the reasons why Paul had changed his mind about Macedonia. It
would require time to visit Corinth, as he would wish to remain there;
and an unexpected opportunity having arisen for doing good, he judged it
best to remain at Ephesus as long as practicable, and then to go at once
to Macedonia.

And there are many adversaries - Many opposers; many who resist the
gospel. These were doubtless in part Jews who excited opposition to him,
and in part the friends of Demetrius; see Acts 19. That Paul had great
success in Ephesus, and that his labors were attended with a great
revival of religion there, is manifest from that chapter. We may remark
here:

\(1\) That such a work of grace, such a setting open a great and
effectual door, is often the occasion of increased opposition to the
gospel. It is no uncommon thing that the adversaries of Christ should be
excited at such times; and we are not to be surprised if the same thing
should occur now which occurred in the time of Paul.

\(2\) this was regarded by Paul as no reason why he should leave
Ephesus, but rather as a reason why he should remain there. It was
regarded by him as an evidence that the Holy Spirit was there. It was
proof that the enemies of God were alarmed, and that the kingdom of
Christ was advancing. His presence, also, would be needed there, to
encourage and strengthen the young converts who would be attacked and
opposed; and he deemed it his duty to remain. A minister should never
wish to make enemies to the gospel, nor seek to excite them to make
opposition; but such opposition is often evidence that the Spirit of God
is among a people; that the consciences of sinners are aroused and
alarmed; and that the great enemy of God and man is making, as he was at
Ephesus, a desperate effort to preserve his kingdom from being
destroyed.

\(3\) a minister should regard it as his duty in a special manner to be
among his people when there is such opposition excited. His presence is
needed to comfort and encourage the church; and when the minds of people
are excited, it is often the best time to present truth, and to defend
successfully the great doctrines of the Bible.

\(4\) ministers should not be discouraged because there is opposition to
the gospel. It is one ground of encouragement. It is an indication of
the presence of God in awakening the conscience. And it is far more
favorable as a season to do good than a dead calm, and when there is
universal stagnation and unconcern.

[1 Corinthians 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 16:10</span></span>

Now if Timotheus come - Paul had sent Timothy to them (see the note at
[Co1 4:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#017)), but as he had many
churches to visit, it was not absolutely certain that he would go to
Corinth.

May be with you without fear - Let him be received kindly and
affectionately. Timothy was then a young man; [Act
16:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001); [Ti1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012). There might be some danger that
he might feel himself embarrassed among the rich, the frivilous, and the
great. Paul, therefore, asks them to encourage him, to receive him
kindly, and not to embarrass him. Perhaps, also, there may be some
reference to the false teachers whom Timothy might be called on to
oppose. They were powerful, and they might endeavor to intimidate and
alarm him. Paul, therefore, asks the church to sustain him in his
efforts to defend the truth.

For he worketh the work of the Lord - He is engaged in the service of
the Lord; and he is worthy of your confidence, and worthy to be
sustained by you.

[1 Corinthians 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 16:11</span></span>

Let no man, therefore, despise him - Let no one despise him on account
of his youth and inexperience. It is probable that some of the more
wealthy and proud, some who valued themselves on their wisdom and
experience, would be disposed to look upon him with contempt. On another
occasion, he directed Timothy so to live as that no one should have
occasion to despise him on account of his youth [Ti1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012); and he here urges on the
Corinthians, that they should not despise him because be was a young
man, and comparatively inexperienced. A minister of the gospel, though
young, should receive the respect that is due to his office; and if he
conducts himself in accordance with his high calling, his youth should
be no barrier to the confidence and affection of even aged and
experienced Christians. It should be rather a reason why they should
treat him with affection, and encourage him in his work.

But conduct him forth in peace - That is, when he leaves you. Attend him
on his way, and help him forward on his journey to me; see the note on
[Co1 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#006).

For I look for him with the brethren - Erastus accompanied Timothy in
this journey [Act 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#022), and probably
there were others with him. Titus also had been sent to Corinth [Co2
12:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#017), and it is not improbable
that Paul had desired Titus to bring with him to Ephesus some of the
Corinthian brethren, as he might need their assistance there - Grotius.

[1 Corinthians 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 16:12</span></span>

As touching our brother Apollos - Tyndale renders this, "To speak of
brother Apollo." In regard to Apollos, see the note at [Co1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012).

His will was not at all to come at this time - It is probable that there
were matters which detained him, or which required his presence in
Ephesus. It is not known why Apollos had left Corinth, but it has been
supposed that it was on account of the dissensions which existed there.
For the same reason he might not be induced to return there while those
dissensions lasted and there might be employment which he had where he
then was which rendered his presence there important. The Latin fathers
say that Apollos did after this return to Corinth, when the religious
differences had been settled - Bloomfield. It is probable that the
Corinthians had requested, by the messengers who carried their letter to
Paul, that either he or Apollos would come and visit them. Paul states,
in reply, that he had endeavored to prevail on Apollos to go, but had
not succeeded.

He will come when he shall have convenient thee - The Greek word means,
when he should have leisure, or a good opportunity. He might then be
engaged; or he might be unwilling to go while their contentions lasted.
They had probably [Co1 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012) endeavored
to make him the head of a party, and on that account he might have been
unwilling to return at present among them. But Paul assures them that he
designed to come among them at some future time. This was said probably
to show them that he still retained his affection for them, and had a
tender solicitude for their peace and prosperity. Had this not been
said, they might, perhaps, have inferred that he was offended, and had
no desire to come among them.

[1 Corinthians 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 16:13</span></span>

Watch ye - The exhortation in this and the following verse is given
evidently in view of the special dangers and temptations which
surrounded them. The word used here (Γρηγορεῖτε Grēgoreite) means, to
keep awake, to be vigilant, etc.; and this may, perhaps, be a military
metaphor derived from the duty of those who are stationed as sentinels
to guard a camp, or to observe the motions of an enemy. The term is
frequently used in the New Testament, and the duty frequently enjoined;
[Mat 24:41-42](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#041); [Mat
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#013); [Mar
13:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#035); [Luk
21:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#036); [Act
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#031); [Th1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#006); [Ti2
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#005). The sense here is, that they were
to watch, or be vigilant, against all the evils of which he had
admonished them, the evils of dissension, or erroneous doctrines, of
disorder, of false teachers, etc. They were to watch lest their souls
should be ruined, and their salvation endangered; lest the enemies of
the truth and of holiness should steal silently upon them, and surprise
them. They were to watch with the same vigilance that is required of a
sentinel who guards a camp, lest an enemy should come suddenly upon
them, and surprise the camp when the army was locked in sleep.

Stand fast in the faith - Be firm in holding and defending the truths of
the gospel. Do not yield to any foe, but maintain the truth, and adhere
to your confidence in God and to the doctrines of the gospel with
unwavering constancy; see the note at [Co1
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#001). Be firm in maintaining what you
believe to be true, and in holding on to your personal confidence in
God, notwithstanding all the arts, insinuations, and teachings of
seducers and the friends of false doctrine.

Quit you like men - (ἀνδρίζεσθε andrizesthe, from ἀνήρ anēr, a man). The
word occurs no where else in the New Testament. In the Septuagint it
occurs in [Jos 1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#006), [Jos
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#009),[Jos
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#018); [Ch1
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#020); [Ch2
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#007); [Neh
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#001); and in 18 other places. See
Trommius' Concordance. It occurs also in the classic authors; see
Xenophon, Oec. [Neh 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#004). It means, to
render one manly or brave; to show oneself a man; that is, not to be a
coward, or timid, or alarmed at enemies, but to be bold and brave. We
have a similar phrase in common use: "Be a man," or "Show yourself a
man;" that is, be not mean, or be not cowardly.

Be strong - Be firm, fixed, steadfast; compare [Eph
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010), "Be strong in the Lord, and in
the power of his might."

[1 Corinthians 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 16:14</span></span>

Let all your things ... - All that you do. This direction is repeated on
account of its great importance, and because it is a summing up of all
that he had said in this Epistle; see [Co1
13:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001); [Co1
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001). Here he says, that charity, or
love, was to regulate all that they did. This was a simple rule; and if
this was observed, every thing would be done well.

[1 Corinthians 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 16:15</span></span>

I beseech you, brethren - The construction here is somewhat involved,
but the sense is plain. The words, "I beseech you," in this verse, are
evidently to be taken in connection with [Co1
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#016), "I beseech you that ye submit
yourselves unto such," etc. The design is to exhort them to pay proper
deference to Stephanas, and to all who sustained the same rank and
character; and the remainder of [Co1
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#015) is designed to state the reason
why they should show respect and kindness to the household of Stephanas.

Ye know the house - You are acquainted with the household, or family.
Probably a considerable portion, or all, of the family of Stephanas had
been converted to the Christian faith.

Of Stephanas - See the note at [Co1
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#016). Paul there says that he had
baptized his family. That it is the first-fruits of Achaia. They were
the first converted to the Christian religion in Achaia; see the note at
[Rom 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#005). Respecting Achaia, see the
note at [Act 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#012).

That they have addicted themselves ... - That they have devoted
themselves to the service of Christians. That is, by aiding the
ministry; by showing hospitality; by providing for their needs; by
attending and aiding the apostles in their journeys, etc.

[1 Corinthians 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 16:16</span></span>

That ye submit yourselves ... - The word used here means evidently that
you would show them proper deference and regard; that you would treat
them with distinguished respect and honor for what they have done.

And to everyone that helpeth with us ... - Everyone who aids us in the
ministry, or provides for our needs, etc. It is possible that Stephanas
lived among them at this time (Note, [Co1
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#016)), though he had been converted in
Achaia; and it is probable that, as Corinth was a central place and a
thoroughfare, others might come among them who were the personal friends
of Paul, and who had aided him in the ministry. Towards all such he
bespeaks their kind, and tender, and respectful regards.

[1 Corinthians 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 16:17</span></span>

I am glad of the coming - That is, I am glad that they have come to me
at Ephesus. I rejoice that he who was converted by my ministry in
Achaia, and who has so long shown himself to be a personal friend to me,
and an aid in my work, came where I am.

Stephanas - The same person evidently mentioned in the previous verses.
Probably he, as one of the oldest and most respected members of the
church, had been selected to carry the letter of the Corinthians [Co1
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#001) to Paul, and to consult with him
respecting the affairs of the church there.

Fortunatus and Achaieus - These persons are not referred to anywhere
else in the New Testament. It appears that Fortunatus survived Paul, for
he was subsequently the messenger of the church at Corinth to that at
Rome, and bore back to the Corinthians the Epistle which Clement of Rome
sent to them. See that epistle, Section 59.

For that which was lacking ... - The word which is used here, and
rendered "that which was lacking" (ὑστέρημα husterēma), does not occur
in the Classic writers. It means properly that which is missing, want,
lack - Robinson. It may be used to denote a want or lack of any kind,
whether of support, sustenance, aid, consolation, information, or
counsel; see [Luk 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#004); [Phi
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#030); [Th1
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#010). What this was which the
Corinthians had neglected or failed to furnish Paul, and which had been
supplied by the presence of these persons, can be only a matter of
conjecture; and different commentators have supposed different things.
It might be a neglect to provide for his needs, or a defect of informing
him about their affairs in the letter which they had sent him; or it
might be that these persons had furnished, by their presence and
conversation, those consolations and friendly offices which the church
at Corinth would have rendered had they been all present; and Paul may
mean to say, that he had enjoyed with them that friendly contact and
Christian communion which he had desired with them, but which was
lacking, that is, which he had not been permitted to enjoy by reason of
his absence. This is the view which is given by Rosenmuller, Doddridge,
Bloomfield; and as Paul does not seem here inclined to blame them, this
view is most in accordance with the general strain of the passage.

[1 Corinthians 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 16:18</span></span>

For they have refreshed my spirit - By their presence and conversation.
They have given me information respecting the state of things in the
church; and their society has been with me of the most gratifying and
cheering kind.

And yours - "By removing," says Locke, "those suspicions and fears that
were on both sides." "By thus supplying your absence, they have
benefited us both. For Paul gained information of those absent, and they
gained in the counsel afforded to them by the apostle" - Bloomfield.
"For they refreshed my spirit by their obliging behavior and edifying
conversation, as, I doubt not, they have often refreshed yours by their
ministrations among you" - Doddridge. The sense seems to be, that their
visit to him would be a benefit to both; would result in imparting
comfort, a good understanding, an increase of their mutual attachment,
and ultimately a large accession to their mutual joy when they should
again meet.

Therefore acknowledge ye them that are such - Receive affectionately;
recognize as brethren; cherish, treat kindly all that evince such a
spirit; see the notes on [Co1
16:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#015). The apostle here designs,
evidently, that the Corinthians should receive them kindly on their
return, and regard with deference and respect the counsel which they
might offer, and the message which they might bear from him.

[1 Corinthians 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 16:19</span></span>

The churches of Asia - The word "Asia" in the New Testament usually
denotes Asia Minor in general; see the note on [Act
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009). It was sometimes used in a more
limited sense, to denote the region around Ephesus, and of which Ephesus
was the center and capital; see note, [Act
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006). This is the region undoubtedly
which is intended here.

Salute you - Greet you; send respectful and affectionate Christian
regards; see the note at [Rom 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#003).

Aquila and Priscilla - See the note on [Act
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#026).

Much in the Lord - With affectionate Christian salutations; or as
Christians. Wishing the blessing and favor of the Lord.

With the church that is in their house - See the note at [Rom
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#005).

[1 Corinthians 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 16:20</span></span>

All the brethren ... - All the Christians with whom Paul was connected
in Ephesus. They felt a deep interest in the church at Corinth, and sent
to them Christian salutations. "With a holy kiss; see the note on [Rom
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#016).

[1 Corinthians 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 16:21</span></span>

The salutation of me, Paul, with mine own hand - It is evident that Paul
was accustomed to employ an amanuensis (copyist) in penning his epistles
(see the note on [Rom 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#022)), though
he signed his own name, and expressed his Christian salutation in every
epistle, [Th2 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#017); compare [Col
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#018). This gave a sanction to what was
written; was a proof that it was his own, and was a valuable token of
affectionate regard. It was a proof that there was no fraud or
imposition. Why he employed an amanuensis is not known.

[1 Corinthians 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 16:22</span></span>

If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ - This is a most solemn and
affecting close of the whole epistle. It was designed to direct them to
the great and essential matter of religion, the love of the Lord Jesus;
and was intended, doubtless, to turn away their minds from the subjects
which had agitated them, the disputes and dissensions which had rent the
church into factions, to the great inquiry whether they truly loved the
Saviour. It is implied that there was danger, in their disputes and
strifes about minor matters, of neglecting the love of the Lord Jesus,
or of substituting attachment to a party in the place of that love to
the Saviour which alone could be connected with eternal life.

Let him be anathema - On the meaning of the word anathema, see the note
at [Co1 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003). The word properly means
accursed, or devoted to destruction; and the idea here is, that he who
did not believe in the Lord Jesus, and love him, would be, and ought to
be, devoted to destruction, or accursed of God. It expresses what ought
to be done; it expresses a truth in regard to God's dealings, not the
desire of the apostle. No matter what any man's endowments might be; no
matter what might be his wealth, his standing, or his talent; no matter
if he were regarded as a ruler in the church, or at the head of a party;
yet if he had not true love to the Lord Jesus, he could not be saved.
This sentiment is in accordance with the declaration of the Scripture
everywhere. See particularly, [Joh
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#031); [Mic
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#016), and the note on the latter
place.

Maran-atha - These are Syriac words, Moran Etho - "the Lord comes;" that
is, will come. The reason why this expression is added may be:

\(1\) To give the greater solemnity to the declaration of the apostle;
that is, to give it an emphatic form.

\(2\) to intimate that, though there were no earthly power to punish a
lack of love to the Saviour; though the state could not, and ought not
to punish it; and though the church could not exclude all who did not
love the Lord Jesus from its bosom, yet they could not escape. For, the
Lord would himself come to take vengeance on his enemies; and no one
could escape. Though, therefore, those who did not love the Lord Jesus
could not be punished by people, yet they could not escape divine
condemnation. The Lord would come to execute vengeance himself, and they
could not escape. It is probable (see Lightfoot in loco) that the Jews
were accustomed to use such a form in their greater excommunication, and
that they meant by it, that the person who was thus devoted to
destruction, and excommunicated, must be destroyed; for the Lord would
come to take vengeance on all his enemies. "It certainly was not now,
for the first time, used as a new kind of cursing by the apostle; but
was the application of a current mode of speech to the purpose he had in
contemplation. Perhaps, therefore, by inspecting the manners of the
East, we may illustrate the import of this singular passage. The nearest
approach to it that I have been able to discover is in the following
extract from Mr. Bruce; and though, perhaps, this does not come up to
the full power of the apostle's meaning, yet, probably, it gives the
idea which was commonly attached to the phrase among the public. Mr.
Bruce had been forced by a pretended saint, in Egypt, to take him on
board his vessel, as if to carry him to a certain place - whereas, Mr.
Bruce meant no such thing; but, having set him on shore at some little
distance from whence he came, 'we slacked our vessel down the stream a
few yards, filling our sails, and stretching away.

On seeing this, our saint fell into a desperate passion, cursing,
blaspheming, and stamping with his feet; at every word crying "Shar
Ullah!" that is, "May God send and do justice!" This appears to be the
strongest execration this passionate Arab could use, that is, To punish
you adequately is out of my power: I remit you to the vengeance of God.'
Is not this the import of anathema maranatha?" - Taylor in Calmet. This
solemn declaration, or denunciation, the apostle wrote with his own
hand, as the summary of all that he had said, in order that it might be
attentively regarded. There is not a more solemn declaration in the
Bible; there is not a more fearful denunciation; there is no one that
will be more certainly executed. No matter what we may have - be it
wealth, or beauty, or vigor, or accomplishment, or adorning, or the
praise and flattery of the world; no matter if we are elevated high in
office and in rank; no matter if we are honored by the present age, or
gain a reputation to be transmitted to future times; yet if we have not
love to the Saviour, we cannot be saved.

We must be devoted to the curse; and the Lord Jesus will soon return to
execute the tremendous sentence on a guilty world. How important then to
ask whether we have that love? Whether we are attached to the Lord Jesus
in such a manner as to secure his approbation? Whether we so love him as
to be prepared to hail his coming with joy, and to be received into his
everlasting kingdom - In the close of the notes on this Epistle, I may
ask anyone who shall read these pages whether he has this love? And I
may press it upon the attention of each one, though I may never see
their faces in the flesh, as the great inquiry which is to determine
their everlasting destiny. The solemn declaration stands here, that if
they do not love the Lord Jesus, they will be, and they ought to be,
devoted to destruction. The Lord Jesus will soon return to make
investigation, and to judge the world. There will be no escape; and no
tongue can express the awful horrors of an eternal curse pronounced by
the lips of the Son of God!

[1 Corinthians 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 16:23</span></span>

The grace ... - See the note at [Rom
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020).

[1 Corinthians 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co1 16:24</span></span>

In Christ Jesus - Through Christ Jesus; or in connection with your love
to him; that is, as Christians. This is an expression of tender regard
to them as Christian brethren; of his love for the church; and his
earnest desire for their welfare. It is in accordance with the usual
manner in which he closes his epistles; and it is especially tender,
affectionate, and beautiful here, when we consider the manner in which
he had been treated by many of the Corinthians; and as following the
solemn declaration in [Co1 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#022). Paul
loved them; loved them intensely, and was ever ready to express his
affectionate regard for them all, and his earnest desire for their
salvation.

The subscription to the Epistle, "The first epistle to the Corinthians,"
etc., was evidently written by some other hand than that of Paul, and
has no claim to be regarded as inspired. Probably these subscriptions
were added a considerable time after the Epistles were first written;
and in some instances evidently by some person who was not well informed
on the subject; see the note at the end of the Epistle to the Romans. In
this instance, the subscription is evidently in its main statement
false. The Epistle bears internal marks that it was written from
Ephesus, though there is every probability that it was sent by three of
the persons who are mentioned here. It is absurd, however, to suppose
that Timothy was concerned in bearing the Epistle to them, since it is
evident that when it was written he was already on a visit to the
churches, and on his way to Corinth; see the notes on [Co1
16:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010); [Co1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#017). There is not the slightest
internal evidence that it was written from Philippi; but everything in
the Epistle concurs in the supposition that it was sent from Ephesus.
See the introduction to that Epistle. There is, however, a considerable
variety among the manuscripts in regard to the subscription; and they
are evidently none of them of any authority, and as these subscriptions
generally mislead the reader of the Bible, it would have been better had
they been omitted.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Introduction](co2000)

</div>
