<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2003)  [Next](co2005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 4:0</span></span>

This chapter 2 Cor. 4 is intimately connected with the preceding, and is
indeed merely a statement of the consequences or results of the doctrine
advanced there. In that chapter, Paul had stated the clearness and
plainness of the gospel as contrasted with the institutions of Moses,
and particularly that the Christian ministry was a ministration more
glorious than that of Moses. It was more clear. It was a ministration of
justification [Co2 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#009), and of the
Spirit [Co2 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#008), and was a
ministration where they were permitted to look upon the unveiled and
unclouded glories of God, [Co2 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018).
In this chapter he states some of the "consequences," or "results" of
their being called to this ministry; and the design is, to magnify the
office of the ministry; to show the sustaining power of the truths which
they preached; the interest which the Corinthian Christians and all
other Christians had in the ministry, and this to conciliate their
favor; and to show what there was to comfort them in the various trials
to which as ministers they were exposed. Paul states therefore in this
chapter:

1\. That these clear and elevated views of the gospel sustained him;
kept him from fainting; preserved him from deceit and all improper acts;
made him open and honest; since he had no necessity for craft and guilt,
but proclaimed a system of religion which could be commended to every
man's conscience, and be seen to be true, [Co2
4:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#001).

2\. That if any persons were lost, it was not the fault of the gospel,
[Co2 4:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#003). That was clear, open,
plain, glorious, and might be understood; and if they were lost, it was
to be traced to the malign influence of the god of this world, and not
to the gospel.

3\. That the great purpose of Paul and his associates was to make known
this clear and glorious truth of the gospel, and that, therefore, the
apostles did not preach themselves, but Christ Jesus, the revealer and
source of all this glory. [Co2 4:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#005).
Their sole object was to show forth this pure and glorious light of the
gospel.

4\. That it was so arranged by God's appointment and providence that all
the glory of the results of the ministry should be his, [Co2
4:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007). He had taken special care that
they should have no cause of self-exultation or glorying in preaching
the gospel; and had taken effectual means that they should be humbled,
and not lifted up with pride, from the fact that they were commissioned
to make known such glorious truths, and had a ministry more honorable
than that of Moses. He had, therefore, committed the treasure to earthen
vessels; to frail, weak, dying people, and to people in humble life [Co2
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007), and he had called them to submit
to constant trials of persecution, poverty, peril, and want, in order
that they might be humbled, and that God might manifestly have all the
glory, [Co2 4:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#008).

5\. All this was for the sake of the church, a fact which was adapted to
conciliate the favor of Christians and excite their sympathy in the
sufferings of the apostles, and to lead them to honor the ministry in a
proper manner, [Co2 4:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#012). It was
not for their own welfare, happiness, honor. or emolument that they
endured these trials in the ministry; it was that the church might be
benefitted, and thus abundant praise redound to God.

6\. These considerations sustained them in their trials, [Co2
4:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016). They had comfort in all their
afflictions. They felt that they were doing and suffering these things
for the salvation of souls, and the glory of God, [Co2
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016); they had inward strength given
them every day, though the outward man perished [Co2
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016); they knew that the result of
this would be an eternal weight of glory [Co2
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017); and they were enabled to look to
another and a better world; to keep the eye on heaven, and to
contemplate by faith the things which were unseen and eternal, [Co2
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#018). These things supported them; and
thus upheld, they went cheerfully to their great work, and met with
calmness and joy all the trials which it involved.

[2 Corinthians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 4:1</span></span>

Therefore - Διὰ τοῦτο Dia touto. On account of this. That is, because
the light of the gospel is so clear; because it reveals so glorious
truths, and all obscurity is taken away, and we are permitted to behold
as in a mirror the glory of the Lord, [Co2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018). Since the glories of the gospel
dispensation are so great, and its effects on the heart are so
transforming and purifying. The object is, to show the "effect" of being
entrusted with such a ministry, on the character of his preaching.

Seeing we have this ministry - The gospel ministry, so much more
glorious than that of Moses [Co2 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006);
which is the ministry by which the Holy Spirit acts on the hearts of
people [Co2 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#008); which is the ministry
of that system by which people are justified [Co2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#009); and which is the ministry of a
system so pure and unclouded, [Co2
3:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#009), [Co2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018).

As we have received mercy - Tyndale renders this: "even as mercy is sure
in us." The idea is, that it was by the mere mercy and favor of God,
that he had been entrusted with the ministry, and the object of Paul is
doubtless to prevent the "appearance" of arrogance and self-confidence
by stating that it was to be traced entirely to God that he was put into
the ministry. He doubtless had his eye on the fact that he had been a
persecutor and blasphemer; and that it was by the mere favor of God that
he had been converted and entrusted with the ministry, [Ti1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013). Nothing will more effectually
humble a minister, and prevent his assuming any arrogant and
self-confident airs, than to look over his past life; especially if his
life was one of blasphemy, vice, or infidelity; and to remember that it
is by the mere mercy of God that he is entrusted with the high office of
an ambassador of Jesus Christ. Paul never forgot to trace his hope, his
appointment to the ministerial office, and his success, to the mere
grace of God.

We faint not - This is one of the effects of being entrusted with such a
ministry. The word used here (ἐκκακοῦμεν ekkakoumen) means, properly, to
turn out a coward; to lose one's courage; then to be fainthearted, to
faint, to despond, in view of trial, difficulty, etc. - Robinson. Here
it means, that by the mercy of God, he was not disheartened by the
difficulties which he met; his faith and zeal did not flag; he was
enabled to be faithful, and laborious, and his courage always kept up,
and his mind was filled with cheerfulness; see note on [Co2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#014). He was deterred by no
difficulties; embarrassed by no opposition; driven from his purpose by
no persecution; and his strength did not fail under any trials. The
consciousness of being entrusted with "such" a ministry animated him;
and the mercy and grace of God sustained him.

[2 Corinthians 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 4:2</span></span>

But have renounced - (ἀπειπάμεθα apeipametha from ἀπὸ apo and εἶπον
eipon). The word means properly to speak out or off; to refuse or deny;
to interdict or forbid. Here it means, to renounce, or disown; to spurn,
or scorn with aversion. It occurs no where else in the New Testament;
and the sense here is, that the apostles had such a view of the truth of
religion, and the glory of the Christian scheme [Co2
3:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013), as to lead them to discard
everything that was disguised, and artful, and crafty; everything like
deceit and fraud. The religions of the pagan were made up mainly of
trick, and were supported by deception practiced on the ignorant, and on
the mass of people. Paul says, that he and his fellow-laborers had such
views of the truth, and glory, and holiness of the Christian scheme, as
to lead them solemnly to abjure and abhor all such dishonest tricks and
devices. Truth never needs such arts; and no cause will long succeed by
mere trick and cunning.

The hidden things of dishonesty - Margin, "shame." The Greek word most
commonly means shame, or disgrace. The hidden things of shame here mean
disgraceful conduct; clandestine and secret arts, which were in
themselves shameful and disgraceful. They denote all "underhanded"
dealings; all dishonest artifices and plans, such as were common among
the pagan, and such probably as the false teachers adopted in the
propagation of their opinions at Corinth. The expression here does not
imply that the apostles ever had anything to do with such arts; but that
they solemnly abjured and abhorred them. Religion is open, plain,
straightforward. It has no alliance with cunning, and trick, and
artifice. It should be defended openly; stated clearly; and urged with
steady argument. It is a work of light, and not of darkness.

Not walking in craftiness - Not acting craftily; not behaving in a
crafty manner. The word used here πανουργία (panourgia from πᾶν pan,
"all," ἔργον ergon, "work," that is, doing every thing, or capable of
doing anything) denotes shrewdness, cunning, and craft. This was common;
and this was probably practiced by the false teachers in Corinth. With
this Paul says he had nothing to do. He did not adopt a course of carnal
wisdom and policy (note, [Co2 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012));
he did not attempt to impose upon them, or to deceive them; or to make
his way by subtile and deceitful arts. True religion can never be
advanced by trick and craftiness.

Nor handling the word of God deceitfully - (δολοῦντες dolountes). Not
falsifying; or deceitfully corrupting or disguising the truth of God,
The phrase seems to be synonymous with that used in [Co2
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#017), and rendered "corrupt the word
of God;" see the note on that verse. It properly means to falsify,
adulterate, corrupt, by Jewish traditions, etc. (Robinson, Bloomfield,
Doddridge, etc.); or it may mean, as in our translation, to handle in a
deceitful manner; to make use of trick and art in propagating and
defending it. Tyndale renders it: "neither corrupt we the Word of God."

But by manifestation of the truth - By making the truth manifest; that
is, by a simple exhibition of the truth. By stating it just as it is, in
an undisguised and open manner. Not by adulterating it with foreign
mixtures; not by mingling it with philosophy, or traditions; not by
blunting its edge, or concealing anything, or explaining it away; but by
an open, plain, straightforward exhibition of it as it is in Jesus.
Preaching should consist in a simple exhibition of the truth. There is
no deceit in the gospel itself; and there should be none in the manner
of exhibiting it. It should consist of a simple statement of things as
they are. The whole design of preaching is, to make known the truth. And
this is done in an effectual manner only when it is simple, open,
undisguised, without craft, and without deceit.

Commending ourselves to every man's conscience - That is, so speaking
the truth that every man's conscience shall approve it "as" true; every
man shall see it to be true, and to be in accordance with what he knows
to be right. Conscience is that faculty of the mind which distinguishes
between right and wrong, and which prompts us to choose the former and
avoid the latter; [Joh 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#009); [Rom
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#015) note; [Co1
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#025), [Co1
10:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#027) notes; [Co2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012) note. It is implied here:

\(1\) That a course of life, and a manner of preaching that shall be
free from dishonesty, and art, and trick, will be such as the
consciences of people will approve. Paul sought such a course of life as
should accord with their sense of "right," and thus serve to commend the
gospel to them.

\(2\) that the gospel may be so preached as to be seen by men to be
true; so as to be approved as right; and so that every man's conscience
shall bear testimony to its truth. People do not "love" it, but they may
see that it is "true;" they may hate it, but they may see that the truth
which condemns their practices is from heaven. This is an exceedingly
important principle in regard to preaching, and vastly momentous in its
bearing on the views which ministers should have of their own work. The
gospel is reasonable. It may be seen to be true by every man to whom it
is preached. And it should be the aim of every preacher so to preach it,
as to enlist the consciences of his hearers in his layout. And it is a
very material fact that when so preached the conscience and reason of
every man is in its favor, and they know that it is true even when it
pronounces their own condemnation, and denounces their own sins. This
passage proves, therefore, the following things:

\(1\) That the gospel may be so preached as to be seen to be true by all
people. People are capable of seeing the truth, and even when they do
not love it; they can perceive that it has demonstration that it is from
God. It is a system so reasonable; so well established by evidence; so
fortified by miracles, and the fulfillment of prophecies; so pure in its
nature; so well-adapted to man; so suited to his condition, and so well
designed to make him better; and so happy in its influence on society,
that people may be led to see that it is true. And this I take to be the
case with almost all those people who habitually attend on the preaching
of the gospel. Infidels do not often visit the sanctuary; and when they
are in the habit of doing it, it is a fact that they gradually come to
the conviction that the Christian religion is true. It is rare to find
professed infidels in our places of worship; and the great mass of those
who attend on the preaching of the gospel may be set down as speculative
believers in the truth of Christianity.

\(2\) the consciences of people are on the side of truth, and the gospel
may be so preached as to enlist their consciences in its favor.
Conscience prompts to do right, and condemns us if we do wrong. It can
never be made to approve of wrong, never to give a man peace if he does
that which he knows to be evil. By no art or device; by no system of
laws, or bad government; by no training or discipline, can it be made
the advocate of sin. In all lands, at all times, and in all
circumstances, it prompts a man to do what is right, and condemns him if
he does wrong. It may be silenced for a time; it may be "seared as with
a hot iron," and for a time be insensible, but if it speak at all, it
speaks to prompt a man to do what he believes to be right, and condemns
him if he does that which is wrong. The consciences of people are on the
side of the gospel; and it is only their hearts which are opposed to it.
Their consciences are in favor of the gospel in the following, among
other respects:

\(a\) They approve of it as a just, pure, holy, and reasonable system;
as in accordance with what they feel to be right; as recommending that
which ought to be done, and forbidding that which ought not to be done.

\(b\) In its special requirements on themselves. Their consciences tell
them that they ought to love God with all the heart; to repent of their
sins; to trust in that Saviour who died for them; and to lead a life of
prayer and of devotedness to the service of God; that they ought to be
sincere and humble Christians, and prepare to meet God in peace.

\(c\) Their consciences approve the truth that condemns them. No matter
how strict it may seem to be; no matter how loud its denunciation
against their sins; no matter how much the gospel may condemn their
pride, avarice, sensuality, levity, dishonesty, fraud, intemperance,
profaneness, biasphemy, or their neglect of their soul, yet their
consciences approve of it as right, and proclaim that these things ought
to be condemned, and ought to be abandoned. The heart may love them, but
the conscience cannot be made to approve them. And the minister of the
gospel may "always" approach his people, or an individual man, with the
assurance that however much they may "love" the ways of sin, yet that he
has their consciences in his favor, and that in urging the claims of God
on them, their "consciences" will always coincide with his appeals.

\(3\) the "way" in which a minister is to commend himself to the
consciences of people, is that which was pursued by Paul. He must:

\(a\) Have a clear and unwavering conviction of the truth himself. On
this subject he should have no doubt. He should be able to look on it as
on a burnished mirror (note, [Co2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018)); and to see its glory as with
open face.

\(b\) It should be by the simple statement of the truth of the gospel.
Not by preaching philosophy, or metaphysics, or the traditions of man,
or the sentiments of theologians, but the simple truths of the gospel of
Jesus Christ. People may be made to see that these are truths, and God
will take care that the reason and consciences of people shall be in
their favor.

\(c\) By the absence of all trick and cunning, and disguised and subtle
arts. The gospel has nothing of these in itself, and it will never
approve of them, nor will God bless them. A minister of Jesus should be
frank, open, undisguised, and candid. He should make a sober and
elevated appeal to the reason and conscience of man. The gospel is not
"a cunningly devised fable;" it has no trick in itself, and the
ministers of religion should solemnly abjure all the hidden things of
dishonesty.

In the sight of God - As in the immediate presence of God. We act as if
we felt that His eye was upon us; and this consideration serves to keep
us from the hidden things of dishonesty, and from improper arts in
spreading the true religion; see the note on [Co2
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#017).

[2 Corinthians 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 4:3</span></span>

But if our gospel be hid - Paul here calls it his gospel, because it was
that which he preached, or the message which he bore; see note, [Rom
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025). The sense here is, "if the
gospel which I preach is not understood; if its meaning is obscure or
hidden; if its glory is not seen." It is "implied" here, that to many
the beauty and glory of the gospel was not perceived. This was
undeniable, notwithstanding the plainness and fullness with which its
truths were made known. The "object" of Paul here is, to state that this
fact was not to be traced to any lack of clearness in the gospel itself,
but to other causes, and thus probably to meet an objection which might
be made to his argument about the clearness and fullness of the
revelation in the gospel. In the language which Paul uses here, there is
undoubted allusion to what he had said respecting Moses, who put a veil
upon his face, [Co2 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013). He had hid,
or concealed his face, as emblematic of the nature of his institutions
(note, [Co2 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014)); and here Paul says
that it was not to be denied that the gospel was "veiled" also to some.
But it was not from the nature of the gospel. It was not because God had
purposely concealed its meaning. It was not from any lack of clearness
in itself. It was to be traced to other causes.

It is hid to them that are lost - On the meaning of the word rendered
here as "lost;" see the note, [Co2
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015), rendered there as "perish." It
is hid among them who are about to perish; who are perishing (ἐν τοῖς
ἀπολλυμένοις en tois apollumenois); those who deserve to perish. It is
concealed only among that class who may be designated as the perishing,
or as the lost. Grotins explains this, "those who deserve to perish, who
foster their vices, and will not see the truth which condemns those
vices." And he adds, that this might very well be, for, "however
conspicuous the gospel was in itself, yet like the sun it would not be
visible to the blind." The cause was not in the gospel, but in
themselves. This verse teaches, therefore:

\(1\) That the beauty of the gospel may be hidden from many of the human
family. This is a matter of simple fact. There are thousands and million
to whom it is preached who see no beauty in it, and who regard it as
foolishness.

\(2\) that there is a class of people who may be called, even now, "the
lost." They are lost to virtue, to piety, to happiness, to hope. They
deserve to perish; and they are hastening to merited ruin. This class in
the time of Paul was large; and it is large now. It is composed of those
to whom the gospel is hidden, or to whom it appears to be veiled, and
who see no beauty in it. It is made up indeed of all the profane,
polluted, and vile; but their "characteristic" feature is, that the
gospel is hidden from them, and that they see no beauty and glory in it.

\(3\) this is not the fault of the gospel. It is not the fault of the
sun when people shut their eyes and will not see it. It is not the fault
of a running stream, or a bubbling fountain, if people will not drink of
it, but rather choose to die of thirst. The gospel does not obscure and
conceal its own glory anymore than the sun does. It is in itself a clear
and full revelation of God and his grace; and that glory is adapted to
shed light upon the benighted minds of people.

[2 Corinthians 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 4:4</span></span>

In whom - In respect to whom; among whom; or in whose hearts. The design
of this verse is to account for the fact that the glory of the gospel
was not seen by them. It is to be traced entirely to the agency of him
whom Paul here calls "the god of this world."

The god of this world - There can be no doubt that Satan is here
designated by this appellation; though some of the fathers supposed that
it means the true God, and Clarke inclines to this opinion. In [Joh
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031), he is called "the prince of
this world." In [Eph 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002), he is called
"the prince of the power of the air." And in [Eph
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012), the same bad influence is
referred to under the names of "principalities, and powers," "the rulers
of the darkness of this world," and "spiritual wickedness in high
places." The name "god" is here given to him, not because he has any
divine attributes, but because he actually has the homage of the people
of this world as their god, as the being who is really worshipped, or
who has the affections of their hearts in the same way as it is given to
idols. By "this world" is meant the wicked world; or the mass of people.
He has dominion over the world. They obey his will; they execute his
plans; they further his purposes, and they are his obedient subjects. He
has subdued the world to himself, and was really adored in the place of
the true God; see the note on [Co1
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020). "They sacrificed to devils and
not to God." Here it is meant by the declaration that Satan is the god
of this world:

\(1\) That the world at large was under his control and direction. He
secured the apostasy of man, and early brought him to follow his plans;
and he has maintained his scepter and dominion since. No more abject
submission could be desired by him than has been rendered by the mass of
people.

\(2\) the idolatrous world particularly is under his control, and
subject to him; [Co1 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020). He is
worshipped there; and the religious rites and ceremonies of the pagan
are in general just such as a mighty being who hated human happiness,
and who sought pollution, obscenity, wretchedness, and blood would
appoint; and over all the pagan world his power is absolute. In the time
of Paul all the world, except the Jews and Christians, was sunk in pagan
degradation.

\(3\) he rules in the hearts and lives of all wicked people - and the
world is full of wicked people. They obey him, and submit to his will in
executing fraud, and rapine, and piracy, and murder, and adultery, and
lewdness; in wars and fightings; in their amusements and pastimes; in
dishonesty and falsehood. The dominion of Satan over this world has
been, and is still almost universal and absolute; nor has the lapse of
1,800 years rendered the appellation improper as descriptive of his
influence, that he is the god of this world. The world pursues his
plans; yields to his temptations; neglects, or rejects the reign of God
as he pleases; and submits to his scepter, and is still full of
abomination cruelty, and pollution, as he desires it to be.

Hath blinded the minds of them which believe not - Of all who discern no
beauty in the gospel, and who reject it. It is implied here:

\(1\) That the minds of unbelievers are blinded; that they perceive no
beauty in the gospel. This is often affirmed of those who reject the
gospel, and who live in sin; see the [Co2
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#013) note; [Mat
23:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#016), [Mat
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#026) notes; [Luk
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#018) note; [Joh
9:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#039); [Joh
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#040) notes; [Rom
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#007) note. The sense is, that they did
not see the spiritual beauty and glory of the plan of redemption. They
act in reference to that as they would in reference to this world, if a
bandage were over their eyes, and they saw not the light of the sun, the
beauty of the landscape, the path in which they should go, or the
countenance of a friend. All is dark, and obscure, and destitute of
beauty to them, however much beauty may be seen in all these objects by
others.

\(2\) that this is done by the agency of Satan; and that his dominion is
secured by keeping the world in darkness. The affirmation is direct and
positive, that it is by his agency that it is done. Some of the "modes"
in which it is done are the following:

\(a\) By a direct influence on the minds of people. I do not know why it
is absurd to suppose that one intellect may, in some way unknown to us,
have access to another, and have power to influence it; nor can it be
proved that Satan may not have power to pervert the understanding; to
derange its powers; to distract its attention; and to give in view of
the mind a wholly delusive relative importance to objects. In the time
of the Saviour it cannot be doubted that in the numerous cases of
demoniacal possessions, Satan directly affected the minds of people; nor
is there any reason to think that he has ceased to delude and destroy
them.

\(b\) By the false philosophy which has prevailed - a large part of
which seems to have been contrived as if on purpose to deceive the
world, and destroy the peace and happiness of people.

\(c\) By the systems of superstition and idolatry. All these seem to be
under the control of one Master Mind. They are so well conceived and
adapted to prostrate the moral powers; to fetter the intellect; to
pervert the will; to make people debased, sunken, polluted, and
degraded; and they so uniformly accomplish this effect, that they have
all the marks of being under the control of one mighty Mind, and of
having been devised to accomplish His purposes over people.

\(d\) By producing in the minds of people a wholly disproportionate view
of the value of objects. "A very small object held before the eye will
shut out the light of the sun." A piece of money of the smallest value
laid on the eye will make everything appear dark, and prevent all the
glory of mid-day from reaching the seat of vision. And so it is with the
things of this world. They are placed directly before us, and are placed
directly between us and the glory of the gospel. And the trifles of
wealth and of fashion; the objects of pleasure and ambition, are made to
assume an importance in view of the mind which wholly excludes the glory
of the gospel, and shuts out all the realities of the eternal world. And
he does it:

\(e\) By the blinding influence of passion and vice. Before a vicious
mind all is dark and obscure. There is no beauty in truth, in chastity,
or honesty, or in the fear and love of God. Vice always renders the mind
blind. and the heart hard, and shrouds everything in the moral world in
midnight. And in order to blind the minds of people to the glory of the
gospel, Satan has only to place splendid schemes of speculation before
people; to tempt them to climb the steeps of ambition; to entice them to
scenes of gaiety; to secure the erection of theaters, and gambling
houses, and houses of infamy and pollution; to fill the cities and towns
of a land with taverns and dram-shops; and to give opportunity
everywhere for the full play and unrestrained indulgence of passion; and
the glory of the gospel will be as effectually unseen as the glory of
the sun is in the darkest night.

Lest the light ... - This passage states the design, for which Satan
blinds the minds of people. It is because he "hates" the gospel, and
wishes to prevent its influence and spread in the world Satan has always
hated and opposed it, and all his arts have been employed to arrest its
diffusion on earth. The word "light" here means excellence, beauty, or
splendor. Light is the emblem of knowledge, purity, or innocence; and is
here and elsewhere applied to the gospel, because it removes the errors,
and sins, and wretchedness of people, as the light of the sun scatters
the shades of night. This purpose of preventing the light of the gospel
shining on people, Satan will endeavor to accomplish by all the means in
his power. It is his "grand" object in this world, because it is by the
gospel only that people can be saved; by that that God is glorified on
earth more than by anything else; and because, therefore, if he can
prevent sinners from embracing that, he will secure their destruction,
and most effectually show his hatred of God. And it is to Satan a matter
of little importance what people "may be," or "are," provided they are
not Christians. They may be amiable, moral, accomplished, rich, honored,
esteemed by the world, because in the possession of all these he may be
equally sure of their ruin, and because, also, these things may
contribute somewhat to turn away their minds from the gospel. Satan,
therefore, will not oppose plans of gain or ambition; he will not oppose
purposes of fashion and amusement; he may not oppose schemes by which we
desire to rise in the world; he will not oppose the theater, the
ballroom, the dance, or the song; he will not oppose thoughtless mirth;
but the moment the gospel begins to shine on the benighted mind, that
moment he will make resistance, and then all his power will be
concentrated.

The glorious gospel - Greek 'The gospel of the glory of Christ,' a
Hebraism for the glorious gospel. Mr. Locke renders it, "the glorious
brightness of the light of the gospel of Christ," and supposes it means
the brightness, or clearness, of the doctrine wherein Christ is
manifested in the gospel. It is all light, and splendor, and beauty,
compared with the dark systems of philosophy and paganism. It is
glorious, for it is full of splendor; makes known the glorious God;
discloses a glorious plan of salvation; and conducts ignorant, weak, and
degraded man to a world of light. No two words in our language are so
full of rich and precious meaning, as the phrase "glorious gospel."

Who is the image of God - Christ is called the image of God:

\(1\) In respect to his divine nature, his exact resemblance to God in
his divine attributes and perfections; see [Col
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015); and [Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003); and,

\(2\) In his moral attributes as Mediator, as showing forth the glory of
the Father to people. He "resembles" God, and in him we see the divine
glory and perfections embodied, and shine forth.

It is from his "resemblance" to God in all respects that he is called
his image; and it is through him that the divine perfections are made
known to people. It is an object of special dislike and hatred to Satan
that the glory of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine on
people, and fill their hearts. Satan hates that image; he hates that
people should become like God; and he hates all that has a resemblance
to the great and glorious Yahweh.

[2 Corinthians 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 4:5</span></span>

For we preach not ourselves - The connection here is not very apparent,
and the design of this verse has been variously understood. The
connection seems to me to be this. Paul gives here a reason for what he
had said in the previous parts of the Epistle respecting his conduct in
the ministry. He had said that his course had been open, and pure, and
free from all dishonest arts and tricks, and that he had not corrupted
the Word of God, or resorted to any artifice to accomplish his designs;
[Co2 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#017); [Co2
4:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#001). The "reason" of this he here
says is, that he had not preached himself, or sought to advance his own
interest. He regarded himself as sent to make known a Saviour; himself
as bound by all means to promote his cause, and to imitate him. Other
people - the false teachers, and the cunning priests of the pagan
religion - sought to advance their own interest, and to perpetuate a
system of delusion that would be profitable to themselves; and they
therefore resorted to all arts, and stratagems, and cunning devices to
perpetuate their authority, and extend their influence. But the fact
that Paul and his associates went forth to make known the Lord Jesus,
was a reason why they avoided all such dishonest arts and artifices. "We
are merely the "ambassadors" of another. We are not "principals" in this
business, and do not despatch it as a business of our own, but we
transact it as the "agents" for another, that is, for the Lord Jesus,
and we feel ourselves bound, therefore, to do it as he would have done
it himself; and as he was free from all trick, and dishonest art, we
feel bound to be also." This seems to me to be the design of this
passage. Ministers may be said to preach themselves in the following
ways:

\(1\) When their preaching has a primary reference to their own
interest; and when they engage in it to advance their reputation, or to
secure in some way their own advantage. When they aim at exalting their
authority, extending their influence, or in any way promoting their own
welfare.

\(2\) when they proclaim their own opinions and not the gospel of
Christ; when they derive their doctrines from their own reasonings, and
not from the Bible.

\(3\) when they put themselves forward; speak much of themselves; refer
often to themselves; are vain of their powers of reasoning, of their
eloquence, and of their learning, and seek to make these known rather
than the simple truths of the gospel. In one word, when self is primary,
and the gospel is secondary; when they prostitute the ministry to gain
popularity; to live a life of ease; to be respected; to obtain a
livelihood: to gain influence; to rule over a people; and to make the
preaching of the gospel merely an occasion of advancing themselves in
the world. Such a plan, it is implied here, would lead to dishonest arts
and devices, and to trick and stratagem to accomplish the end in view.
And it is implied here, also, that to avoid all such tricks and arts the
true way is not to preach ourselves, but Jesus Christ.

But Christ Jesus the Lord - This Paul states to be the only purpose of
the ministry. It is so far the sole design of the ministry that had it
not been to make known the Lord Jesus, it would never have been
established; and whatever other objects are secured by its appointment,
and whatever other truths are to be illustrated and enforced by the
ministry, yet, if this is not the primary subject, and if every other
object is not made subservient to this, the design of the ministry is
not secured. The word "Christ" properly means the anointed that is, the
Messiah, the anointed of God for this great office (see the note, [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)); but it is used in the New
Testament as a proper name, the name that was appropriate to "Jesus."
Still it may be used with a reference to the fact of the Messiahship,
and not merely as a proper name, and in this place it may mean that they
preached Jesus as the Messiah, or the Christ and defended his claims to
that high appointment. The word "Lord" also is used to designate him
[Mar 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#003); [Joh
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#025); and when it stands by itself in
the New Testament, it denotes the Lord Jesus (note, [Act
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#024)); but it properly denotes one who
has rule or authority, or proprietorship; and it is used here not merely
as a part of the appropriate title of the Saviour, but with reference to
the fact that he had the supreme headship, or lordship over the church
and the world. This important passage, therefore, means, that they made
it their sole business to make known Jesus the Messiah, or the Christ,
as the supreme head and Lord of people that is, to set forth the
Messiahship and the lordship of Jesus of Nazareth appointed to these
high offices by God. To do this, or to preach Jesus Christ the Lord,
implies the following things:

\(1\) To prove that he is the Messiah so often predicted in the Old
Testament, and so long expected by the Jewish people. To do this was a
very vital part of the work of the ministry in the time of the apostles,
and was essential to their success in all their attempts to convert the
Jews; and to do this will be no less important in all attempts to bring
the Jews now or in future times to the knowledge of the truth. No man
can be successful among them who is not able to prove that Jesus is the
Messiah. It is not indeed so vital and leading a point now in reference
to those to whom the ministers of the gospel usually preach; and it is
probable that the importance of this argument is by many overlooked, and
that it is not urged as it should be by those who "preach Christ Jesus
the Lord." It involves the whole argument for the truth of Christianity.
It leads to all the demonstrations that this religion is from God; and
the establishment of the proposition that Jesus is the Messiah, is one
of the most direct and certain ways of proving that his religion is from
heaven. Because:

\(a\) It contains the argument from the fulfillment of the prophecies -
one of the main evidences of the truth of revelation; and,

\(b\) It involves an examination of all the evidences that Jesus gave
that he was the Messiah sent from God, and of course an examination of
all the miracles that he performed in attestation of his divine mission.

The first object of a preacher, therefore, is to demonstrate that Jesus
is sent from God in accordance with the predictions of the prophets.

\(2\) to proclaim the truths that he taught. To make known his
sentiments, and his doctrines, and not our own. This includes, of
course, all that he taught respecting God, and respecting man; all that
he taught respecting his own nature, and the design of his coming; all
that he taught respecting the character of the human heart, and about
human obligation and duty; all that he taught respecting death, the
judgment, and eternity - respecting an eternal heaven, and an eternal
hell. To explain, enforce, and vindicate his doctrines, is one great
design of the ministry; and were there nothing else, this would be a
field sufficiently ample to employ the life; sufficiently glorious to
employ the best talents of man. The minister of the gospel is to teach
the sentiments and doctrines of Jesus Christ, in contradistinction from
all his own sentiments, and from all the doctrines of mere philosophy.
He is not to teach science, or mere morals, but he is to proclaim and
defend the doctrines of the Redeemer.

\(3\) he is to make known the facts of the Saviour's life. He is to show
how he lived - to hold up his example in all the trying circumstances in
which he was placed. For he came to show by his life what the Law
required; and to show how people should live. And it is the office of
the Christian ministry, or a part of their work in preaching "Christ
Jesus the Lord," to show how he lived, and to set forth his self-denial,
his meekness, his purity, his blameless life, his spirit of prayer, his
submission to the divine will, his patience in suffering, his
forgiveness of his enemies, his tenderness to the afflicted, the weak,
and the tempted; and the manner of his death. Were "this" all, it would
be enough to employ the whole of a minister's life, and to command the
best talents of the world. For he was the only perfectly pure model; and
his example is to be followed by all his people, and his example is
designed to exert a deep and wide influence on the world. Piety
flourishes just in proportion as the pure example of Jesus Christ is
kept before a people; and the world is made happier and better just as
that example is kept constantly in view. To the frivolous and the
thoughtless, the ministers of the gospel are to show how serious and
calm was the Redeemer; to the worldly-minded, to show trow he lived
above the world; to the avaricious, how benevolent he was; to the
profane and licentious, how pure he was; to the tempted, how he endured
temptation; to the afflicted, how patient and resigned; to the dying,
how he died: to all, to show how holy, and heavenly-minded, and
prayerful, and pure he was; in order that they may be won to the same
purity, and be prepared to dwell with him in his kingdom.

\(4\) to set forth the design of his death. To show why he came to die;
and what was the great object to be effected by his sufferings and
death. To exhibit, therefore, the sorrows of his life; to describe his
many trials; to dwell upon his sufferings in the Garden of Gethsemane,
and on the cross. To show why he died, and what was to be the influence
of his death on the destiny of man. To Show how it makes an atonement
for sin; how it reconciles God to man; how it is made efficacious in the
justification and the sanctification of the sinner. And were there
nothing else, this would be sufficient to employ all the time, and the
best talents in the ministry. For the salvation of the soul depends on
the proper exhibition of the design of the death of the Redeemer. There
is no salvation but through his blood; and hence, the nature and design
of his atoning sacrifice is to be exhibited to every man, and the offers
of mercy through that death to be pressed upon the attention of every
sinner.

\(5\) to set forth the truth and the design of his resurrection. To
prove that he rose from the dead, and that he ascended to heaven; and to
show the influence of his resurrection on our hopes and destiny. The
whole structure of Christianity is dependent on making out the fact that
he rose; and if he rose, all the difficulties in the doctrine of the
resurrection of the dead are removed at once, and his people will also
rise. The influence of that fact, therefore, on our hopes and on our
prospects for eternity, is to be shown by the ministry of the gospel;
and were there nothing else, this would be ample to command all the
time, and the best talents of the ministry.

\(6\) to proclaim him as "Lord." This is expressly specified in the
passage before us. "For we preach Christ Jesus the Lord;" we proclaim
him as the Lord. That is, he is to be preached as having dominion over
the conscience; as the Supreme Ruler in his Church; as above all
councils, and synods, and conferences, and all human authority; as
having a right to legislate for his people; a right to prescribe their
mode of worship; a right to define and determine the doctrines which
they shall believe. He is to be proclaimed also as ruling over all, and
as exalted in his mediatorial character over all worlds, and as having
all things put beneath his feet; [Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006); [Isa
9:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006); [Mat
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018); [Joh
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002); [Eph
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020); [Heb
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#008).

And ourselves your servants ... - So far as we make any mention of
ourselves, it is to declare that we are your servants, and that we are
bound to promote your welfare in the cause and for the sake of the
Redeemer. That is, they were their servants in all things in which they
could advance the interests of the Redeemer's kingdom among them. The
doctrine is, that they regarded themselves as under obligation not to
seek their own interest, or to build up their own reputation and cause,
but to seek the welfare of the church; and promote its interests, as a
servant does that of his master. They should not seek to lord it over
God's heritage, and to claim supreme and independent authority. They
were not masters but servants. The church at large was the master, and
they were its servants. This implies the following things:

\(1\) That the "time" of ministers belongs to the church, and should be
employed in its welfare. It is not their own; and it is not to be
employed in farming, or in speculating, or in doing business, or in
idleness, or in lounging, or in unprofitable visiting, or in mere
science, or in reading or making books that will not advance the
interests of the church. The time of the ministry is not for ease, or
ambition, or self-indulgence, but is to promote the interests of the
body of Christ. So Paul felt, and so he lived.

\(2\) their "talents" belong to the church. All their original talents,
and all that they can acquire, should be honestly devoted to the welfare
of the church of the Redeemer.

\(3\) their best efforts and plans, the avails of their best thoughts
and purposes, belong to the church, and should be honestly devoted to
it. Their strength and vigor, and influence should be devoted to it, as
the vigor, and strength, and talent, and skill of a servant belong to
the master; see [Psa 137:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#005). The
language of the ministry, as of every Christian, should be:

I love thy church, O God,

Her walls before thee stand,

Dear as the apple of thine eye,

And graven on thy hand,

If e'er to bless thy sons.

My voice or hands deny,

These hands let useful skill forsake,

This voice in silence die.

If e'er my heart forget.

Her welfare or her wo,

Let every joy this heart forsake,

And every grief o'erflow.

For her my tears shall fall,

For her my prayers ascend,

To her my cares and toils be given,

Until toils and cares shall end.

And it implies:

\(4\) That they are the servants of the church in time of trial,
temptation, and affliction. They are to devote themselves to the comfort
of the afflicted. They are to be the guide to the perplexed. They are to
aid the tempted. They are to comfort those that mourn, and they are to
sustain and console the dying. They are to regard themselves as the
servants of the church to accomplish these great objects; and are to be
willing to deny themselves, and to take up their cross, and to
consecrate their time to the advancement of these great interests. And
they are, in all respects, to devote their time, and talents, and
influence to the welfare of the church, with as much single-mindedness
as the servant is to seek the interest of his master. It was in this way
eminently that Paul was favored with the success with which God blessed
him in the ministry; and so every minister will be successful, just in
proportion to the single-mindedness with which he devotes himself to the
work of preaching Jesus Christ the Lord.

[2 Corinthians 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 4:6</span></span>

For God, who commanded ... - The design of this verse seems to be, to
give a reason why Paul and his fellow-apostles did not preach
themselves, but Jesus Christ the Lord, [Co2
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#005). That reason was, that their minds
had been so illuminated by that God who had commanded the light to shine
out of darkness, that they had discerned the glory of the divine
perfections shining in and through the Redeemer, and they therefore gave
themselves. to the work of making him known among people. The doctrines
which they preached they had not derived from people in any form. They
had not been elaborated by human reasoning or science, nor had they been
imparted by tradition. They had been communicated directly by the source
of all light - the true God - who had shined into the hearts that were
once benighted by sin. Having been thus illuminated, they had felt
themselves bound to go and make known to others the truths which God had
imparted to them.

Who commanded the light ... - [Gen
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003). God caused it to shine by his
simple command. He said, "let there be light, and there was light." The
fact that it was produced by "his saying so" is referred to here by Paul
by his use of the phrase (ὁ εἰπὼν ho eipōn) "Who saying," or speaking
the light to shine from darkness. The passage in Genesis is adduced by
Longinus as a striking instance of the sublime.

Hath shined in our hearts - Margin, "It is he who hath." This is more in
accordance with the Greek, and the sense is, "The God who at the
creation bade the light to shine out of darkness, is he who has shined
into our hearts; or it is the same God who has illuminated us, who
commanded the light to shine at the creation." "Light" is every where in
the Bible the emblem of knowledge, purity, and truth; as darkness is the
emblem of ignorance, error, sin, and wretchedness. See note, [Joh
1:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004). And the sense here is, that God
had removed this ignorance, and poured a flood of light and truth on
their minds. This passage teaches, therefore, the following important
truths in regard to Christians - since it is as applicable to all
Christians, as it was to the apostles:

\(1\) That the mind is by nature ignorant and benighted - to an extent
which may be properly compared with the darkness which prevailed before
God commanded the light to shine. Indeed, the darkness which prevailed
before the light was formed, was a most striking emblem of the darkness
which exists in the mind of man before it is enlightened by revelation,
and by the Holy Spirit. For:

\(a\) In all minds by nature there is deep ignorance of God, of His Law,
and His requirements; and,

\(b\) This is often greatly deepened by the course of life which people
lead; by their education; or by their indulgence in sin, and by their
plans of life; and especially by the indulgence of evil passions.

The tendency of man if left to himself is to plunge into deeper
darkness, and to involve his mind more entirely in the obscurity of
moral midnight. "Light is come into the world, and men loved darkness
rather than light, because their deeds were evil," [Joh
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#019).

\(2\) this verse teaches the fact, that the minds of Christians are
illuminated. They are enabled to see things as they are. This fact is
often taught in the Scriptures; see [Jo1
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#020); [Co1
2:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#012). They have different views of
things from their fellow-men, and different from what they once had.
They perceive a beauty in religion which others do not see, and a glory
in truth, and in the Saviour, and in the promises of the gospel, which
they did not see before they were converted. This does not mean:

\(a\) That they are superior in their powers of understanding to other
people - for the reverse is often the fact; nor,

\(b\) That the effect of religion is at once to enlarge their own
intellectual powers, and make them different from what they were before
in this respect.

But it means that they have clear and consistent views; they look at
things as they are; they perceive a beauty in religion and in the
service of God which they did not before. They see a beauty in the
Bible, and in the doctrines of the Bible, which they did not before, and
which sinners do not see. The temperate man will see a beauty in
temperance, and in an argument for temperance, which the drunkard will
not; the benevolent man will see a beauty in benevolence which the churl
will not: and so of honesty, truth, and chastity. And especially will a
man who is reformed from intemperance, impurity, dishonesty, and
avarice, see a beauty in a virtuous life which he did not before see.
There is indeed no immediate and direct enlargement of the intellect;
but there is an effect on the heart which produces an appropriate and
indirect effect on the understanding.

It is at the same time true, that the practice of virtue, that a pure
heart, and that the cultivation of piety all tend to regulate,
strengthen, and expand the intellect, as the ways of vice and the
indulgence of evil passions and propensities tend to enfeeble, paralyze,
darken, and ruin the understanding; so that, other things being equal,
the man of most decided virtue, and most calm and elevated piety, will
be the man of the clearest and best regulated mind. His powers will be
the most assiduously, carefully, and conscientiously cultivated and he
will feel himself bound to make the most of them. The influence of piety
in giving light to the mind is often strikingly manifested among
unlettered and ignorant Christians. It often happens, as a matter of
fact, that they have by far clearer, and more just and elevated views of
truth than people of the most mighty intellects, and most highly
cultivated by science and adorned with learning. but who have no piety;
and a practical acquaintance with their own hearts, and a practical
experience of the power of religion in the days of temptation and trial
is a better enlightener of the mind on the subject of religion than all
the learning of the schools.

\(3\) this verse teaches, that it is the "same God" who enlightens the
mind of the Christian that commanded the light at first to shine. He is
the source of all light. He formed the light in the natural world; he
gives all light and truth on all subjects to the understanding; and he
imparts all correct views of truth to the heart. Light is not originated
by man; and man on the subject of religion no more creates the light
which beams upon his benighted mind than he created the light of the sun
when it first shed its beams over the darkened earth. "All truth is from
the sempiternal source of light divine;" and it is no more the work of
man to enlighten the mind. and dissipate the darkness from the soul of a
benighted sinner, than it was of man to scatter the darkness that
brooded over the creation, or than he can now turn the shades of
midnight to noonday. All this work lies beyond the proper province of
man; and is all to be traced to the agency of God - the great fountain
of light.

\(4\) it is taught here that it is the "same power" that gives light to
the mind of the Christian which at first commanded the light to shine
out of darkness. It requires the exertion of the same Omnipotence; and
the change is often as remarkable, and surprising. Nothing can be
conceived to be more grand than the first creation of light - when by
one word the whole solar system was in a blaze. And nothing in the moral
world is more grand than when by a word God commands the light to beam
on the soul of a benighted sinner. Night is at once changed to day; and
all things are seen in a blaze of glory. The works of God appear
different; the Word of God appears different; and a new aspect of beauty
is diffused over all things. If it be asked in what way God thus imparts
light to the mind, we may reply:

\(a\) By his written and preached word. All spiritual and saving light
to the minds of people has come through his revealed truth. Nor does the
Spirit of God now give or reveal any light to the mind which is not to
be found in the Word of God. and which is not imparted through that
medium.

\(b\) God makes use of his providential dealings to give light to the
minds of people. They are then, by sickness, disappointment, and pain,
made to see the folly and vanity of the things of this world, and to see
the necessity of a better portion.

\(c\) It is done especially and mainly by the influences of the Holy
Spirit. It is directly by his agency that the heart becomes affected,
and the mind enlightened.

It is his province in the world to prepare the heart to receive the
truth; to dispose the mind to attend to it: to remove the obstructions
which existed to its clear perception; to enable the mind clearly to see
the beauty of truth, and of the plan of salvation through a Redeemer.
And whatever may be the means which may be used, it is still true that
it is only by the Spirit of God that people are ever brought to see the
truth clearly and brightly. The same Spirit that inspired the prophets
and apostles also illuminates the minds of people now, removes the
darkness from their minds, and enables them clearly to discover the
truth as it is in Jesus. See the notes, [Co1
2:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010).

To give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God - This shows the
"object," or the "effect" of enlightening the mind. It is that
Christians may behold the divine glory. The meaning is, that it is for
the purpose of enlightening and instructing them concerning the
knowledge of the glory of God - Bloomfield. Doddridge renders it, "the
luster of the knowledge of God's glory." Tyndale, "to give the light of
the knowledge of the glorious God." The sense is, that the purpose of
his shining into their hearts was to give light (πρὸς pros φωτισμὸν
phōtismon) that is, unto the enlightening; and the purpose of that light
was to acquaint them with the knowledge of the divine glory.

In the face of Jesus Christ - That is, that they might obtain the
knowledge of the divine glory as it shines in the face of Jesus Christ;
or as it is reflected on the face, or the person of the Redeemer. There
is undoubted allusion here to what is said of Moses [Co2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013) when the divine glory was
reflected on his face, and produced such a splendor and magnificence
that the children of Israel could not steadfastly look upon it. The
sense here is, that in the face or the person of Jesus Christ the glory
of God shone clearly, and the divinity appeared without a veil. The
divine perfections, as it were, illuminated him, as the face of Moses
was illuminated; or they shone forth through him, and were seen in him.
The word rendered "face" here (προσώπον prosōpon) may mean either face
or person; see the note, [Co2 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#010).
The sense is not materially affected which ever translation is
preferred. It is, that the divine perfections shone in and through the
Redeemer. This refers doubtless to the following truths:

\(1\) That the glory of the divine "nature" is seen in him, since he is
"the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person." [Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003). And it is in and through him that
the glory of the divine perfections are made known,

\(2\) That the glory of the divine "attributes" are made known through
him, since it is through him that the work of creation was accomplished
[Joh 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003); [Col
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016); and it is by him that the mercy
and goodness of God have been manifested to people.

\(3\) that the glory of the divine "moral character" is seen through
him, since when on earth he manifested the embodied divine perfections;
he showed what God is when incarnate; he lived as became the incarnate
God - he was as pure and holy in human nature as God is in the heavens.

And there is not, that we know of, one of the divine attributes or
perfections which has not at some period, or in some form, been evinced
by Jesus Christ. If it be the prerogative of God to be eternal, he was
eternal; [Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006); [Rev
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008), [Rev
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#018). If it be the prerogative of God
to be the creator, he was also the creator [Joh
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003); if to be omniscient, he was
omniscient [Mat 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027); [Luk
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#022); if to be omnipresent, he is
omnipresent [Mat 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020); if to be
almighty, he was almighty [Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006); if
to raise the dead, to give life, he did it ([Joh
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021); [Joh
12:43-44](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#043); if to still waves and
tempests, he did it [Mar 4:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#039); if to
be full of benevolence, to be perfectly holy, to be without a moral
stain or spot, then all this is found in Jesus Christ. And as the wax
bears the perfect image of the seal - perfect not only in the outline,
and in the general resemblance, but in the filling up - in all the
lines, and features, and letters on the seal, so it is with the
Redeemer. There is not one of the divine perfections which has not the
counterpart in him, and if the glory of the divine character is seen at
all, it will be seen in and through him.

[2 Corinthians 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 4:7</span></span>

But we have this treasure - The treasure of the gospel; the rich and
invaluable truths which they were called to preach to others. The word
"treasure" is applied to those truths on account of their inestimable
worth. Paul in the previous verses had spoken of the gospel, the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, as full of glory, and infinitely precious.
This rich blessing had been committed to him and his fellow-laborers, to
dispense it to others, and to diffuse it abroad. His purpose in this and
the following verses is, to show that it had been so entrusted to them
as to secure all the glory of its propagation to God, and so also as to
show its unspeakable value. For this purpose, he not only affirms that
it is a treasure, but says that it had been so entrusted to them as to
show the power of God in its propagation; that it had showed its value
in sustaining them in their many trials; and "they" had showed their
sense of its worth by being willing to endure all kinds of trial in
order to make it everywhere known, [Co2
4:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#008). The expression here is similar
to that which the Saviour uses when he calls the gospel "the pearl of
great price," [Mat 13:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#046).

In earthen vessels - This refers to the apostles and ministers of
religion, as weak and feeble; as having bodies decaying and dying; as
fragile, and liable to various accidents, and as being altogether
unworthy to hold a treasure so invaluable; as if valuable diamonds and
gold were placed in vessels of earth of coarse composition, easily
broken, and liable to decay. The word "vessel" (σκεῦος skeuos) means
properly any utensil or instrument; and is applied usually to utensils
of household furniture, or hollow vessels for containing things, [Luk
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#016); [Joh
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#029). It is applied to the human
body, as made of clay, and therefore frail and feeble, with reference to
its "containing" anything, as, e. g., treasure; compare note on [Rom
9:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022). The word rendered "earthen,"
(ὀστρακίνοις ostrakinois) means that which is made of shells (from
ὄστρακινον ostrakinon), and then burnt clay, probably because vessels
were at first made of burnt shells. It is suited well to represent the
human body; frail, fragile, and easily reduced again to dust. The
purpose of Paul here is, to show that it was by no excellency of his
nature that the gospel was originated; it was in virtue of no vigor and
strength which he possessed that it was propagated; but that it had
been, of design, committed by God to weak, decaying, and crumbling
instruments, in order that it might "be seen" that it was by the power
of God that such instruments were sustained in the trials to which they
were exposed, and in order that it might be manifest to all that it was
not originated and diffused by the power of those to whom it was
entrusted. The idea is, that they were altogether insufficient of their
own strength to accomplish what was accomplished by the gospel. Paul
uses a metaphor similar to this in [Ti2
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#020).

That the excellency of the power - An elegant expression, denoting the
exceeding great power. The great power referred to here was that which
was manifested in connection with the labors of the apostles - the power
of healing the sick, raising the dead, and casting out devils; the power
of bearing persecution and trial, and the power of carrying the gospel
over sea and land, in the midst of danger, and in spite of all the
opposition which people could make, whether as individuals or as
combined; and especially the power of converting the hearts of sin ners,
of humbling the proud, and leading the guilty to the knowledge of God,
and the hope of heaven. The idea is, that all this was manifestly beyond
human strength; and that God had of design chosen weak and feeble
instruments "in order" that it might be everywhere seen that it was done
not by human power but by his own. The instrumentality employed was
altogether "disproportionate" in its nature to the effect produced.

May be of God - May evidently appear to be of God; that it may be
manifest to all that it is God's power and not ours. It was one great
purpose of God that this should be kept clearly in view. And it is still
done. God takes care that this shall be apparent. For:

\(1\) It is "always" true, whoever is employed, and however great may be
the talents, learning, or zeal of those who preach, that it is by the
power of God that people are converted. Such a work cannot be
accomplished by man. It is not by might or by strength; and between the
conversion of a proud, haughty, and abandoned sinner, and the power of
him who is made the instrument, there is such a manifest disproportion,
that it is evident it is the work of God. The conversion of the human
heart is not to be accomplished by man.

\(2\) ministers are frail, imperfect, and Sinful, as they were in the
time of Paul. When the imperfections of ministers are considered; when
their frequent errors, and their not unfrequent moral obliquities are
contemplated; when it is remembered how far many of them live from what
they ought to do, and how few of them live in any considerable degree as
becometh the followers of the Redeemer, it is wonderful that God blesses
their labor as he does; and the matter of amazement is not that no more
are converted under their ministry, but it is that so many are
converted, or that any are converted; and it is manifest tidal it is the
mere power of God.

\(3\) he often makes use of the most feeble, and unlearned, and weak of
his servants to accomplish the greatest effects. It is not splendid
talents, or profound learning, or distinguished eloquence, that is
always or even commonly most successful. Often the ministry of such is
entirely barren; while some humble and obscure man shall have constant
success, and revivals shall attend him wherever he goes. It is the man
of faith, and prayer, and self-denial, that is blessed; and the purpose
of God in the ministry, as in everything else, is to "stain the pride of
all human glory," and to show that he is all in all.

[2 Corinthians 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 4:8</span></span>

We are troubled - We the apostles. Paul here refers to some of the
trials to which he and his fellow laborers were subjected in making
known the gospel. The "design" for which he does it seems to be to show
them:

\(1\) What they endured in preaching the truth;

\(2\) To show the sustaining power of that gospel in the midst of
afflictions; and,

\(3\) To conciliate their favor, or to remind them that they had endured
these things on their account, [Co2
4:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#012).

Perhaps one leading design was to recover the affections of those of the
Corinthians whose heart had been alienated from him, by showing them how
much he had endured on their account. For this purpose he freely opens
his heart to them, and tenderly represents the many and grievous
pressures and hardships to which love to souls, and theirs among the
rest, had exposed him - Doddridge. The whole passage is one of the most
pathetic and beautiful to be found in the New Testament. The word
rendered "troubled" (θλιβόμενοι thlibomenoi, from θλίβω thlibō) may have
reference to wrestling, or to the contests in the Grecian games. It
properly means, to press, to press together; then to press as in a crowd
where there is a throng [Mar 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#009); then
to compress together [Mat 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014); and
then to oppress, or compress with evils, to distress, to afflict, [Th2
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006); [Co2
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#006). Here it may mean, that he was
encompassed with trials, or placed in the midst of them so that they
pressed upon him as persons do in a crowd, or, possibly, as a man was
close pressed by an adversary in the games. He refers to the fact that
he was called to endure a great number of trials and afflictions. Some
of those trials he refers to in [Co2
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#005). "When we were come into
Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we were troubled on every side;
without were fightings, within were fears."

On every side - In every respect. In every way. We are subjected to all
kinds of trim and affliction.

Yet not distressed - This by no means expresses the force of the
original; nor is it possible perhaps to express it in a translation.
Tyndale renders it, "yet we are not without our shift." The Greek word
used here (στενοχωρούμενοι stenochōroumenoi) has a relation to the word
which is rendered "troubled." It properly means "to crowd into a narrow
place; to straiten as to room; to be so straitened as not to be able to
turn oneself." And the idea is, that though he was close pressed by
persecutions and trials, yet he was not so hemmed in that he had no way
to turn himself; his trials did not wholly prevent motion and action. He
was not so closely pressed as a man would be who was so straitened that
he could not move his body, or stir hand or foot. He had still
resources; he was permitted to move; the energy of his piety, and the
vigor of his soul could not be entirely cramped and impeded by the
trials which encompassed him. The Syriac renders it: "In all things we
are pressed, but are not suffocated." The idea is, he was not wholly
discouraged, and disheartened, and overcome. He had resources in his
piety which enabled him to bear up under these trials, and still to
engage in the work of preaching the gospel.

We are perplexed - (ἀπορούμενοι aporoumenoi). This word (from ἄπορος
aporos, "without resource," which is derived from α a, the alpha
privative ("not"), and πόρος poros, way, or exit) means to be without
resource; to know not what to do; to hesitate; to be in doubt and
anxiety, as a traveler is, who is ignorant of the way, or who has not
the means of prosecuting his journey. It means here, that they were
often brought into circumstances of great embarrassment, where they
hardly knew what to do, or what course to take. They were surrounded by
foes; they were in want; they were in circumstances which they had not
anticipated, and which greatly perplexed them.

But not in despair - In the margin, "not altogether without help or
means." Tyndale renders this: "We are in poverty, but not utterly
without somewhat." In the word used here, (ἐξαπορούμενοι exaporoumenoi)
the preposition is intensive or emphatic, and means "utterly, quite."
The word means to be utterly without resource; to despair altogether;
and the idea of Paul here is, that they were not left "entirely" without
resource. Their needs were provided for; their embarrassments were
removed; their grounds of perplexity were taken away; and unexpected
strength and resources were imparted to them. When they did not know
what to do; when all resources seemed to fail them, in some unexpected
manner they would be relieved and saved from absolute despair. How often
does this occur in the lives of all Christians! And how certain is it,
that in all such cases God will interpose by his grace, and aid his
people, and save them from absolute despair.

[2 Corinthians 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 4:9</span></span>

Persecuted - Often persecuted, persecuted in all places. The Book of
Acts shows how true this was.

But not forsaken - Not deserted; nor left by God Though persecuted by
people, yet they experi enced the fulfillment of the divine promise that
he would never leave nor forsake them. God always interposed to aid
them; always saved them from the power of their enemies; always
sustained them in the time of persecution. It is still true. His people
have been often persecuted. Yet God has often interposed to save them
from the hands of their enemies; and where he has not saved them from
their hands, and preserved their lives, yet he has never left them, but
has sustained, upheld, and comforted them even in the dreadful agonies
of death.

Cast down - Thrown down by our enemies, perhaps in allusion to the
contests of wrestlers, or of gladiators.

But not destroyed - Not killed. They rose again; they recovered their
strength; they were prepared for new conflicts. They surmounted every
difficulty, and were ready to engage in new strifes, and to meet new
trials and persecutions.

[2 Corinthians 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 4:10</span></span>

Always bearing about in the body - The expression used here is designed
to show the great perils to which Paul was exposed. And the idea is,
that he had on his body the marks, the stripes and marks of punishment
and persecution, which showed that he was exposed to the same violent
death which the Lord Jesus himself endured; compare [Gal
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#017); "I bear in my body the marks of
the Lord Jesus." It is a strong energetic mode of expression, to denote
the severity of the trials to which he was exposed, and the meaning is,
that his body bore the marks of his being exposed to the same treatment
as the Lord Jesus was; and evidence that he was probably yet to die in a
similar manner under the hands of persecutors; compare [Col
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024).

The dying of the Lord Jesus - The death; the violent death. A death
similar to that of the Lord Jesus. The idea is, that he was always
exposed to death, and always suffering in a manner that was equivalent
to dying. The expression is parallel to what he says in [Co1
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#031). "I die daily;" and in [Co2
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023), where he says, "in deaths oft."
It does not mean that he bore about literally the dying of the Lord
Jesus, but that he was exposed to a similar death. and had marks on his
person which showed that he was always exposed to the same violent
death. This did not occur once only, or at distant intervals, but it
occurred constantly, and wherever he was it was still true that he was
exposed to violence, and liable to suffer in the same manner that the
Lord Jesus did.

That the life also of Jesus ... - This passage has received a
considerable variety of interpretation. Grotius renders it, "such a life
as was that of Christ, immortal, blessed, heavenly." Locke, "That also
the life of Jesus, risen from the dead, may be made manifest by the
energy that accompanies my preaching in this frail body." Clarke
supposes that it means, that he might be able in this manner to show
that Christ was risen from the dead. But perhaps, Paul does not refer to
one single thing in the life of the Lord Jesus, but means that he did
this in order that in all things the same life, the same kind of living
which characterized the Lord Jesus might be manifested in him; or that
he resembled him in his sufferings and trials, in order that in all
things he might have the same life in his body. Perhaps, therefore, it
may include the following things as objects at which the apostle aimed:

\(1\) A desire that his "life" might resemble that of the Lord Jesus.
That there might be the same self-denial; the same readiness to suffer;
the same patience in trials; the same meekness, gentleness, zeal, ardor,
love to God, and love to people evinced in his body which was in that of
the Lord Jesus. Thus understood, it means that he placed the Lord Jesus
before him as the model of his life, and deemed it an object to be
attained even by great self-denial and sufferings to be conformed to
him.

\(2\) a desire to attain to the same life in the resurrection which the
Lord Jesus had attained to. A desire to be made like him, and that in
his body which bore about the dying of the Lord Jesus, he might again
live after death as the Lord Jesus did. Thus understood, it implies an
earnest wish to attain to the resurrection of the dead, and accords with
what he says in [Phi 3:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008), which may
perhaps be considered as Paul's own commentary on this passage, which
has been so variously, and so little understood by expositors. "Yea,
doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of
all things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ. That I may
know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his
sufferings, being made conformable unto his death; if by any means I
might attain unto the resurrection of the dead;" compare [Col
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024). It intimates Paul's earnest
desire and longing to be made like Christ in the resurrection (compare
[Phi 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021)); his longing to rise again
in the last day (compare [Act 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#007));
his sense of the importance of the doctrine of the resurrection and his
readiness to suffer anything if he might at last attain to the
resurrection of the just, and be ready to enter with the Redeemer into a
world of glory. The attainment of this is the high object before the
Christian, and to be made like the Redeemer in heaven, to have a body
like his, is the grand purpose for which they should live; and sustained
by this hope they should be willing to endure any trials, and meet any
sufferings, if they may come to that same "life" and blessedness above.

[2 Corinthians 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 4:11</span></span>

For we which live - Those of us, the apostles and ministers of the
Redeemer who still survive. James the brother of John had been put to
death [Act 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#002); and it is probable
also that some other of the apostles had been also. This verse is merely
explanatory of the previous verse.

Are alway delivered unto death - Exposed constantly to death. This shows
what is meant in [Co2 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010), by bearing
about in the body the dying the Lord Jesus; see the note on [Co1
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#031).

In our mortal flesh - In our body. In our life on earth; and in our
glorified body in heaven; see the note on [Co2
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010).

[2 Corinthians 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 4:12</span></span>

So then death worketh in us - We are exposed to death. The preaching of
the gospel exposes us to trials which may be regarded as death working
in us. Death has an energy over us (ἐνεργεῖται energeitai, is at work,
is active, or operates); it is constantly employed in inflicting pains
on us, and subjecting us to privation and trials. This is a strong and
emphatic mode of saying that they were always exposed to death. We are
called to serve and glorify the Redeemer, as it were, by repeated deaths
and by constantly dying.

But life in you - You live as the effect of our being constantly exposed
to death. You reap the advantage of all our exposure to trials, and of
all our sufferings. You are comparatively safe; are freed from this
exposure to death; and will receive eternal life as the fruit of our
toils, and exposures. Life here may refer either to exemption from
danger and death; or it may refer to the life of religion; the hopes of
piety; the prospect of eternal salvation. To me it seems most probable
that Paul means to use it in the latter sense, and that he designs to
say that while he was exposed to death and called to endure constant
trial, the effect would be that they would obtain, in consequence of his
sufferings, the blessedness of eternal life; compare [Co2
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#015). Thus understood, this passage
means, that the sufferings and self-denials of the apostles were for the
good of others, and would result in their benefit and salvation; and the
design of Paul here is to remind them of his sufferings in their behalf,
in order to conciliate their favor and bind them more closely to him by
the remembrance of his sufferings on their account.

[2 Corinthians 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 4:13</span></span>

We having the same spirit of faith - The same spirit that is expressed
in the quotation which he is about to make; the same faith which the
psalmist had. We have the very spirit of faith which is expressed by
David. The sense is, we have the same spirit of faith which he had who
said, "I believed," etc. The phrase, "spirit of faith," means
substantially the same as faith itself; a believing sense or impression
of the truth.

According as it is written - This passage is found in [Psa
116:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#010). When the psalmist uttered the
words, he was greatly afflicted; see [Psa
116:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#003), [Psa
116:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#006). In these circumstances, he
prayed to God, and expressed confidence in him, and placed all his
reliance on him. In his affliction he spoke to God; he spoke of his
confidence in him; he proclaimed his reliance on him; and his having
spoken in this manner was the result of his belief, or of his putting
confidence in God. Paul, in quoting this, does not mean to say that the
psalmist had any reference to the preaching of the gospel; nor does he
mean to say that his circumstances were in all respects like those of
the psalmist. The circumstances resembled each other only in these
respects:

\(1\) That Paul, like the psalmist, was in circumstances of trial and
affliction; and,

\(2\) That the language which both used was that which was prompted by
faith - faith, which led them to give utterance to the sentiments of
their hearts; the psalmist to utter his confidence in God, and the holms
by which he was sustained, and Paul to utter his belief in the glorious
truths of the gospel; to speak of a risen Saviour, and to show forth the
consolations which were thus set before people in the gospel.

The sentiments of both were the language of faith. Both, in afflictions,
uttered the language of faith; and Paul uses here, as he often does, the
language of the Old Testament, as exactly expressing his feelings, and
the principles by which he was actuated.

We also believe ... - We believe in the truths of the gospel; we believe
in God, in the Saviour, in the atonement, in the resurrection, etc. The
sentiment is, that they had a firm confidence in these things, and that,
as the result of that confidence they boldly delivered their sentiments.
It prompted them to give utterance to their feelings. "Out of the
abundance of the heart," said the Saviour, "the mouth speaketh," [Mat
12:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#034). No man should attempt to preach
the gospel who has not a firm belief of its truths; and he who does
believe its truths will be prompted to make them known to his
fellow-men. All successful preaching is the result of a firm and settled
conviction of the truth of the gospel; and when such a conviction
exists, it is natural to give utterance to the belief, and such an
expression will be attended with happy influences on the minds of other
people; see the note on [Act 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#020).

[2 Corinthians 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 4:14</span></span>

Knowing - Being fully confident; having the most entire assurance. It
was the assured hope of the resurrection which sustained them in all
their trials. This expression denotes the full and unwavering belief, in
the minds of the apostles, that the doctrines which they preached were
true. They knew that they were revealed from heaven, and that all the
promises of God would be fulfilled.

Shall raise up us also - All Christians. In the hope of the resurrection
they were ready to meet trials, and even to die. Sustained by this
assurance, the apostles went forth amidst persecutions and opposition,
for they knew that their trials would soon end, and that they would be
raised up in the morning of the resurrection, to a world of eternal
glory.

By Jesus - By the power or the agency of Jesus. Christ will raise up the
dead from their graves, [Joh 5:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025).

And shall present us with you - Will present us before the throne of
glory with exceeding joy and honor. He will present us to God as those
who have been redeemed by his blood. He will present us in the courts of
heaven, before the throne of the eternal Father, as his ransomed people;
as recovered from the ruins of the fall; as saved by the merits of his
blood. They shall not only be raised up from the dead; but they shall be
publicly and solemnly presented to God as his, as recovered to his
service, and as having a title in the covenant of grace to the
blessedness of heaven.

[2 Corinthians 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co2 4:15</span></span>

For all things are for your sakes - All these things; these glorious
hopes, and truths, and prospects; these self-denials of the apostles,
and these provisions of the plan of mercy.

For your sakes - On your account. They are designed to promote your
salvation. They are not primarily for the welfare of those who engage in
these toils and self-denials; but the whole arrangement and execution of
the plan of salvation, and all the self-denial evinced by those who are
engaged in making that plan known, are in order that you might be
benefitted. One object of Paul in this statement, doubtless, is, to
conciliate their favor, and remove the objections which had been made to
him by a faction in the church at Corinth.

That the abundant grace - Grace abounding, or overflowing. The rich
mercy of God that should be manifested by these means. It is implied
here, that grace would abound by means of these labors and self-denials
of the apostles. The grace referred to here is that which would be
conferred on them in consequence of these labors.

Through the thanksgiving of many - That many may have occasion of
gratitude to God; that by these labors more persons may be led to praise
him. It was an object with Paul so to labor that as many as possible
might be led to praise God, and have occasion to thank him to all
eternity.

Redound to the glory of God - That God may have augmented praise; that
his glory in the salvation of people may abound. The sentiment of the
passage is, that it would be for the glory of God that as many as
possible should be brought to give praise and thanksgivings to him; and
that, therefore, Paul endeavored to make as many converts as possible.
He denied himself; he welcomed toil; he encountered enemies; he
subjected himself to dangers; and he sought by all means possible to
bring as many as could be brought to praise God. The word "redound"
(περισσεύῃ perisseuē) here means abound, or be abundant; and the sense
is, that the overflowing grace thus evinced in the salvation of many
would so abound as to promote the glory of God.

[2 Corinthians 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 4:16</span></span>

For which cause - With such an object in view, and sustained by such
elevated purposes and desires. The sense is, that the purpose of trying
to save as many as possible would make toil easy, privations welcome,
and would be so accompanied by the grace of God, as to gird the soul
with strength, and fill it with abundant consolations.

We faint not - For an explanation of the word used here, see the note on
[Co2 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#001). We are not exhausted,
desponding, or disheartened. We are sustained, encouraged, emboldened by
having such an object in view.

But though our outward man perish - By outward man, Paul evidently means
the body. By using the phrases, "the outward man," and the "inward man,"
he shows that he believed that man was made up of two parts, body and
soul. He was no materialist. He has described two parts as constituting
man, so distinct: that while the one perishes, the other is renewed;
while the one is enfeebled, the other is strengthened; while the one
grows old and decays, the other renews its youth and is invigorated. Of
course, the soul is not dependent on the body for its vigor and
strength, since it expands while the body decays; and of course the soul
may exist independently of the body, and in a separate state.

Perish - Grows old; becomes weak and feeble; loses its vigor and
elasticity under the many trials which we endure, and under the
infirmities of advancing years. It is a characteristic of the "outer
man," that it thus perishes. Great as may be its vigor, yet it must
decay and die. It cannot long bear up under the trials of life, and the
wear and tear of constant action, but must soon sink to the grave.

Yet the inward man - The soul; the undecaying, the immortal part.

Is renewed - Is renovated, strengthened, invigorated. His powers of mind
expanded; his courage became bolder; he had clearer views of truth; he
had more faith in God. As he drew nearer to the grave and to heaven, his
soul was more raised above the world, and he was more filled with the
joys and triumphs of the gospel. The understanding and the heart did not
sympathize with the suffering and decaying body; but, while that became
feeble, the soul acquired new strength, and was fitting for its flight
to the eternal world. This verse is an ample refutation of the doctrine
of the materialist, and proves that there is in man something that is
distinct from decaying and dying matter, and that there is a principle
which may gain augmented strength and power, while the body dies;
compare note, [Rom 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#022).

Day by day - Constantly. There was a daily and constant increase of
inward vigor. God imparted to him constant strength in his trials, and
sustained him with the hopes of heaven, as the body was decaying, and
tending to the grave. The sentiment of this verse is, that in an effort
to do good, and to promote the salvation of man, the soul will be
sustained in trials, and will be comforted and invigorated even when the
body is weary, grows old, decays, and dies. It is the testimony of Paul
respecting his own experience; and it is a fact which has been
experienced by thousands in their efforts to do good, and to save the
souls of people from death.

[2 Corinthians 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co2 4:17</span></span>

For our light affliction - This verse, with the following, is designed
to show further the sources of consolation and support which Paul and
his fellow-laborers had in their many trials. Bloomfield remarks on this
passage, that "in energy and beauty of expression, it is little inferior
to any in Demosthenes himself, to whom, indeed, and to Thucydides in his
orations, the style of the apostle, when it rises to the oratorical,
bears no slight resemblance." The passage abounds with intensive and
emphatic expressions, and manifests that the mind of the writer was
laboring to convey ideas which language, even after all the energy of
expression which he could command, would very imperfectly communicate.
The trials which Paul endured, to many persons would have seemed to be
anything else but light. They consisted of want, and danger, and
contempt, and stoning, and toil, and weariness, and the scorn of the
world, and constant exposure to death by land or by sea; see [Co2
4:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007), compare [Co2
11:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023). Yet these trials, though
continued through many years, and constituting, as it were, his very
life, he speaks of as the lightest conceivable thing when compared with
that eternal glory which awaited him. He strives to get an expression as
emphatic as possible, to show that in his estimation they were not
worthy to be named in comparison with the eternal weight of glory. It is
not sufficient to say that the affliction was "light" or was a mere
trifle; but he says that it was to endure but for a moment. Though
trials had followed him ever since he began to make known the Redeemer,
and though he had the firmest expectation that they would follow him to
the end of life and everywhere [Act
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#023), yet all this was a momentary
trifle compared with the eternal glory before him. The word rendered
"light" (ἐλαφρὸν elaphron) means that which is easy to bear, and is
usually applied to a burden; see [Mat
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030), compare [Co2
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#017).

Which is but for a moment - The Greek word used here (παραυτίκα
parautika) occurs nowhere else in the New Testament. It is an adverb,
from αὐτίκα autika, αὐτός autos, and means properly, "at this very
instant; immediately." Here it seems to qualify the word "light," and to
be used in the sense of momentary, transient. Bloomfield renders it,
"for the at present lightness of our affliction." Doddridge, "for this
momentary lightness of our affliction, which passes off so fast, and
leaves so little impression that it may be called levity itself." The
apostle evidently wished to express two ideas in as emphatic a manner as
possible; first, that the affliction was light, and, secondly, that it
was transient, momentary, and soon passing away. His object is to
contrast this with the glory that awaited him, as being heavy, and as
being also eternal.

Worketh for us - see the note, [Co2
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#012). Will produce, will result in.
The effect of these afflictions is to produce eternal glory. This they
do:

\(1\) By their tendency to wean us from the world;

\(2\) To purify the heart, by enabling us to 'break off from the sins on
account of which God afflicts us;

\(3\) By disposing us to look to God for consolation and support in our
trials;

\(4\) By inducing us to contemplate the glories of the heavenly world,
and thus winning us to seek heaven as our home; and,

\(5\) Because God has graciously promised to reward his people in heaven
as the result of their bearing trials in this life.

It is by affliction that he purifies them [Isa
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#010); and by trial that he takes
their affections from the objects of time and sense, and gives them a
relish for the enjoyments which result from the prospect of perfect and
eternal glory.

A far more exceeding - καθ ̓ ὑπερβολὴν εἰς ὑπερβολὴν kath' huperbolēn
eis huperbolēn. There is not to be found any where a more energetic
expression than this. The word (ὑπερβολή huperbolē), used here (whence
our word "hyperbole") means properly a throwing, casting, or throwing
beyond. In the New Testament it means excess, excellence, eminence; see
[Co2 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007). "The excellency of the
power." The phrase καθ ̓ ὑπερβολὴν kath' huperbolēn means exceedingly,
supereminently, [Rom 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#013); [Co1
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031); [Co2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#008); [Gal
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#013). This expression would have been
by itself intensive in a high degree. But this was not sufficient to
express Paul's sense of the glory which was laid up for Christians. It
was not enough for him to use the ordinary highest expression for the
superlative to denote the value of the object in his eye. He therefore
coins an expression, and adds εἰς ὑπερβολὴν eis huperbolēn. It is not
merely eminent; but it is eminent unto eminence; excess unto excess; a
hyperbole unto hyperbole - one hyperbole heaped upon another; and the
expression means that it is "exceeding exceedingly" glorious; glorious
in the highest possible degree - Robinson. Mr. Slade renders it,
"infinitely exceeding." The expression is the Hebrew form of denoting
the highest superlative; and it means that all hyperboles fail of
expressing that eternal glory which remains for the just. It is infinite
and boundless. You may pass from one degree to another; from one sublime
height to another; but still an infinity remains beyond. Nothing can
describe the uppermost height of that glory; nothing can express its
infinitude.

Eternal - This stands in contrast with the affliction that is for a
moment (παραυτίκα parautika). The one is momentary, transient; so short,
even in the longest life, that it may be said to be an instant; the
other has no limits to its duration. It is literally everlasting.

Weight - βάρος (baros). This stands opposed to the (ἐλαφρὸν elaphron)
light affliction. That was so light that it was a trifle. It was easily
borne. It was like the most light and airy objects, which constitute no
burden. It is not even here called a burden, or said to be heavy in any
degree. This is so heavy as to be a burden. Grotins thinks that the
image is taken from gold or silver articles, that are solid and heavy,
compared with those that are mixed or plated. But why may it not refer
to the insignia of glory and honor; a robe heavy with gold, or a diadem
or crown, heavy with gold or diamonds: glory so rich, so profuse as to
be heavy? The affliction was light; but the crown, the robe, the
adornings in the glorious world were not trifles, or baubles, but solid,
substantial, weighty. We apply the word weighty now to that which is
valuable and important, compared with that which is of no value,
probably because the precious metals and jewels are heavy; and it is by
them that we usually estimate the value of objects.

Of glory - (δόξης doxēs). The Hebrew word כבוד kabowd denotes weight as
well as glory. And perhaps Paul had that use of the word in his eye in
this strong expression. It refers here to the splendor, magnificence,
honor, and happiness of the eternal world. In this exceedingly
interesting passage, which is worthy of the deepest study of Christians,
Paul has set in most beautiful and emphatic contrast the trials of this
life and the glories of heaven. It may be profitable to contemplate at a
single glance the view which he had of them, that they may be brought
distinctly before the mind.

The one is:

1\. Affliction, θλίψις thlipsis.

2\. Light, ἐλαφρὸν elaphron.

3\. For a moment, παραυτίκα parautika.

The other is, by contrast,

\(1\) Glory, δόξή doxa.

\(2\) Weight, βάρος baros.

\(3\) Eternal, αἰώνιον aiōnion.

\(4\) Eminent, or excellent, καθ ̓ ὑπερβολὴν kath' huperbolēn.

\(5\) Infinitely excellent, eminent in the highest degree, εἰς ὑπερβολὴν
eis huperbolēn .

So the account stands in the view of Paul; and with this balance in
favor of the eternal glory, he regarded afflictions as mere trifles, and
made it the grand purpose of his life to gain the glory of the heavens.
What wise man, looking at the account, would not do likewise?

[2 Corinthians 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co2 4:18</span></span>

While we look ... - Or, rather, we not looking at the things which are
seen. The design of this is, to show in what way the afflictions which
they endured became in their view light and momentary. It was by looking
to the glories of the future world, and thus turning away the attention
from the trials and sorrows of this life. If we look directly at our
trials; if the mind is fixed wholly on them, and we think of nothing
else, they often appear heavy and long. Even comparatively light and
brief sufferings will appear to be exceedingly difficult to bear. But if
we can turn away the mind from them and contemplate future glory; if we
can compare them with eternal blessedness, and feel that they will
introduce us to perfect and everlasting happiness, they will appear to
be transitory, and will be easily borne. And Paul here has stated the
true secret of bearing trials with patience. It is to look at the things
which are unseen. To anticipate the glories of the heavenly world. To
fix the eye on the eternal happiness which is beyond the grave; and to
reflect how short these trials are, compared with the eternal glories of
heaven; and how short they will seem to be when we are there.

The things which are seen - The things here below; the things of this
life - poverty, want, care, persecution, trial, etc.

The things which are not seen - The glories of heaven, compare [Heb
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001).

The things which are seen are temporal - This refers particularly to the
things which they suffered. But it is as true of all things here below.
Wealth, pleasure, fame, the three idols which the people of this world
adore, are all to endure but for a little time. They will all soon
vanish away. So it is with pain, and sorrow, and tears. All that we
enjoy, and all that we suffer here, must soon vanish and disappear. The
most splendid palace will decay; the most costly pile will moulder to
dust; the most magnificent city will fall to ruins; the most exquisite
earthly pleasures will soon come to an end; and the most extended
possessions can be enjoyed but a little time. So the acutest pain will
soon be over; the most lingering disease will soon cease; the evils of
the deepest poverty, want, and suffering will soon be passed. There is
nothing on which the eye can fix, nothing that the heart can desire
here, which will not soon fade away; or, if it survives, it is temporary
in regard to us. We must soon leave it to others; and if enjoyed, it
will be enjoyed while our bodies are slumbering in the grave, and our
souls engaged in the deep solemnities of eternity. How foolish then to
make these our portion, and to fix our affections supremely on the
things of this life? How foolish also to be very deeply affected by the
trials of this life, which at the furthest can be endured but a little
longer before we shall be forever beyond their reach!

The things which are not seen are eternal - Everything which pertains to
that state beyond the grave:

\(1\) God is eternal; not to leave us as our earthly friends do.

\(2\) the Saviour is eternal - to be our everlasting friend.

\(3\) the companions and friends there are eternal. The angels who are
to be our associates, and the spirits of the just with whom we shall
live, are to exist forever. The angels never die; and the pious dead
shall die no more. There shall be then no separation, no death-bed, no
grave, no sad vacancy and loss caused by the removal of a much-loved
friend.

\(4\) the joys of heaven are eternal; There shall be no interruption; no
night; no cessation; no end. Heaven and all its joys shall be
everlasting; and he who enters there shall have the assurance that those
joys shall endure and increase while eternal ages shall roll away.

\(5\) it may be added, also, that the woes of hell shall be eternal.
They are now among the things which to us "are not seen;" and they, as
well as the joys of heaven, shall have no end. Sorrow there shall never
cease; the soul shall there never die; the body that shall be raised up
"to the resurrection of damnation" shall never again expire. And when
all these things are contemplated, well might Paul say of the things of
this life - the sorrows, trials, privations, and persecutions which he
endured, that they were light, and were for a moment." How soon will
they pass away; how soon shall we all be engaged amidst the unchanging
and eternal realities of the things which are not seen!

Remarks

1\. Ministers of the gospel have no cause to faint or to be discouraged,
[Co2 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#001). Whatever may be the
reception of their message, and whatever the trials to which they may be
subjected, yet there are abundant sources of consolation and support in
the gospel which they preach. They have the consciousness that they
preach a system of truth; that they are proclaiming that which God has
revealed; and, if they are faithful, that they have his smiles and
approbation. Even, therefore, if people reject, and despise their
message, and if they are called to endure many privations and trials,
they should not faint. It is enough for them that they proclaim the
truth which God loves, and that they meet with his approbation and
smiles. Trials will come in the ministry as every where else, but there
are also special consolations. There may be much opposition and
resistance to the message, but we should not faint or be discouraged. We
should do our duty, and commit the result to God.

2\. The gospel should be embraced by those to whom it comes, [Co2
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#002). If it has their reason and
conscience in its favor, then they should embrace it without delay. They
are under the most sacred obligation to receive it, and to become
decided Christians. Every man is bound, and may be urged to pursue, that
course which his conscience approves; and the gospel may thus be pressed
on the attention of all to whom it comes.

3\. If people wish peace of conscience, they should embrace the gospel,
[Co2 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#002). They can never find it
elsewhere. No man's conscience is at peace from the fact that he does
not repent, and love God and obey the gospel. His heart may love sin;
but his conscience cannot approve it. That is at peace only in doing the
work of God; and that can find self-approbation only when it submits to
him, and embraces the gospel of his Son. Then the conscience is at ease.
No man ever yet had a troubled conscience from the fact that he had
embraced the gospel, and was an humble and decided Christian. Thousands
and million have had a troubled conscience from the fact that they have
neglected it. No man on a death-bed ever had a troubled conscience
because he embraced religion too early in life. Thousands and million
have been troubled when they came to die, because they neglected it so
long, or rejected it altogether. No man when death approaches has a
troubled conscience because he has lived too much devoted to God the
Saviour, and been too active as a Christian. But O how many have been
troubled then because they have been worldly-minded, and selfish, and
vain, and proud? The conscience gives peace just in proportion as we
serve God faithfully; nor can all the art of man or Satan give peace to
one conscience in the ways of sin, and in the neglect of the soul.

4\. Ministers should preach the truth - the simple truth - and nothing
but the truth, [Co2 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#002). They should
make use of no false art, no deception, no trick, no disguise. They
should be open, sincere, plain, pure in all their preaching, and in
their manner of life. Such was the course of the Saviour; such the
course of Paul; and such a course only will God approve and bless.

5\. This is a deluded world, [Co2 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004).
It is blinded and deceived by him who is here called the "god of this
world." Satan rules in the hearts of people; and he rules by deceiving
them, and in order to deceive them. Everything which operates to prevent
people from embracing the gospel has a tendency to blind the mind. The
man who is seeking wealth as his only portion, is blinded and deceived
in regard to its value. The man who is pursuing the objects of ambition
as his main portion, is deceived in regard to the true value of things.
And he, or she, who pursues pleasure as the main business of life, is
deceived in regard to the proper value of objects. It is impossible to
conceive of a world more deluded than this. We can conceive of a world
more sinful, and more miserable, and such is hell; but there is no
delusion and deception there. Things are seen as they are; and no one is
deceived in regard to his character or prospects there. But here, every
impenitent man is deceived and blinded. He is deceived about his own
character; about the relative value of objects; about his prospects for
eternity; about death, the judgment, heaven, hell. On none of these
points has he any right apprehension; and on none is it possible for any
human power to break the deep delusion, and to penetrate the darkness of
his mind.

6\. People are in danger, [Co2 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004).
They are under deep delusion, and they tread unconcerned near to ruin.
They walk in darkness - blinded by the god of this world, and are very
near a precipice, and nothing will rouse them from their condition. It
is like children gathering flowers near a deep gulf, when the pursuit of
one more flower may carry them too far, and they will fall to rise no
more. The delusion rests on every unsanctified mind; and it needs to
remain but a little longer, and the soul will be lost. That danger
deepens every day and every hour. If it is continued but a little longer
it will be broken in upon by the sad realities of death, judgment, and
hell. But then it will be too late. The soul will be lost - deluded in
the world of probation; sensible of the truth only in the world of
despair.

7\. Satan will practice every device and art possible to prevent the
gospel from shining upon the hearts of people. That light is painful and
hateful to his eyes, and he will do all that can be done to prevent its
being diffused. Every art which long-tried ingenuity and skill can
devise, will be resorted to; every power which he can put forth will be
exerted. If he can blind the minds of people, he will do it. If people
can be hoodwinked, and gulled, it will be done. If error can be made to
spread, and be embraced - error smooth, plausible, cunning - it will be
diffused. Ministers will be raised up to preach it; and the press will
be employed to accomplish it. If sinners can be deceived, and made to
remain at ease in their sins, by novels and seductive poetry; by books
false in sentiments, and perverse in morals, the press will be made to
groan under the works of fiction. If theaters are necessary to cheat and
beguile people, they will be reared; and the song, and the dance, the
ball, and the splendid party will alike contribute to divert the
attention from the cross of Christ, the worth of the soul, and the
importance of a preparation to die. No art has been spared, or will be
spared to deceive people; and the world is full of the devices of Satan
to hoodwink and blind the perishing, and lead them down to hell.

8\. Yet, Satan is not alone to blame for this. He does all he can, and
he has consummate skill and art. Yet, let not the deluded sinner take
comfort to himself because Satan is the tempter, and because he is
deluded. The bitterness of death is not made sweet to a young man
because he has been deluded by the arts of the veteran in temptation;
and the fires of hell will not burn any the less fiercely because the
sinner suffered himself to be deluded, and chose to go there through the
ballroom or the theater. The sinner is, after all, voluntary in his
delusions. He does, or he might, know the truth. He goes voluntarily to
the place of amusement; voluntarily forms the plans of gain and ambition
which deceive and ruin the soul; goes voluntarily to the theater, and to
the haunts of vice; and chooses this course in the face of many
warnings, and remonstrances. Who is to blame if he is lost! Who but
himself?

9\. Sinners should be entreated to rouse from this delusive and false
security. They are now blinded, and deceived. Life is too short and too
uncertain to be playing such a game as the sinner does. There are too
many realities here to make it proper to pass life amidst deceptions and
delusions. Sin is real, and danger is real, and death is real, and
eternity is real; and man should rouse from his delusions, and look upon
things as they are. Soon he will be on a bed of death, and then he will
look over the follies of his life. Soon he will be at the judgment bar,
and from that high and awful place look on the past and the future, and
see things as they are. But, alas, it will be too late then to repair
the errors of a life; and amidst the realities of those scenes, all that
he may be able to do, will be to sigh unavailingly that he suffered
himself to be deluded, deceived, and destroyed in the only world of
probation, by the trifles and baubles which the great deceiver placed
before him to beguile him of heaven, and to lead him down to hell!

10\. The great purpose of the ministry is to make known in any and every
way the Lord Jesus Christ, [Co2 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#005).
To this, the ministers of the gospel are to devote themselves. It is not
to cultivate farms; to engage in traffic; to shine in the social circle;
to be distinguished for learning; to become fine scholars; to be
profoundly versed in science; or to be distinguished as authors, that
they are set apart; but it is in every way possible to make known the
Lord Jesus Christ. Whatever other people do, or not do; however the
world may choose to be employed, their work is simple and plain, and it
is not to cease or be intermitted until death shall close their toils.
Neither by the love of ease, of wealth, or pleasure are they to turn
aside from their work, or to forsake the vocation to which God has
called them.

11\. We see the responsibility of the ministry, [Co2
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#005). On the ministry devolves the work
of making the Saviour known to a dying world. If they will not do it,
the world will remain in ignorance of the Redeemer and will perish. If
there is one soul to whom they might make known the Saviour, and to whom
they do not make him known, that soul will perish, and the
responsibility will rest on the minister of the Lord Jesus. And, O how
great is this responsibility! And who is sufficient for these things?

12\. Ministers of the gospel should submit to any self-denial in order
that they may do good. Their Master did; and Paul and the other apostles
did. It is sufficient for the disciple that he be as the master; and the
ministers of the gospel should regard themselves as set apart to a work
of self-denial, and called to a life of toil, like their Lord. Their
rest is in heaven, and not on the earth. Their days of leisure and
repose are to be found in the skies when their work is done, and not in
a world perishing in sin.

13\. The ministry is a glorious work, [Co2
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#005). What higher honor is there on
earth than to make known a Redeemer? What pleasure more exquisite can
there be than to speak of pardon to the guilty? What greater comfort
than to go to the afflicted and bind up their hearts; to pour the balm
of peace into the wounded spirit, and to sustain and cheer the dying?
The ministry has its own consolations amidst all its trials; its own
honor amidst the contempt and scorn with which it is often viewed by the
world.

14\. The situation of man would have been dreadful and awful had it not
been for the light which is imparted by revelation, and by the Holy
Spirit, [Co2 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006). Man would have ever
remained like the dark night before God said, "Let there be light;" and
his condition would have been thick darkness, where not a ray of light
would have beamed on his benighted way. Some idea of what this was, and
would have continued to be, we have now in the pagan world, where thick
darkness reigns over nations, though it has been somewhat broken in upon
by the dim light which tradition has diffused there.

15\. God has power to impart light to the most dark and benighted mind.
There is no one to whom he cannot reveal himself and make his truth
known, [Co2 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006). With as much ease as
he commanded light to shine out of darkness at first can he command the
pure light of truth to shine on the minds of people; and on minds most
beclouded by sin he can cause the sun of righteousness to shine with
healing in his beams.

16\. We should implore the enlightening influence of the Spirit of
truth, [Co2 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006). If God is the source
of light, we should seek it at his hands. Nothing to man is so valuable
as the light of truth; nothing of so much worth as the knowledge of the
true God; and with the deepest solicitude, and the most fervent prayer,
should we seek the enlightening influences of his Spirit, and the
guidance of his grace.

17\. There is no true knowledge of God except that which shines in the
face of Jesus Christ, [Co2 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006). He
came to make known the true God. He is the exact image of God. He
resembles him in all things. And he who does not love the character of
Jesus Christ, therefore, does not love the character of God; he who does
not seek to be like Jesus Christ, does not desire to be like God. He who
does not bear the image of the Redeemer, does not bear the image of God.
To be a moral man merely, therefore, is not to be like God. To be
amiable, and honest, merely, is not to be like God. Jesus Christ, the
image of God, was more than this. He was religious. He was holy. He was,
as a man, a man of prayer, and filled with the love of God, and was
always submissive to his holy will. He sought his honor and glory: and
he made it the great purpose of his life and death to make known his
existence, perfections, and name. To imitate him in this is to have the
knowledge of the glory of God; and no man is like God who does not bear
the image of the Redeemer. No man is like God, therefore, who is not a
Christian. Of course, no man can be prepared for heaven who is not a
friend and follower of Jesus Christ.

18\. God designs to secure the promotion of his own glory in the manner
in which religion is spread in the world, [Co2
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007). For this purpose, and with this
view, he did not commit it to angels, nor has he employed people of
rank, or wealth, or profound scientific attainments to be the chief
instruments in its propagation. He has committed it to frail, mortal
people; and often to people of humble rank, and even humble attainments
- except attainments in piety. In fitting them for their work his grace
is manifest; and in all the success which attends their labors it is
apparent that it is by the mere grace and mercy of God that it is done.

19\. We see what our religion has cost, [Co2
4:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#008). Its extension in the world has
been everywhere connected with sufferings, and toil, and tears. It began
in the labors, sorrows, self-denials, persecutions, and dying agonies of
the Son of God; and to introduce it to the world cost his life. It was
spread by the toils, and sacrifices, and sufferings of the apostles. It
was kept up by the dying groans of martyrs. It has been preserved and
extended on earth by the labors and prayers of the Reformers, and amidst
scenes of persecution everywhere, and it is now extending through the
earth by the sacrifices of those who are willing to leave country and
home; to cross oceans and deserts; and to encounter the perils of
barbarous climes, that they may make it known to distant lands. If
estimated by what it has cost, assuredly no religion, no blessing is so
valuable as Christianity. It is above all human valuation: and it should
be a matter of unfeigned thankfulness to us that God has been pleased to
raise up people who have been willing to suffer so much that it might be
perpetuated and extended on the earth; and we should be willing also to
imitate their example, and deny ourselves, that we may make its
inestimable blessings known to those who are now destitute. To us, it is
worth all it has cost - all the blood of apostles and martyrs; to
others, also, it would be worth all that it would cost to send it to
them. How can we better express our sense of its worth, and our
gratitude to the dying Redeemer, and our veneration for the memory of
self-denying apostles and martyrs, than by endeavoring to diffuse the
religion for which they died all over the world?

20\. We have in this chapter an illustration of the sustaining power of
religion in trials, [Co2 4:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#008). The
friends of Christianity have been called to endure every form of
suffering. Poverty, want, tears, stripes, imprisonments, and deaths have
been their portion. They have suffered under every form of torture which
people could inflict on them. And yet the power of religion has never
failed them. It has been amply tried; and has shown itself able to
sustain them always, and to enable them always to triumph. Though
troubled, they have not been so close pressed that they had no room to
turn; though perplexed, they have not been without some resource; though
persecuted by people, they have not been forsaken by God; though thrown
down in the conflict, yet they have recovered strength, and been
prepared to renew the strife, and to engage in new contentions with the
foes of God. Who can estimate the value of a religion like this? Who
does not see that it is adapted to man in a state of trial, and that it
furnishes him with just what he needs in this world?

21\. Christianity will live, [Co2
4:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#008). Nothing can destroy it. All the
power that could be brought to bear on it to blot it from the earth has
been tried, and yet it survives. No new attempt to destroy it can
prevail; and it is now settled that this religion is to live to the end
of time. It has cost much to obtain this demonstration; but it is worth
all it has cost, and the sufferings of apostles and martyrs, therefore,
have not been for nothing.

22\. Christians should be willing to endure anything in order that they
may become like Christ on earth, and be like him in heaven, [Co2
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010). It is worth all their efforts,
and all their self-denials. It is the grand object before us; and we
should deem no sufferings too severe, no self-denial or sacrifice too
great, if we may become like him here below, and may live with him
above, [Co2 4:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010).

23\. In order to animate us in the work to which God has called us; to
encourage us in our trials; and to prompt us to a faithful discharge of
our duties, especially those who like Paul are called to preach the
gospel, we should have, like him, the following views and feelings -
views and feelings adapted to sustain us in all our trials, and to
uphold us in all the conflicts of life:

\(1\) A firm and unwavering belief of the truth of the religion which we
profess, and of the truth which we make known to others, [Co2
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#012). No man can preach successfully,
and no man can do much good, whose mind is vacillating and hesitating;
who is filled with doubts, and who goes timidly to work, or who declares
that of which he has no practical acquaintance, and no deep-felt
conviction, and who knows not whereof he affirms. A man to do good must
have a faith which never wavers; a conviction of truth which is
constant; a belief settled like the everlasting hills, which nothing can
shake or overturn. With such a conviction of the truth of Christianity,
and of the great doctrines which it inculcates, he cannot but speak of
it, and make known his convictions. He that believes that people are in
fact in danger of hell, will tell them of it; he that believes there is
an awful bar of judgment, will tell them of it; he that believes that
the Son of God became incarnate and died for people, will tell them of
it; he that believes that there is a heaven, will invite them to it. And
one reason why professing Christians are so reluctant to speak of these
things, is, that they have no very settled and definite conviction of
their truth, and no correct view of their relative importance.

\(2\) we should have a firm assurance that God has raised up the Lord
Jesus, and that we also shall be raised from the dead, [Co2
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#014). The hope and expectation of the
resurrection of the dead was one of the sustaining principles which
upheld Paul in his labors, and to attain to this was one of the grand
objects of his life, [Act 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006); [Phi
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#011). Under the influence of this hope
and expectation, he was willing to encounter any danger, and to endure
any trial. The prospect of being raised up to eternal life and glory was
all that was needful to make trials welcome, and to uphold him in the
midst of privations and toils. And so we, if we are assured of this
great truth, shall welcome trial also, and shall be able to endure
afflictions and persecutions. They will soon be ended, and the eternal
glory in the morning of the resurrection shall be more than a
compensation for all that we shall endure in this life.

\(3\) we should have a sincere desire to promote the glory of God, and
to bring as many as possible to join in his praise, and to celebrate his
saving mercy, [Co2 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#015). It was this
which sustained and animated Paul; and a man who has this as the leading
objector his life, and his great purpose and aim, will be willing to
endure much trial, to suffer much persecution, and to encounter many
dangers. No object is so noble as that of endeavoring to promote the
divine glory; and he who is influenced by that will care little how many
sufferings he is called to endure in this life.

24\. Christians should have such a belief of the truth of their religion
as to be willing to speak of it at all times, and in all places, [Co2
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#013). If we have such a belief we
shall be willing to speak of it. We cannot help it. We shall so see its
value. and so love it, and our hearts will be so full of it, and we
shall see so much the danger of our fellow-men, that we shall be
instinctively prompted to go to them and warn them of their danger, and
tell them of the glories of the Redeemer.

25\. Christians may expect to be supported and comforted in the trials
and toils of life, [Co2 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016). The
"outward man" will indeed perish and decay. The body will become feeble,
weary, jaded, decayed, decrepit. It will be filled with pain, and will
languish under disease, and will endure the mortal agony, and will be
corrupted in the tomb. But the "inward man" will be renewed. The faith
will be invigorated, the hope become stronger, the intellect brighter,
the heart better, the whole soul be more like God. While the body,
therefore, the less important part, decays and dies, the immortal part
shall live and ripen for glory. Of what consequence is it, therefore,
how soon or how much the body decays; or when, and where, and how it
dies? Let the immortal part be preserved, let that live, and all is
well. And while this is done, we should not, we shall not "faint." We
shall be sustained; and shall find the consolations of religion to be
suited to all our needs, and adapted to all the necessities of our
condition as weak, and frail, and dying creatures.

26\. We learn from this chapter how to bear affliction in a proper
manner, [Co2 4:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017). It is by looking
at eternity and comparing our trials with the eternal weight of glory
that awaits us. In themselves afflictions often seem heavy and long.
Human nature is often ready to sink under them. The powers of the body
fail, and the mortal frame is crushed. The day seems long while we
suffer; and the night seems often to be almost endless, [Deu
28:67](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#067). But compared with eternity how
short are all these trials! Compared with the weight of glory which
awaits the believer, what a trifle are the severest sufferings of this
life. Soon the ransomed spirit will be released, and will be admitted to
the full fruition of the joys of the world above. In that world all
these sorrows will seem like the sufferings of childhood, that we have
now almost forgotten, and that now seem to us like trifles.

27\. We should not look to the things which are seen as our portion,
[Co2 4:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017). They are light in their
character, and are soon to fade away. Our great interests are beyond the
grave. There all is weighty, and momentous, and eternal. Whatever great
interests we have are there. Eternity is stamped upon all the joys and
all the sorrows which are beyond this life. here all is temporary,
changing, decaying, dying. There all is fixed, settled, unchanging,
immortal. It becomes us then as rational creatures to look to that
world, to act with reference to it, to feel and act as if we felt that
all our interests were there. Were this life all, everything in relation
to us would be trifling. But when we remember that there is an eternity;
that we are near it; and that our conduct here is to determine our
character and destiny there, life becomes invested with infinite
importance. Who can estimate the magnitude of the interests at stake?
Who can appreciate aright the importance of every step we take, and
every plan we form?

28\. All here below is temporary, decaying, dying; [Co2
4:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017). Afflictions are temporary.
They are but for a moment, and will soon be passed away. Our sorrows
here will soon be ended. The last sigh on earth will soon be heaved; the
last tear will have fallen on the cheek; the last pain will have shot
across the seat of life! The last pangs of parting with a beloved friend
will soon have been endured; and the last step which we are to take in
"the valley of the shadow of death," will soon have been trod. And in
like manner we shall soon have tasted the last cup of earthly joy. All
our comforts here below will soon pass from us. Our friends will die.
Our sources of happiness will be dried up. Our health will fail, and
darkness will come over our eyes, and we shall go down to the dead. All
our property must be left, and all our honors be parted with forever. In
a little time - O, how brief! we shall have gone from all these, and
shall be engaged in the deep and awful solemnities of the unchanging
world. How vain and foolish, therefore, the attachment to earthly
objects! How important to secure an interest in that future inheritance
which shall never fade away!

29\. Let it not be inferred, however, that all affliction shall be
light, and for a moment, or that all earthly trial shall of course work
out a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. There are sorrows
beyond the grave compared with which the most heavy and most protracted
woes this side 'the tomb, are "light," and are "but for a moment." And
there are sorrows in this life, deep and prolonged afflictions - which
by no means tend to prepare the soul for the "far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory." Such are those afflictions where there is no
submission to the will of God; where there is complaining, repining,
impatience, and increased rebellion; where there is no looking to God
for comfort, and no contemplation of eternal glory. Such are those
afflictions where people look to philosophy, or to earthly friends to
comfort them; or where they plunge deeper into the business, the gaiety,
or the vices of the world, to drown their sorrows and to obliterate the
sense of their calamities. This is "the sorrow of the world, which
worketh death," [Co2 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010). In
afflictions, therefore, it should be to us a matter of deep and anxious
solicitude to know whether we have the right feelings, and whether we
are seeking the right sources of consolation. And in such seasons it
shall be the subject of our deep and earnest prayer to God that our
trials may, by his grace, be made to work out for us "a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory." All are afflicted; all suffer in
various ways; and all may find these trials terminate in eternal
blessedness beyond the grave.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 5](co2005)

</div>
