<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2.md)  
  [Previous](co2008)  [Next](co2010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#001.md)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 9:0</span></span>

In this chapter [Co2 9:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#001.md) the
apostle continues the subject which he had discussed in 2 Cor. 8 - the
collection which he had purposed to make for the poor saints in Judea.
The deep anxiety which he had that the collection should be liberal;
that it should not only be such as to be really an aid to those who were
suffering, but be such as would be an expression of tender attachment to
them on the part of the Gentile converts, was the reason, doubtless, why
Paul urged this so much on their attention. His primary wish undoubtedly
was, to furnish aid to those who were suffering. But in connection with
that, he also wished to excite a deep interest among the Gentile
converts in behalf of those who had been converted to Christianity among
the Jews. He wished that the collection should be so liberal as to show
that they felt that they were united as brethren, and that they were
grateful that they had received the true religion from the Jews. And he
doubtless wished to cement as much as possible the great body of the
Christian brotherhood, and to impress on their minds the great truths
that whatever was their national origin, and whatever were their
national distinctions, yet in Christ they were one. For this purpose he
presses on their attention a great variety of considerations why they
should give liberally, and this chapter is chiefly occupied in stating
reasons for that in addition to those which had been urged in the
previous chapter. The following view will present the main points in the
chapter.

\(1\) he was aware of their readiness to give, and knowing this, he had
boasted of it to others, and others had been excited to give liberally
from what the apostle had said of them, [Co2
9:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#001.md). The argument here is, that
Paul's veracity and their own character were at stake and depended on
their now giving liberally.

\(2\) he had sent the brethren to them in order that there might by no
possibility be a failure, [Co2 9:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#003.md).
Though he had the utmost confidence in them, and fully believed that
they were disposed to give liberally, yet he knew also that something
might prevent it unless messengers went to secure the contributions, and
that the consequence might be, that he and they would be "ashamed" that
he had boasted so much of their readiness to give.

\(3\) to excite them to give liberally, Paul advances the great
principles that the reward in heaven will be in proportion to the
liberality evinced on earth, and that God loves one who gives
cheerfully, [Co2 9:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#006.md). By the
prospect, therefore, of an ample reward, and by the desire to meet with
the approbation of God, he calls upon them to contribute freely to aid
their afflicted Christian brethren.

\(4\) he further excites them to liberal giving by the consideration
that if they contributed liberally, God was able to furnish them
abundantly with the means of doing good on a large scale in time to
come, [Co2 9:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#008.md). In this way he
would enable them to do good hereafter in proportion as they were
disposed to do good now, and the result of all would be, that abundant
thanks would be rendered to God - thanks from those who were aided, and
thanks from those who had aided them that they had been enabled to
contribute to supply their needs.

\(5\) as a final consideration inducing them to give, the apostle states
that not only would they thus do good, but would show the power of the
gospel, and the affection which they had for the Jewish converts, and
would thus contribute much in promoting the glory of God. The Jewish
converts would see the power of the gospel on their Gentile brethren;
they would feel that they now pertained to one great family; they would
praise God for imparting his grace in this manner; and they would be led
to pray much for those who had thus contributed to alleviate their
needs, [Co2 9:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#012.md).

\(6\) Paul closes the whole chapter, and the whole discussion respecting
the contribution about which he had felt so deep an interest, by
rendering thanks to God for his "unspeakable gift," Jesus Christ, [Co2
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#015.md). Paul was ever ready, whatever
was the topic before him, to turn the attention to him. He here
evidently regards him as the author of all liberal feeling, and of all
true charity; and seems to imply that all that they could give would he
small compared with the "unspeakable gift" of God, and that the fact
that God had imparted such a gift. to the world was a reason why they
should be willing to devote all they had to his service.

[2 Corinthians 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 9:1</span></span>

For as touching the ministering to the saints - In regard to the
collection that was to be taken up for the aid of the poor Christians in
Judea; see the notes on [Rom 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#026.md);
[Co1 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001.md); 2 Cor. 8.

It is superfluous ... - It is needless to urge that matter on you,
because I know that you acknowledge the obligation to do it, and have
already purposed it.

For me to write to you - That is, to write more, or to write largely on
the subject. It is unnecessary for me to urge arguments why it should be
done; and all that is proper is to offer some suggestions in regard to
the manner in which it shall be accomplished.

[2 Corinthians 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 9:2</span></span>

For I know the forwardness of your mind - I know your promptitude, or
your readiness to do it; see [Co2
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#010.md). Probably Paul here means that he
had had opportunity before of witnessing their readiness to do good, and
that he had learned in particular of Titus that they had formed the plan
to aid in this contribution.

For which I boast of you to them of Macedonia - To the church in
Macedonia; see [Co2 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001.md). So well
assured was he that the church at Corinth would make the collection as
it had proposed, that he boasted of it to the churches of Macedonia as
if it were already done, and made use of this as an argument to
stimulate them to make an effort.

That Achaia was ready a year ago - Achaia was that part of Greece of
which Corinth was the capital; see the note, [Act
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#012.md). It is probable that there were
Christians in other parts of Achaia besides Corinth, and indeed it is
known that there was a church in Cenchrea (see [Rom
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#001).md). which was one of the ports of
Corinth. Though the contribution would be chiefly derived from Corinth,
yet it is probable that the others also would participate in it. The
phrase "was ready" means that they had been preparing themselves for
this collection, and doubtless Paul had stated that the collection was
already made and was waiting. He had directed them [Co1
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001.md) to make it on the first day of
the week, and to lay it by in store, and he did not doubt that they had
complied with his request.

And your zeal - Your ardor and promptitude. The readiness with which you
entered into this subject, and your desire to relieve the needs of
others.

Hath provoked - Has roused, excited, impelled to give. We use the word
"provoke" commonly now in the sense of to irritate, but in the
Scriptures it is confined to the signification of exciting, or rousing.
The ardor of the Corinthians would excite others not only by their
promptitude, but because Corinth was a splendid city, and their example
would be looked up to by Christians at a distance. This is one instance
of the effect which will be produced by the example of a church in a
city.

[2 Corinthians 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 9:3</span></span>

Yet have I sent the brethren - The brethren referred to in [Co2
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#018.md), [Co2
8:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#022.md).

Lest our boasting of you - That you were disposed to contribute, and
that you were already prepared, and that the contribution was ready.

Should be in vain - Lest anything should have occurred to prevent the
collection. I have sent them that they may facilitate it, and that it
may be secure and certain.

In this behalf - In this respect. That is, lest our boasting of you, in
regard to your readiness to contribute to relieve the needs of others,
should be found to have been ill-grounded.

[2 Corinthians 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 9:4</span></span>

Lest haply if they of Macedonia - If any of the Macedonians should
happen to come with me, and should find that you had done nothing. He
does not say that they would come with him, but it was by no means
improbable that they would. It was customary for some of the members of
the churches to travel with Paul from place to place, and the
conversation was constant between Macedonia and Achaia. Paul had,
therefore, every reason to suppose that some of the Macedonians would
accompany him when he should go to Corinth. At all events it was
probable that the Macedonians would learn from some quarter whether the
Corinthians were or were not ready when Paul should go to them.

should be ashamed ...}}We (that we say not, ye) should be ashamed ... -
"In this," says Bloomfield, "one cannot but recognize a most refined and
delicate turn, inferior to none of the best Classical writers." Paul had
boasted confidently that the Corinthians would be ready with their
collection. He had excited and stimulated the Macedonians by this
consideration. He had induced them in this way to give liberally, [Co2
8:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001.md). If now it should turn out after
all that the Corinthians had given nothing, or had given stintedly, the
character of Paul would suffer. His veracity and his judgment would be
called in question, and he would be accused of trick, and artifice, and
fraud in inducing them to give. Or if he should not be charged with
dishonesty, yet he would be humbled and mortified himself that he had
made representations which had proved to be so unfounded. But this was
not all. The character of the Corinthians was also at stake. They had
purposed to make the collection. They had left the impression in the
mind of Paul that it would be done. They had hitherto evinced such a
character as to make Paul confident that the collection would be made.
If now by any means this should fail, their character would suffer, and
they would have occasion to be ashamed that they had excited so
confident expectations of what they would do.

[2 Corinthians 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 9:5</span></span>

Therefore I thought it necessary ... - In order to secure the
collection, and to avoid all unpleasant feeling on all hands.

That they would go before unto you - Before I should come.

And make up beforehand your bounty - Prepare it before I come. The word
"bounty" is in the margin, rendered "blessing." The Greek (εὐλογία
eulogia) means properly commendation, eulogy. Then it means blessing,
praise applied to God. Then that which blesses - a gift, donation,
favor, bounty - whether of God to human beings, or of one man to
another. Here it refers to their contribution as that which would be
adapted to confer a blessing on others, or suited to produce happiness.

That the same might be ready as a matter of bounty - That it may truly
appear as a liberal and voluntary offering; as an act of generosity and
not as wrung or extorted from you. That it may be truly a blessing - a
thank-offering to God and adapted to do good to people.

And not as of covetousness - "And not like a sort of extortion, wrung
from you by mere dint of importunity" - Doddridge. The word used here
(πλεονεξία pleonexia) means usually covetousness, greediness of gain,
which leads a person to defraud others. The idea here is, that Paul
would have them give this as an act of bounty, or liberality on their
part, and not as an act of covetousness on his part, not as extorted by
him from them.

[2 Corinthians 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 9:6</span></span>

But this I say - This I say in order to induce you to give liberally.
This I say to prevent your supposing that because it is to be a
voluntary offering you may give only from your superfluity, and may give
sparingly.

He which soweth sparingly - This expression has all the appearance of a
proverb, and doubtless is such. It does not occur indeed elsewhere in
the Scriptures, though substantially the same sentiment exciting to
liberality often occurs; see [Psa
12:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001.md); [Pro
11:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#024.md); [Pro
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#017.md); [Pro
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#009.md). Paul here says that it is in
giving as it is in agriculture. A man that sows little must expect to
reap little. If he sows a small piece of land he will reap a small
harvest; or if he is niggardly in sowing and wishes to save his seed and
will not commit it to the earth, he must expect to reap little. So it is
in giving. Money given in alms, money bestowed to aid the poor and
needy, or to extend the influence of virtue and pure religion, is money
bestowed in a way similar to the act of committing seed to the earth. It
will be returned again in some way with an abundant increase. It shall
not be lost. The seed may be buried long.

It may lie in the ground with no indication of a return or of increase.
One who knew not the arrangements of Providence might suppose it was
lost and dead. But in due time it shall spring up and produce an ample
increase. So with money given to objects of benevolence. To many it may
seem to be a waste, or may appear to be thrown away. But in due time it
will be repaid in some way with abundant increase. And the man who
wishes to make the most out of his money for future use and personal
comfort will give liberally to deserving objects of charity - just as
the man who wishes to make the most out of his grain will not suffer it
to lie in his granary, but will commit the seed to the fertile earth.
"Cast thy bread upon the waters: for thou shalt find it again after many
days" [Ecc 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#001.md); that is, when the
waters as of the Nile have overflown the banks and flooded the whole
adjacent country, then is the time to cast abroad thy seed. The waters
will retire, and the seed will sink into the accumulated fertile mud
that is deposited, and will spring up in an abundant harvest. So it is
with that which is given for objects of benevolence.

Shall reap also sparingly - Shall reap in proportion to what he sowed.
This everyone knows is true in regard to grain that is sowed. It is also
no less true in regard to deeds of charity. The idea is, that God will
bestow rewards in proportion to what is given. These rewards may refer
to results in this life, or to the rewards in heaven, or both. All who
have ever been in the habit of giving liberally to the objects of
benevolence can testify that they have lost nothing, but have reaped in
proportion to their liberality. This follows in various ways.

\(1\) in the comfort and peace which results from giving. If a man
wishes to purchase happiness with his gold, he can secure the most by
bestowing it liberally on objects of charity. It will produce him more
immediate peace than it would to spend it in sensual gratifications, and
far more than to hoard it up useless in his coffers.

\(2\) in reflection on it hereafter. It will produce more happiness in
remembering that he has done good with it, and promoted the happiness of
others, than it will to reflect that he has hoarded up useless wealth,
or that he has squandered it in sensual gratification. The one will be
unmingled pleasure when he comes to die; the other will be unmingled
self-reproach and pain.

\(3\) in subsequent life, God will in some way repay to him far more
than he has bestowed in deeds of charity. By augmented prosperity, by
health and future comfort, and by raising up for us and our families,
when in distress and want, friends to aid us, God can and often does
abundantly repay the liberal for all their acts of kindness and deeds of
beneficence.

\(4\) God can and will reward his people in heaven abundantly for all
their kindness to the poor, and all their self-denials in endeavoring to
diffuse the influence of truth and the knowledge of salvation. Indeed
the rewards of heaven will be in no small degree apportioned in this
manner, and determined by the amount of benevolence which we have shown
on earth; see [Mat 25:34-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034.md). On all
accounts, therefore, we have every inducement to give liberally. As a
farmer who desires an ample harvest scatters his seed with a liberal
hand; as he does not grudge it though it falls into the earth; as he
scatters it with the expectation that in due time it will spring up and
reward his labors, so should we give with a liberal hand to aid the
cause of benevolence, nor should we deem what we give to be lost or
wasted though we wait long before we are recompensed, or though we
should be in no other way rewarded than by the comfort which arises from
the act of doing good.

[2 Corinthians 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 9:7</span></span>

Every man according as he purposeth in his heart ... - The main idea in
this verse is, that the act of giving should be voluntary and cheerful.
It should not seem to be extorted by the importunity of others [Co2
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#006.md); nor should it be given from
urgent necessity, but it should be given as an offering of the heart. On
this part of the verse we may remark:

\(1\) That the heart is usually more concerned in the business of giving
than the head. If liberality is evinced, it will be the heart which
prompts to it; if it is not evinced, it will be because the heart has
some bad passions to gratify, and is under the influence of avarice, or
selfishness, or some other improper attachment. Very often a man is
convinced he ought to give liberally, but a narrow heart and a
parsimonious spirit prevents it.

\(2\) we should follow the dictates of the heart in giving. I mean that
a man will usually give more correctly who follows the first promptings
of his heart when an object of charity is presented, than he will if he
takes much time to deliberate. The instinctive prompting of a benevolent
heart is to give liberally. And the amount which should be given will
usually be suggested to a man by the better feelings of his heart. But
if he resolves to deliberate much, and if he suffers the heart to grow
cold, and if he defers it, the pleadings of avarice will como in, or
some object of attachment or plan of life will rise to view, or he will
begin to compare himself with others. and he will give much less than he
would have done if he had followed the first impulse of feeling. God
implanted the benevolent feelings in the bosom that they should prompt
us to do good; and he who acts most in accordance with them is most
likely to do what he ought to do; and in general it is the safest and
best rule for a man to give just what his heart prompts him to give when
an object of charity is presented. Man at best is too selfish to be
likely to give too much or to go beyond his means; and if in a few
instances it should be done, more would be gained in value in the
cultivation of benevolent feeling than would be lost in money. I know of
no better rule on the subject, than to cultivate as much as possible the
benevolent feelings, and then to throw open the soul to every proper
appeal to our charity, and to give just according to the instinctive
prompting of the heart.

\(3\) giving should be voluntary and cheerful. It should be from the
heart. Yet there is much, very much that is not so, and there is,
therefore, much benevolence that is spasmodic and spurious; that cannot
be depended on, and that will not endure. No dependence can be placed on
a man in regard to giving who does not do it from the steady influences
of a benevolent heart. But there is much obtained in the cause of
benevolence that is produced by a kind of extortion It is given because
others give, and the man would be ashamed to give less than they do. Or,
it is given because he thinks his rank in life demands it, and he is
prompted to do it by pride and vanity. Or, he gives from respect to a
pastor or a friend, or because he is warmly importuned to give; or
because he is shut up to a kind of necessity to give, and must give or
he would lose his character and become an object of scorn and
detestation. In all this there is nothing cheerful and voluntary; and
there can be nothing in it acceptable to God. Nor can it be depended on
permanently. The heart is not in it, and the man will evade the duty as
soon as he can, and will soon find excuses for not giving at all.

Not grudgingly - Greek, "Not of grief" (μὴ ἐκ λύπης mē ek lupēs). Not as
if be were sorry to part with his money. Not as if he were constrained
to do a thing that was extremely painful to him. "Or of necessity." As
if he were compelled to do it. Let him do it cheerfully.

For God loveth a cheerful giver - And who does not? Valuable as any gift
may be in itself, yet if it is forced and constrained; if it can be
procured only after great importunity and persevering effort, who can
esteem it as desirable? God desires the heart in every service. No
service that is not cheerful and voluntary; none that does not arise
from true love to him can be acceptable in his sight. God loves it
because it shows a heart like his own - a heart disposed to give
cheerfully and do good on the largest scale possible; and because it
shows a heart attached from principle to his service and cause. The
expression here has all the appearance of a proverb, and expressions
similar to this occur often in the Scriptures. In an uninspired writer,
also, this idea has been beautifully expanded. "In all thy gifts show a
cheerful countenance, and dedicate thy tithes with gladness. Give unto
the Most High according as he hath enriched thee: and as thou hast
gotten give with a cheerful eye. For the Lord recompenseth, and will
give thee seven times as much" - Wisdom of the Son of Sirach 35:9-11. In
nothing, therefore, is it more important than to examine the motives by
which we give to the objects of benevolence. However liberal may be our
benefactions, yet God may see that there is no sincerity, and may hate
the spirit with which it is done.

[2 Corinthians 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 9:8</span></span>

And God is able ... - Do not suppose that by giving liberally you will
be impoverished and reduced to want. You should rather confide in God,
who is able to furnish you abundantly with what is needful for the
supply of your necessities. Few persons are ever reduced to poverty by
liberality. Perhaps in the whole circle of his acquaintance it would be
difficult for an individual to point out one who has been impoverished
or made the poorer in this way. Our selfishness is generally a
sufficient guard against this; but it is also to be added, that the
divine blessing rests upon the liberal man, and that God keeps him from
want. But in the meantime there are multitudes who are made poor by the
lack of liberality. They are parsimonious in giving but they are
extravagant in dress, and luxury, and in expenses for amusement or vice,
and the consequence is poverty and want. "There is that withholdeth more
than is meet, and it tendeth to poverty;" [Pro
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#024.md). The divine blessing rests upon
the liberal: and while every person should make a proper provision for
his family, every one should give liberally, confiding in God that he
will furnish the supplies for our future needs. Let this maxim be borne
in mind, that no one is usually made the poorer by being liberal.

All grace - All kinds of favor. He is able to impart to you those things
which are needful for your welfare.

That ye always ... - The sense is, "If you give liberally you are to
expect that God will furnish you with the means, so that you will be
able to abound more and more in it." You are to expect that he will
abundantly qualify you for doing good in every way, and that he will
furnish you with all that is needful for this. The man who gives,
therefore, should have faith in God. He should expect that God will
bless him in it; and the experience of the Christian world may be
appealed to in proof that people are not made poor by liberality.

[2 Corinthians 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 9:9</span></span>

As it is written - [Psa 112:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#009.md). The
idea is, "in this way will the saying in the Scriptures be verified, or
the promise confirmed." The psalmist is describing the character of the
righteous man. One of his characteristics, he says, is, that he has
scattered abroad, he has given liberally to the poor. On such a man a
blessing is pronounced [Psa 112:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#001.md); and
one of the blessings will be that he shall be prospered. Some difficulty
has been felt by commentators to see how the quotation here made
sustains the position of Paul that the liberal man would be blessed of
God, and would receive an increase according to his liberality. In order
to this, they have supposed (see Doddridge, Bloomfield, and Clarke) that
the word "righteousness" means the same as almsgiving, or that "he would
always have something to bestow." But I would suggest that perhaps Paul
quoted this, as quotations are frequently made in the Scriptures, where
a passage was familiar. He quotes only a part of the passage, meaning
that the whole passage confirms the point under consideration. Thus, the
whole passage in the psalm is, "He hath dispersed; he hath given to the
poor; his righteousness endureth forever; his horn shall be exalted with
honor;" that is, he shall be abundantly blessed with prosperity and with
the favor of God. Thus, the entire promise sustains the position of
Paul, that the liberal man would be abundantly blessed. The phrase "he
hath dispersed" Ἐσκόρπισεν Eskorpisen, may refer either to the act of
sowing, as a man scatters seed on the earth; or there may be an allusion
to the oriental custom of scattering money among an assembled company of
paupers; compare [Pro 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#024.md).

His righteousness - His deeds of beneficence.

Remaineth - In its fruits and consequences; that is, either in its
effects on others, or on himself. It may mean that the sums so
distributed will remain with him forever inasmuch as he will be supplied
with all that is needful to enable him to do good to others. This
interpretation accords with the connection.

[2 Corinthians 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 9:10</span></span>

Now he that ministereth seed to the sower - This is an expression of an
earnest wish. In the previous verses he had stated the promises, or had
shown what we had a right to expect as a consequence of liberality. He
here unites the expression of an earnest desire that they might
experience this themselves. The allusion is to the act of sowing seed.
The idea is, that when a man scatters seed in his field God provides him
with the means of sowing again. He not only gives him a harvest to
supply his needs, but he blesses him also in giving him the ability to
sow again. Such was the benevolent wish of Paul. He desired not only
that God would supply their returning needs, but he desired also that he
would give them the ability to do good again; that he would furnish them
the means of future benevolence. He acknowledges God as the source of
all increase, and wishes that they may experience the results of such
increase. Perhaps in this language there is an allusion to [Isa
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#010.md); and the idea is, that it is God
who furnishes by his providence the seed to the sower. In like manner he
will furnish you the means of doing good.

Minister bread for your food - Furnish you with an ample supply for your
needs.

Multiply your seed sown - Greatly increase your means of doing good;
make the result of all your benefactions so to abound that you may have
the means of doing good again, and on a larger scale, as the seed sown
in the earth is so increased that the farmer may have the means of
sowing more abundantly again.

And increase the fruits of your righteousness - This evidently means,
the results and effects of their benevolence. The word "righteousness"
here refers to their liberality; and the wish of the apostle is, that
the results of their beneficence might greatly abound, that they might
have the means of doing extensive good, and that they might be the means
of diffusing happiness from afar.

[2 Corinthians 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 9:11</span></span>

Being enriched in everything ... - In all respects your riches are
conferred on you for this purpose. The design of the apostle is to state
to them the true reason why wealth was bestowed. It was not for the
purposes of luxury and self-gratification; not to be spent in sensual
enjoyment, not for parade and display; it was that it might be
distributed to others in such a way as to cause thanksgiving to God. At
the same time, this implies the expression of an earnest wish on the
part of Paul. He did not desire that they should be rich for their own
gratification or pleasure; he desired it only as the means of their
doing good to others. Right feeling will desire property only as the
means of promoting happiness and producing thanksgiving to God. They who
truly love their children and friends will wish them to be successful in
acquiring wealth only that they may have the means and the disposition
to alleviate misery, and promote the happiness of all around them. No
one who has true benevolence will desire that anyone in whom he feels an
interest should be enriched for the purpose of living amidst luxury, and
encompassing himself with the indulgences which wealth can furnish. If a
man has not a disposition to do good with money, it is not true
benevolence to desire that he may not possess it.

To all bountifulness - Margin, Simplicity, or liberality. The word
(ἁπλότης haplotēs) means properly sincerity, candor, probity; then also
simplicity, frankness, fidelity, and especially as manifesting itself in
liberality; see [Rom 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#008.md); [Co2
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#002.md). Here it evidently means
"liberality," and the idea is, that property is given for this purpose,
in order that there may be liberality evinced in doing good to others.

Which causeth through us ... - That is, we shall so distribute your alms
as to cause thanksgiving to God. The result will be that by our
instrumentality, thanks will be given to the great Source and Giver of
all wealth. Property should always be so employed as to produce
thanksgiving. If it is made to contribute to our own support and the
support of our families, it should excite thanksgiving. If it is given
to others, it should be so given, if it is possible, that the recipient
should be more grateful to God than to us; should feel that though we
may be the honored instrument in distributing it, yet the true
benefactor is God.

[2 Corinthians 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 9:12</span></span>

For the administration of this service - The distribution of this proof
of your liberality. The word "service" here, says Doddridge, intimates
that this was to be regarded not merely as an act of humanity, but
religion.

The want of the saints - Of the poor Christians in Judea on whose behalf
it was contributed.

But is abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God - Will abound unto
God in producing thanksgivings. The result will be that it will produce
abundant thanksgiving in their hearts to God.

[2 Corinthians 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 9:13</span></span>

Whiles by the experiment ... - Or rather, by the experience of this
ministration; the proof (δοκιμῆς dokimēs), the evidence here furnished
of your liberality. They shall in this ministration have experience or
proof of your Christian principle.

They glorify God - They will praise God as the source of your
liberality, as having given you the means of being liberal, and having
inclined your hearts to it.

For your professed subjection ... - Literally, "For the obedience of
your profession of the gospel." It does not imply merely that there was
a profession of religion, but that there was a real subjection to the
gospel which they professed. This is not clearly expressed in our
translation. Tyndale has expressed it better, "Which praise God for your
obedience in acknowledging the gospel of Christ." There was a real and
sincere submission to the gospel of Christ, and that was manifested by
their giving liberally to supply the needs of others. The doctrine is,
that one evidence of true subjection to the gospel; one proof that our
profession is sincere and genuine, is a willingness to contribute to
relieve the needs of the poor and afflicted friends of the Redeemer. And
unto all people. That is, all others whom you may have the opportunity
of relieving.

[2 Corinthians 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 9:14</span></span>

And by their prayer for you - On the grammatical construction of this
difficult verse, Doddridge and Bloomfield may be consulted. It is
probably to be taken in connection with [Co2
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#012.md), and [Co2
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#013.md) is a parenthesis. Thus
interpreted, the sense will be, "The administration of this service [Co2
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#012.md) will produce abundant thanks to
God. It will also [Co2 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#014.md) produce
another effect. It will tend to excite the prayers of the saints for
you, and thus produce important benefits to yourselves. They will
earnestly desire your welfare, they will anxiously pray to be united in
Christian friendship with those who have been so signally endowed with
the grace of God." The sentiment is, that charity should be shown to
poor and afflicted Christians because it will lead them to pray for us
and to desire our welfare. The prayers of the poorest Christian for us
are worth more than all we usually bestow on them in charity; and he who
has secured the pleadings of a child of God, however humble, in his
behalf, has made a good use of his money.

Which long after you - Who earnestly desire to see and know you. Who
will sincerely desire your welfare, and who will thus be led to pray for
you.

For the exceeding grace of God in you - On account of the favor which
God has shown to you: the strength and power of the Christian principle,
manifesting itself in doing good to those whom you have never seen. The
apostle supposes that the exercise of a charitable disposition is to be
traced entirely to God. God is the author of all grace; he alone excites
in us a disposition to do good to others.

[2 Corinthians 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co2 9:15</span></span>

Thanks be unto God - Whitby supposes that this refers to the charitable
disposition which they had manifested, and that the sense is, that God
was to be adored for the liberal spirit which they were disposed to
manifest, and the aid which they were disposed to render to others. But
this, it is believed, falls far below the design of the apostle. The
reference is rather to the inexpressible gift which God had granted to
them in bestowing his Son to die for them; and this is one of the most
striking instances which occur in the New Testament, showing that the
mind of Paul was full of this subject; and that wherever he began, he
was sure to end with a reference to the Redeemer. The invaluable gift of
a Saviour was so familiar to his mind, and he was so accustomed to dwell
on that in his private thoughts, that the mind naturally and easily
glanced on that whenever anything occurred that by the remotest allusion
would suggest it. The idea is, "Your benefactions are indeed valuable;
and for them, for the disposition which you have manifested, and for all
the good which you will be enabled thus to accomplish, we are bound to
give thanks to God. All this will excite the gratitude of those who
shall be benefitted. But how small is all this compared with the great
gift which God has imparted in bestowing a Saviour! That is unspeakable.
No words can express it, no language convey an adequate description of
the value of the gift, and of the mercies which result from it."

His unspeakable gift - The word used here ἀνεκδιηγήτῳ anekdiēgētō means,
what cannot be related, unutterable. It occurs nowhere else in the New
Testament. The idea is, that no words can properly express the greatness
of the gift thus bestowed on man. It is higher than the mind can
conceive; higher than language can express. On this verse we may
observe:

\(1\) That the Saviour is a gift to mankind. So he is uniformly
represented; see [Joh 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016.md); [Gal
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#004.md); [Gal
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020.md); [Eph
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022.md); [Ti1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#006.md); [Tit
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#014.md). Man had no claim on God. He
could not compel him to provide a plan of salvation; and the whole
arrangement - the selection of the Saviour, the sending him into the
world, and all the benefits resulting from his work, are all an
undeserved gift to man.

\(2\) this is a gift unspeakably great, whose value no language can
express, no heart fully conceive. It is so because:

\(a\) Of his own greatness and glory;

\(b\) Because of the inexpressible love which he evinced;

\(c\) Because of the unutterable sufferings which he endured;

\(d\) Because of the inexpressibly great benefits which result from his
work. No language can do justice to this work in either of these
respects; no heart in this world fully conceives the obligation which
rests upon man in virtue of his work.

\(3\) thanks should be rendered to God for this. We owe him our highest
praises for this. This appears:

\(a\) Because it was mere benevolence in God. We had no claim; we could
not compel him to grant us a Saviour. The gift might have been withheld,
and his throne would have been spotless, We owe no thanks where we have
a claim; where we deserve nothing, then he who benefits us has a claim
on our thanks.

\(b\) Because of the benefits which we have received from him. Who can
express this? All our peace and hope; all our comfort and joy in this
life; all our prospect of pardon and salvation; all the offers of
eternal glory are to be traced to him. Man has no prospect of being
happy when he dies but in virtue of the "unspeakable gift" of God. And
when he thinks of his sins, which may now be freely pardoned; when he
thinks of an agitated and troubled conscience, which may now be at
peace; when he thinks of his soul, which may now be unspeakably and
eternally happy; when he thinks of the hell from which he is delivered,
and of the heaven to whose eternal glories he may now be raised up by
the gift of a Saviour, his heart should overflow with gratitude, and the
language should be continually on his lips and in his heart, "thanks be
unto God for His unspeakable gift." Every other mercy should seem small
compared with this; and every manifestation of right feeling in the
heart should lead us to contemplate the source of it, and to feel, as
Paul did, that all is to be traced to the unspeakable gift of God.

Remarks

1\. This chapter, with the preceding, derives special importance from
the fact that it contains the most extended discussion of the principles
of Christian charity which occurs in the Bible. No one can doubt that it
was intended by the Redeemer that his people should be distinguished for
benevolence. It was important, therefore, that there should be some
portion of the New Testament where the principles on which charity
should be exercised, and the motives by which Christians should be
induced to give, should be fully stated. Such a discussion we have in
these chapters; and they therefore demand the profound and prayerful
attention of all who love the Lord Jesus.

2\. We have here a striking specimen of the manner in which the Bible is
written. Instead of abstract statements and systematic arrangement, the
principles of religion are brought out in connection with a case that
actually occurred. But it follows that it is important to study the
Bible attentively, and to be familiar with every part of it. In some
part of the Scriptures, statements of the principles which should guide
us in given circumstances will be found; and Christians should,
therefore, be familiar with every part of the Bible.

3\. These chapters are of special importance to the ministers of
religion, and to all whose duty it is to press upon their fellow
Christians the duty of giving liberally to the objects of benevolence.
The principles on which it should be done are fully developed here. The
motives which it is lawful to urge are urged here by Paul. It may be
added, also, that the chapters are worthy of our profound study on
account of the admirable tact and address which Paul evinces in inducing
others to give. Well he knew human nature. Well he knew the motives
which would influence others to give. And well he knew exactly how to
shape his arguments and adapt his reasoning to the circumstances of
those whom he addressed.

4\. The summary of the motives presented in this chapter contains still
the most important argument which can be urged to produce liberality. We
cannot but admire the felicity of Paul in this address - a felicity not
the result of craft and cunning, but resulting from his amiable
feelings, and the love which he bore to the Corinthians and to the cause
of benevolence. He reminds them of the high opinion which he had of
them, and of the honorable mention which he had been induced to make of
them [Co2 9:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#001.md); he reminds them of
the painful result to his own feelings and theirs if the collection
should in any way fail, and it should appear that his confidence in them
had been misplaced [Co2 9:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#003.md); he
refers them to the abundant reward which they might anticipate as the
result of liberal benefactions, and of the fact that God loved those who
gave cheerfully [Co2 9:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#006.md); he reminds
them of the abundant grace of God, who was able to supply all their
needs and to give them the means to contribute liberally to meet the
needs of the poor [Co2 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#008.md); he reminds
them of the joy which their liberality would occasion, and of the
abundant thanksgiving to God which would result from it [Co2
9:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#012.md); and he refers them to the
unspeakable gift of God, Jesus Christ, as an example, and an argument,
and us urging the highest claims in them, [Co2
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#015.md). "Who," says Doddridge, "could
withstand the force of such oratory?" No doubt it was effectual in that
case, and it should be in all others.

5\. May the motives here urged by the apostle be effectual to persuade
us all to liberal efforts to do good! Assuredly there is no less
occasion for Christian liberality now than there was in the time of
Paul. There are still multitudes of the poor who need the kind and
efficient aid of Christians. And the whole world now is a field in which
Christian beneficence may be abundantly displayed, and every land may,
and should experience the benefits of the charity to which the gospel
prompts, and which it enjoins. Happy are they who are influenced by the
principles of the gospel to do good to all people! Happy they who have
any opportunity to illustrate the power of Christian principle in this;
any ability to alleviate the needs of one sufferer, or to do anything in
sending that gospel to benighted nations which alone can save the soul
from eternal death!

6\. Let us especially thank God for his unspeakable gift, Jesus Christ.
Let us remember that to him we owe every opportunity to do good: that it
was because he came that there is any possibility of benefiting a dying
world; and that all who profess to love him are bound to imitate his
example and to show their sense of their obligation to God for giving a
Saviour. How poor and worthless are all our gifts compared with the
great gift of God; how slight our expressions of compassion, even at the
best, for our fellow-men, compared with the compassion which he has
shown for us! When God has given his Son to die for us, what should we
not be willing to give that we may show our gratitude, and that we may
benefit a dying world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 10](co2010.md)

</div>
