<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2006)  [Next](co2008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 7:0</span></span>

The first verse of this chapter 2 Cor. 7 properly belongs to the
previous chapter, and should have been attached to that. It is an
exhortation made in view of the promises there referred to, to make
every effort to obtain perfect purity, and to become entirely holy.

In [Co2 7:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#002), he entreats the
Corinthians, in accordance with the wish which he had expressed in [Co2
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#013), to receive him as a teacher and
a spiritual father; as a faithful apostle of the Lord Jesus. To induce
them to do this, he assures them that he had given them, at no time, any
occasion of offence. He had injured no man; he had wronged no man.
Possibly some might suppose that he had injured them by the sternness of
his requirements in forbidding them to contract friendships and
alliances with infidels; or in the case of discipline in regard to the
incestuous person. But he assures them that all his commands had been
the fruit of most tender love for them, and that he was ready to live
and die with them.

The remainder of the chapter [Co2
7:4-15](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#004) is occupied mainly in stating
the joy which he had at the evidence which they had given that they were
ready to obey his commands. He says, therefore [Co2
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#004), that he was full of comfort and
joy; and that in all his tribulation, the evidence of their obedience
had given him great and unfeigned satisfaction. In order to show them
the extent of his joy, he gives a pathetic description of the anxiety of
mind which he had on the subject; his troubles in Macedonia, and
particularly his distress on not meeting with Titus as he had expected,
[Co2 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#005). But this distress had been
relieved by his coming, and by the evidence which was furnished through
him that they were ready to yield obedience to his commands, [Co2
7:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#006). This joy was greatly increased
by his hearing from Titus the effect which his former Epistle to them
had produced, [Co2 7:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#008).

He had felt deep anxiety in regard to that. He had even regretted, it
would seem [Co2 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#008), that he had sent
it. He had been deeply pained at the necessity of giving them pain, [Co2
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#008). But the effect had been all that
he had desired; and when he learned from Titus the effect which it had
produced - the deep repentance which they had evinced, and the thorough
reformation which had occurred [Co2
7:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#009), he had great occasion to
rejoice that he had sent the Epistle to them. This new and distinguished
instance of their obedience had given him great joy, and confirmed him
in the proof that they were truly attached to him. The apostle adds, in
the conclusion of the chapter, that his joy was greatly increased by the
joy which Titus manifested. and his entire satisfaction in the conduct
of the Corinthians and the treatment which he had received from them
[Co2 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#013), so that though he, Paul,
had often had occasion to speak in the kindest terms of the Corinthians,
all that he had ever said in their favor Titus had realized in his own
case [Co2 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#014), and the affection of
Titus for them had been greatly increased by his visit to them, [Co2
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#015). The whole chapter, therefore, is
eminently adapted to produce good feeling in the minds of the
Corinthians toward the apostle, and to strengthen the bonds of their
mutual attachment.

[2 Corinthians 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 7:1</span></span>

Having therefore these promises - The promises referred to in [Co2
6:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#017); the promise that God would be
a Father, a protector, and a friend The idea is, that as we have a
promise that God would dwell in us, that he would be our God, that he
would be to us a Father, we should remove from us whatever is offensive
in his sight, and become perfectly holy.

Let us cleanse ourselves - Let us purify ourselves. Paul was not afraid
to bring into view the agency of Christians themselves in the work of
salvation. He, therefore, says, 'let us purify ourselves,' as if
Christians had much to do; as if their own agency was to be employed;
and as if their purifying was dependent on their own efforts. While it
is true that all purifying influence and all holiness proceeds from God,
it is also true that the effect of all the influences of the Holy Spirit
is to excite us to diligence to purify our own hearts, and to urge us to
make strenuous efforts to overcome our own sins. He who expects to be
made pure without any effort of his own, will never become pure; and he
who ever becomes holy will become so in consequence of strenuous efforts
to resist the evil of his own heart, and to become like God. The
argument here is, that we have the promises of God to aid us. We do not
go about the work in our own strength. It is not a work in which we are
to have no aid. But it is a work which God desires, and where he will
give us all the aid which we need.

From all filthiness of the flesh - The noun used here (μολυσμὸς
molusmos) occurs nowhere else in the New Testament. The verb occurs in
[Co1 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#007); [Rev
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004); [Rev
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004), and means to stain, defile,
pollute, as a garment; and the word used here means a soiling, hence,
defilement, pollution, and refers to the defiling and corrupting
influence of fleshly desires and carnal appetites. The filthiness of the
flesh here denotes evidently the gross and corrupt appetites and
passions of the body, including all such actions of all kinds as are
inconsistent with the virtue and purity with which the body, regarded as
the temple of the Holy Spirit, should be kept holy - all such passions
and appetites as the Holy Spirit of God would not produce.

And spirit - By "filthiness of the spirit," the apostle means, probably,
all the thoughts or mental associations that defile the man. Thus, the
Saviour [Mat 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#019) speaks of evil
thoughts, etc. that proceed out of the heart, and that pollute the man.
And probably Paul here includes all the sins and passions which pertain
particularly to mind or to the soul rather than to carnal appetites,
such as the desire of revenge, pride, avarice, ambition, etc. These are
in themselves as polluting and defiling as the gross sensual pleasures.
They stand as much in the way of sanctification, they are as offensive
to God, and they prove as certainly that the heart is depraved as the
grossest sensual passions. The main difference is, that they are more
decent in the external appearance; they can be better concealed; they
are usually indulged by a more elevated class in society; but they are
not the less offensive to God. It may be added, also, that they are
often conjoined in the same person; and that the man who is defiled in
his "spirit" is often a man most corrupt and sensual in his" flesh." Sin
sweeps with a desolating influence through the whole frame, and it
usually leaves no part unaffected, though some part may be more deeply
corrupted than others.

Perfecting - This word (ἐπιτελοῦντες epitelountes) means properly to
bring to an end, to finish, complete. The idea here is, that of carrying
it out to the completion. Holiness had been commenced in the heart, and
the exhortation of the apostle is, that they should make every effort
that it might be complete in all its parts. He does not say that this
work of perfection had ever been accomplished - nor does he say that it
had not been. He only urges the obligation to make an effort to be
entirely holy; and this obligation is not affected by the inquiry
whether anyone has been or has not been perfect. It is an obligation
which results from the nature of the Law of God and his unchangeable
claims on the soul. The fact that no one has been perfect does not relax
the claim; the fact that no one will be in this life does not weaken the
obligation. It proves only the deep and dreadful depravity of the human
heart, and should humble us under the stubbornness of guilt.

The obligation to be perfect is one that is unchangeable and eternal;
see [Mat 5:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#048); [Pe1
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#015). Tyndale renders this: "and grow
up to full holiness in the fear, of God." The unceasing and steady aim
of every Christian should be perfection - perfection in all things - in
the love of God, of Christ, of man; perfection of heart, and feeling,
and emotion; perfection in his words, and plans, and dealings with
people; perfection in his prayers, and in his submission to the will of
God. No man can be a Christian who does not sincerely desire it. and who
does not constantly aim at it. No man is a friend of God who can
acquiesce in a state of sin, and who is satisfied and contented that he
is not as holy as God is holy. And any man who has no desire to be
perfect as God is, and who does not make it his daily and constant aim
to be as perfect as God, may set it down as demonstrably certain that he
has no true religion, How can a man be a Christian who is willing to
acquiesce in a state of sin, and who does not desire to be just like his
Master and Lord?

In the fear of God - Out of fear and reverence of God. From a regard to
his commands, and a reverence for his name. The idea seems to be, that
we are always in the presence of God; we are professedly under His Law;
and we should be awed and restrained by a sense of his presence from the
commission of sin, and from indulgence in the pollutions of the flesh
and spirit. There are many sins that the presence of a child will
restrain a man from committing; and how should the conscious presence of
a holy God keep us from sin! If the fear of man or of a child will
restrain us, and make us attempt to be holy and pure, how should the
fear of the all-present and the all-seeing God keep us not only from
outward sins, but from polluted thoughts and unholy desires!

[2 Corinthians 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 7:2</span></span>

Receive us - Tyndale renders this: "understand us." The word used here
(χωρήσατε chōrēsate) means properly, give space, place, or room; and it
means here evidently, make place or room for us in your affections; that
is, admit or receive us as your friends. It is an earnest entreaty that
they would do what he had exhorted them to do in [Co2
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#013); see the note on that verse. From
that he had digressed in the close of the last chapter. He here returns
to the subject and asks an interest in their affections and their love.

We have wronged no man - We have done injustice to no man. This is given
as a reason why they should admit him to their full confidence and
affection. It is not improbable that he had been charged with injuring
the incestuous person by the severe discipline which he had found it
necessary to inflict on him; note, [Co1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005). This charge would not improbably
be brought against him by the false teachers in Corinth. But Paul here
says, that whatever was the severity of the discipline, he was conscious
of having done injury to no member of that church. It is possible,
however, that he does not here refer to any such charge, but that he
says in general that he had done no injury, and that there was no reason
why they should not receive him to their entire confidence. It argues
great consciousness of integrity when a man who has spent a considerable
time, as Paul had, with others, is able to say that he had wronged no
man in any way. Paul could not have made this solemn declaration unless
he was certain he had lived a very blameless life; compare [Act
20:33](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#033).

We have corrupted no man - This means that he had corrupted no man in
his morals, either by his precept or his example. The word (φθείρω
phtheirō) means in general to bring into a worse state or condition, and
is very often applied to morals. The idea is, here, that Paul had not by
his precept or example made any man the worse. He had not corrupted his
principles or his habits, or led him into sin.

We have defrauded no man - We have taken no man's property by cunning,
by trick, or by deception. The word πλεονεκτέω pleonekteō means
literally to have more than another, and then to take advantage, to seek
unlawful gain, to circumvent, defraud, deceive. The idea is, that Paul
had taken advantage of no circumstances to extort money from them, to
overreach them, or to cheat them. It is the conviction of a man who was
conscious that he had lived honestly, and who could appeal to them all
as full proof that his life among them had been blameless.

[2 Corinthians 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 7:3</span></span>

I speak not this to condemn you - I do not speak this with any desire to
reproach you. I do not complain of you for the purpose of condemning, or
because I have a desire to find fault, though I am compelled to speak in
some respect of your lack of affection and liberality toward me. It is
not because I have no love for you, and wish to have occasion to use
words implying complaint and condemnation.

For I have said before - [Co2 7:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#011).

That ye are in our hearts - That is, we are so much attached to you; or
you have such a place in our affections.

To die and live with you - If it were the will of God, we would be glad
to spend our lives among you, and to die with you; an expression
denoting most tender attachment. A similar well-known expression occurs
in Horace:

Tecum vivere amem. tecum obeam libens.

Odes, B. III. IX. 24.

With the world I live, with the world I die.

This was an expression of the tenderest attachment. It was true that the
Corinthians had not shown themselves remarkably worthy of the affections
of Paul, but from the beginning he had felt toward them the tenderest
attachment. And if it had been the will of God that he should cease to
travel, and to expose himself to perils by sea and land to spread the
knowledge of the Saviour, he would gladly have confined his labors to
them, and there have ended his days.

[2 Corinthians 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 7:4</span></span>

Great is my boldness of speech toward you - This verse seems designed to
soften the apparent harshness of what he had said [Co2
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#012), when he intimated that there was
a lack of love in them toward him (Bloomfield), as well as to refer to
the plainness which he had used all along in his letters to them. He
says, therefore, that he speaks freely; he speaks as a friend; he speaks
with the utmost openness and frankness; he conceals nothing from them.
He speaks freely of their faults, and he speaks freely of his love to
them; and he as frankly commends them and praises them. It is the open,
undisguised language of a friend, when he throws open his whole soul and
conceals nothing.

Great is my glorying of you - I have great occasion to commend and
praise you, and I do it freely. He refers here to the fact that he had
boasted of their liberality in regard to the proposed collection for the
poor saints of Judea [Co2 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#004); that he
had formerly boasted much of them to Titus, and of their readiness to
obey his commands [Co2 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#014); and that
now he had had abundant evidence, by what he had heard from Titus
(verses 5ff), that they were disposed to yield to his commands, and obey
his injunctions. He had probably often had occasion to boast of their
favorable regard for him.

I am filled with comfort - That is, by the evidence which I have
received of your readiness to obey me.

I am exceeding joyful - I am overjoyed. The word used here occurs
nowhere else in the New Testament except in [Rom
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020). It is not found in the classic
writers; and is a word which Paul evidently compounded (from ὑπὲρ huper
and περισσεύω perisseuō), and means to superabound over, to superabound
greatly, or exceedingly. It is a word which would be used only when the
heart was full, and when it would be difficult to find words to express
its conceptions. Paul's heart was full of joy; and he pours forth his
feelings in the most fervid and glowing language. I have joy which
cannot be expressed.

In all our tribulation - see the note, [Co2
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#004).

[2 Corinthians 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 7:5</span></span>

For when we were come into Macedonia - For the reasons which induced
Paul to go into Macedonia; see the notes on [Co2
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#016); compare the notes, [Co2
2:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#012).

Our flesh had no rest - We were exceedingly distressed and agitated. We
had no rest. The causes of his distress he immediately states.

But we were troubled on every side - In every way. We had no rest in any
quarter. We were obliged to enter into harassing labors and strifes
there, and we were full of anxiety in regard to you.

Without were fightings - Probably he here refers to fierce opposition,
which he met with in prosecuting his work of preaching the gospel. He
met there, as he did everywhere, with opposition from Pagans, Jews, and
false brethren. Tumults were usually excited wherever he went; and he
preached the gospel commonly amidst violent opposition.

Within were fears - Referring probably to the anxiety which he had in
regard to the success of the Epistle which he had sent to the church at
Corinth. He felt great solicitude on the subject. He had sent Titus
there to see what was the state of the church and to witness the effect
of his instructions. Titus had not come to him as he had expected, at
Troas [Co2 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#013), and he felt the
deepest anxiety in regard to him and to the success of his Epistle. His
fears were probably that they would be indisposed to exercise the
discipline on the offender; or lest the severity of the discipline
required should alienate them from him; or lest the party under the
influence of the false teachers should prevail. All was uncertainty, and
his mind was filled with the deepest apprehension.

[2 Corinthians 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 7:6</span></span>

God that comforteth those that are cast down - Whose characteristic is,
that be gives consolation to those who are anxious and depressed. All
his consolation was in God; and by whatever instrumentality comfort was
administered, he regarded and acknowledged God as the author; see the
note, [Co2 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#004).

By the coming of Titus - To Macedonia. He rejoiced not only in again
seeing him, but especially in the intelligence which he brought
respecting the success of his Epistle, and the conduct of the church at
Corinth.

[2 Corinthians 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 7:7</span></span>

And not by his coming only - Not merely by the fact that be was restored
to me, and that my anxieties in regard to him were now dissipated. It is
evident that Paul, not having met with Titus as he had expected, at
Troas, had felt much anxiety on his account, perhaps apprehending that
he was sick, or that he had died.

But by the consolation wherewith he was comforted in you - Titus was
satisfied and delighted with his interview with you. He had been kindly
treated, and he had seen all the effect produced by the letter which he
had desired. He had, therefore, been much comforted by his visit to
Corinth, and this was a source of additional joy to Paul. He rejoiced at
what he had witnessed among you, and he imparted the same joy to me
also. The joy of one friend will diffuse itself through the heart of
another. Joy is diffusive, and one Christian cannot well be happy
without making others happy also.

When he told us of your earnest desire - Either to rectify what was
amiss (Doddridge, Clarke); or to see me - Macknight, Rosenmuller,
Bloomfied. It seems to me that the connection requires us to understand
it of their desire, their anxiety to comply with his commands. and to
reform the abuses which existed in the church, and which had given him
so much pain.

Your mourning - Produced by the Epistle. Your deep repentance over the
sins which had prevailed in the church.

Your fervent mind toward me - Greek, 'Your zeal for me.' It denotes that
they evinced great ardor of attachment to him, and an earnest desire to
comply with his wishes.

So that I rejoiced the more - I not only rejoiced at his coming, but I
rejoiced the more at what he told me of you. Under any circumstances the
coming of Titus would have been an occasion of joy; but it was
especially so from the account which he gave me of you.

[2 Corinthians 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 7:8</span></span>

For though I made you sorry ... - That is, in the First Epistle which he
had sent to them. In that Epistle he had felt it necessary to reprove
them for their dissensions and other disorders which had occurred and
which were tolerated in the church. That Epistle was suited to produce
pain in them - as severe and just reproof always does; and Paul felt
very anxious about its effect on them. It was painful to him to write
it, and he was well aware that it must cause deep distress among them to
be thus reproved.

I do not repent - I have seen such happy effects produced by it; it has
so completely answered the end which I had in view; it was so kindly
received, that I do not regret now that I wrote it. It gives me no pain
in the recollection, but I have occasion to rejoice that it was done.

Though I did repent - Doddridge renders this: "however anxious I may
have been." The word used here does not denote repentance in the sense
in which that word is commonly understood, as if any wrong had been
done. It is not the language of remorse. It can denote here nothing more
than "that uneasiness which a good man feels, not from the consciousness
of having done wrong, but from a tenderness for others, and a fear lest
that which, prompted by duty, he had said, should have too strong an
effect upon them." - Campbell, diss. vi. part iii. section 9. See the
meaning of the word further illustrated in the same dissertation. The
word (μεταμέλομαι metamelomai) denotes properly to change one's purpose
or mind after having done anything (Robinson); or an uneasy feeling of
regret for what has been done without regard either to duration or
effects - Campbell. Here it is not to be understood that Paul meant to
say he had done anything wrong.

He was an inspired man, and what he had said was proper and right. But
he was a man of deep feeling, and of tender affections. He was pained at
the necessity of giving reproof. And there is no improbability in
supposing that after the letter had been sent off, and he reflected on
its nature and on the pain which it would cause to those whom he
tenderly loved, there might be some misgiving of heart about it, and the
deepest anxiety, and regret at the necessity of doing it. What parent is
there who has not had the same feeling as this? He has felt it necessary
to correct a beloved child, and has formed the purpose, and has executed
it. But is there no misgiving of heart? No question asked whether it
might not have been dispensed with? No internal struggle; no sorrow; no
emotion which may be called regret at the resolution which has been
taken? Yet there is no repentance as if the parent had done wrong. He
feels that he has done what was right and necessary. He approves his own
course, and has occasion of rejoicing at the good effects which follow.
Such appears to have been the situation of the apostle Paul in this
case; and it shows that he, had a tender heart, that he did not delight
in giving pain, and that he had no desire to overwhelm them with grief.
When the effect was seen, he was not unwilling that they should be
apprized of the pain which it had cost him. When a parent has corrected
a child, no injury is done if the child becomes acquainted with the
strugglings which it has cost him, and the deep pain and anxiety caused
by the necessity of resorting to chastisement.

For I perceive ... - I perceive the good effect of the Epistle. I
perceive that it produced the kind of sorrow in you which I desired. I
see that it has produced permanent good results. The sorrow which it
caused in you is only for a season; the good effects will be abiding. I
have, therefore, great occasion to rejoice that I sent the Epistle. It
produced permanent repentance and reformation [Co2
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#009), and thus accomplished all that I
wished or desired.

[2 Corinthians 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 7:9</span></span>

Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry ... - I have no pleasure in
giving pain to anyone, or in witnessing the distress of any. When people
are brought to repentance under the preaching of the gospel, the
ministers of the gospel do not find pleasure in their grief as such.
They are not desirous of making people unhappy by calling them to
repentance, and they have no pleasure in the deep distress of mind which
is often produced by their preaching, in itself considered. It is only
because such sorrow is an indication of their return to God, and will be
followed by happiness and by the fruits of good living, that they find
any pleasure in it, or that they seek to produce it.

But that ye sorrowed to repentance - It was not mere grief; it was not
sorrow producing melancholy, gloom, or despair; it was not sorrow which
led you to be angry at him who had reproved you for your errors - as is
sometimes the case with the sorrow that is produced by reproof; but it
was sorrow that led to a change and reformation. It was sorrow that was
followed by a putting away of the evil for the existence of which there
had been occasion to reprove you. The word rendered here as "repentance"
(μετάνοιαν metanoian) is a different word from that which, in [Co2
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#008), is rendered "I did repent," and
indicates a different state of mind. It properly means a change of mind
or purpose; compare [Heb 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#007). It
denotes a change for the better; a change of mind that is durable and
productive in its consequences; a change which amounts to a permanent
reformation; see Campbell's Diss. ut supra. The sense here is, that it
produced a change, a reformation. It was such sorrow for their sin as to
lead them to reform and to put away the evils which had existed among
them. It was this fact, and not that they had been made sorry, that led
Paul to rejoice.

After a godly manner - Margin, "according to God;" see the note on the
next verse.

That ye might receive damage by us in nothing - The Greek word rendered
"receive damage" (ζημιωθῆτε zēmiōthēte) means properly to bring loss
upon anyone; to receive loss or detriment; see the note on [Co1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#015); compare [Phi
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008). The sense here seems to be, "So
that on the whole no real injury was done you in any respect by me. You
were indeed put to pain and grief by my reproof. You sorrowed. But it
has done you no injury on the whole. It has been a benefit to you. If
you had not reformed, if you had been pained without putting away the
sins for which the reproof was administered, if it had been mere grief
without any proper fruit, you might have said that you would have
suffered a loss of happiness, or you might have given me occasion to
inflict severer discipline. But now you are gainers in happiness by all
the sorrow which I have caused." Sinners are gainers in happiness in the
end by all the pain of repentance produced by the preaching of the
gospel. No man suffers loss by being told of his faults if he repents;
and people are under the highest obligations to those faithful ministers
and other friends who tell them of their errors, and who are the means
of bringing them to true repentance.

[2 Corinthians 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 7:10</span></span>

For godly sorrow - "Sorrow according to God" (Ἡ γὰρ κατὰ Θεὸν λύπη Hē
gar kata Theon lupē). That is, such sorrow as has respect to God, or is
according to his will, or as leads the soul to him. This is a very
important expression in regard to true repentance, and shows the exact
nature of that sorrow which is connected with a return to God. The
phrase may be regarded as implying the following things:

\(1\) Such sorrow as God approves, or such as is suitable to. or
conformable to his will and desires. It cannot mean that it is such
sorrow or grief as God has, for he has none; but such as shall be in
accordance with what God demands in a return to him. It is a sorrow
which his truth is suited to produce on the heart; such a sorrow as
shall appropriately arise from viewing sin as God views it; such sorrow
as exists in the mind when our views accord with his in regard to the
existence, the extent, the nature, and the ill-desert of sin. Such views
will lead to sorrow that it has ever been committed; and such views will
be "according to God."

\(2\) such sorrow as shall be exercised toward God in view of sin; which
shall arise from a view of the evil of sin as committed against a holy
God. It is not mainly that it will lead to pain; that it will overwhelm
the soul in disgrace; that it will forfeit the favor or lead to the
contempt of man; or that it will lead to an eternal hell; but it is such
as arises from a view of the evil of sin as committed against a holy and
just God, deriving its main evil from the fact that it is an offence
against his infinite Majesty. Such sorrow David had [Psa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004), when he said, "against thee, thee
only have I sinned;" when the offence regarded as committed against,
man, enormous as it was, was lost and absorbed in its greater evil when
regarded as committed against God. So all true and genuine repentance is
that which regards sin as deriving its main evil from the fact that it
is committed against God.

\(3\) that which leads to God. It leads to God to obtain forgiveness; to
seek for consolation. A heart truly contrite and penitent seeks God, and
implores pardon from him. Other sorrow in view of sin than that which is
genuine repentance, leads the person away from God. He seeks consolation
in the world; he endeavors to drive away his serious impressions or to
drown them in the pleasures and the cares of life. But genuine sorrow
for sin leads the soul to God, and conducts the sinner, through the
Redeemer, to him to obtain the pardon and peace which he only can give
to a wounded spirit. In God alone can pardon and true peace be found;
and godly sorrow for sin will seek them there.

Worketh repentance - Produces a change that shall be permanent; a
reformation. It is not mere regret; it does not soon pass away in its
effects, but it produces permanent and abiding changes. A man who mourns
over sin as committed against God, and who seek to God for pardon, will
reform his life and truly repent. He who has grief for sin only because
it will lead to disgrace or shame, or because it will lead to poverty or
pain, will not necessarily break off from it and reform. It is only when
it is seen that sin is committed against God and is evil in his sight,
that it leads to a change of life.

Not to be repented of - (ἀμεταμέλητον ametamelēton); see the note on
[Co2 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#008). Not to be regretted. It is
permanent and abiding. There is no occasion to mourn over such
repentance and change of life. It is that which the mind approves, and
which it will always approve. There will be no reason for regretting it,
and it will never be regretted. And it is so. Who ever yet repented of
having truly repented of sin? Who is there, who has there ever been, who
became a true penitent, and a true Christian, who ever regretted it? Not
an individual has ever been known who regretted his having become a
Christian. Not one who regretted that he had become one too soon in
life, or that he had served the Lord Jesus too faithfully or too long.

But the sorrow of the world - All sorrow which is not toward God, and
which does not arise from just views of sin as committed against God, or
lead to God. Probably Paul refers here to the sorrow which arises from
worldly causes and which does not lead to God for consolation. Such may
be the sorrow which arises from the loss of friends or property; from
disappointment, or from shame and disgrace, Perhaps it may include the
following things:

\(1\) Sorrow arising from losses of property and friends, and from
disappointment.

\(2\) sorrow for sin or vice when it overwhelms the mind with the
consciousness of guilt, and when it does not lead to God, and when there
is no contrition of soul from viewing it as an offence against God.
Thus, a female who has wandered from the paths of virtue, and involved
her family and herself in disgrace; or a man who has been guilty of
forgery, or perjury, or any other disgraceful crime, and who is
detected; a man who has violated the laws of the land, and who has
involved himself and family in disgrace, will often feel regret, and
sorrow, and also remorse, but it arises wholly from worldly
considerations, and does not lead to God.

\(3\) when the sorrow arises from a view of worldly consequences merely,
and when there is no looking to God for pardon and consolation. Thus,
people, when they lose their property or friends, often pine in grief
without looking to God. Thus, when they have wandered from the path of
virtue and have fallen into sin, they often look merely to the disgrace
among people, and see their names blasted, and their comforts gone, and
pine away in grief. There is no looking to God for pardon or for
consolation. The sorrow arises from this world, and it terminates there.
It is the loss of what they valued pertaining to this world, and it is
all which they had, and it produces death. It is sorrow such as the
people of this world have, begins with this world, and terminates with
this world.

Worketh death - Tends to death, spiritual, temporal, and eternal. It
does not tend to life.

\(1\) it produces distress only. It is attended with no consolation.

\(2\) it tends to break the spirit, to destroy the peace, and to mar the
happiness.

\(3\) it often leads to death itself. The spirit is broken, and the
heart pines away under the influence of the unalleviated sorrow; or
under its influence people often lay violent hands on themselves and
take their lives. Life is often closed under the influence of such
sorrow.

\(4\) it tends to eternal death. There is no looking to God; no looking
for pardon. It produces murmuring, repining, complaining, fretfulness
against God, and thus leads to his displeasure and to the condemnation
and ruin of the soul.

[2 Corinthians 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 7:11</span></span>

For behold this self-same thing - For see in your own case the happy
effects of godly sorrow. See the effects which it produced; see an
illustration of what it is suited to produce. The construction is, "For
lo! this very thing, to wit, your sorrowing after a godly manner,
wrought carefulness, clearing of yourselves," etc. The object of Paul is
to illustrate the effects of godly sorrow, to which he had referred in
[Co2 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010). He appeals, therefore, to
their own case, and says that it was beautifully illustrated among
themselves.

What carefulness - (σπουδήν spoudēn). This word properly denotes "speed,
haste;" then diligence, earnest effort, forwardness. Here it is
evidently used to denote the diligence and the great anxiety which they
manifested to remove the evils which existed among them. They went to
work to remove them. They did not sit down to mourn over them merely,
nor did they wait for God to remove them, nor did they plead that they
could do nothing, but they set about the work as though they believed it
might be done. When people are thoroughly convinced of sin, they will
set about removing it with the utmost diligence. They will feel that
this can be done, and must be done, or that the soul will be lost.

What clearing of yourselves - (ἀπολογίαν apologian). Apology. This word
properly means a plea or defense before a tribunal or elsewhere; [Act
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#001); [Ti2
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#016). Tyndale renders it, "Yea, it
caused you to clear yourselves." The word here properly means "apology"
for what had been done; and it probably refers here to the effort which
would be made by the sounder part of the church to clear themselves from
blame in what had occurred. It does not mean that the guilty, when
convicted of sin, will attempt to vindicate themselves and to apologize
to God for what they had done; but it means that the church at Corinth
were anxious to state to Titus all the mitigating circumstances of the
case: they showed great solicitude to free themselves, as far as could
be done, from blame; they were anxious, as far as could be, to show that
they had not approved of what had occurred, and perhaps that it had
occurred only because it could not have been prevented. We are not to
suppose that all the things here referred to occurred in the same
individuals, and that the same persons precisely evinced diligence, and
made the apology, etc. It was done by the church; all evinced deep
feeling; but some manifested it in one way, and some in another. The
whole church was roused, and all felt, and all endeavored in the proper
way to free themselves from the blame, and to remove the evil from among
them.

Yea, what indignation - Indignation against the sin, and perhaps against
the persons who had drawn down the censure of the apostle. One effect of
true repentance is to produce decided hatred of sin. It is not mere
regret, or sorrow, it is positive hatred. There is a deep indignation
against it as an evil and a bitter thing.

Yea, what fear - Fear lest the thing should be repeated. Fear lest it
should not be entirely removed. Or it may possibly mean fear of the
displeasure of Paul, and of the punishment which would be inflicted if
the evil were not removed. But it more probably refers to the anxious
state of mind that the whole evil might be corrected, and to the dread
of having any vestige of the evil remaining among them.

Yea, what vehement desire - This may either mean their fervent wish to
remove the cause of complaint, or their anxious desire to see the
apostle. It is used in the latter sense in [Co2
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#007), and according to Doddridge and
Bloomfield this is the meaning here. Locke renders it, "desire of
satisfying me." It seems to me more probable that Paul refers to their
anxious wish to remove the sin, since this is the topic under
consideration. The point of his remarks in this verse is not so much
their affection for him as their indignation against their sin, and
their deep grief that sin had existed and had been tolerated among them.

Yea, what zeal - Zeal to remove the sin, and to show your attachment to
me. They set about the work of reformation in great earnest.

Yea, what revenge! - Tyndale renders this: "it caused punishment." The
idea is, that they immediately set about the work of inflicting
punishment on the offender. The word used here (ἐκδίκησις ekdikēsis)
probably denotes "maintenance of right, protection;" then it is used in
the sense of avengement, or vengeance; and then of penal retribution or
punishment; see [Luk 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#022); [Th2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008); [Pe1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#014).

In all things ... - The sense of this is, "You have entirely acquitted
yourselves of blame in this business." The apostle does not mean that
none of them had been to blame, or that the church had been free from
fault, for a large part of his former Epistle is occupied in reproving
them for their faults in this business, but he means that by their zeal
and their readiness to take away the cause of complaint, they had
removed all necessity of further blame, and had pursued such a course as
entirely to meet his approbation. They had cleared themselves of any
further blame in this business, and had become, so far as this was
concerned, "clear" (ἁγνοὺς hagnous) or pure.

[2 Corinthians 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 7:12</span></span>

Wherefore, though I wrote unto you ... - In this verse Paul states the
main reason why he had written to them on the subject. It was not
principally on account of the man who had done the wrong, or of him who
had been injured; but it was from tender anxiety for the whole church,
and in order to show the deep interest which he had in their welfare.

Not for his cause that had done the wrong - Not mainly, or principally
on account of the incestuous person; [Co1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001). It was not primarily with
reference to him as an individual that I wrote, but from a regard to the
whole church.

Nor for his cause that suffered wrong - Not merely that the wrong which
he had suffered might be rectified, and that his rights might be
restored, valuable and desirable as was that object. The offence was
that a man had taken his father's wife as his own [Co1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001), and the person injured,
therefore, was his father. It is evident from this passage, I think,
that the father was living at the time when Paul wrote this Epistle.

But that our care ... - I wrote mainly that I might show the deep
interest which I had in the church at large, and my anxiety that it
might not suffer by the misconduct of any of its members. It is from a
regard to the welfare of the whole earth that discipline should be
administered, and not simply with reference to an individual who has
done wrong, or an individual who is injured. In church discipline such
private interests are absorbed in the general interest of the church at
large.

[2 Corinthians 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 7:13</span></span>

Therefore we were comforted in your comfort - The phrase "your comfort,"
here seems to mean the happiness which they had, or might reasonably be
expected to have in obeying the directions of Paul, and in the
repentance which they had manifested. Paul had spoken of no other
consolation or comfort than this; and the idea seems to be that they
were a happy people, and would be happy by obeying the commands of God.
This fact gave Paul additional joy, and he could not but rejoice that
they had removed the cause of the offence, and that they would not thus
be exposed to the displeasure of God. Had they not repented and put away
the evil, the consequences to them must have been deep distress. As it
was, they would be blessed and happy.

And exceedingly the more ... - Titus had been kindly received, and
hospitably entertained, and had become much attached to them. This was
to Paul an additional occasion of joy; see [Co2
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#007).

[2 Corinthians 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 7:14</span></span>

For if I have boasted anything to him ... - This seems to imply that
Paul had spoken most favorably to Titus of the Corinthians before he
went among them. He had probably expressed his belief that he would be
kindly received; that they would be disposed to listen to him, and to
comply with the directions of the apostle; perhaps he had spoken to him
of what he anticipated would be their liberality in regard to the
collection which he was about to make for the poor saints at Jerusalem.

I am not ashamed - It has all turned out to be true. He has found it as
I said it would be. All my expectations are realized; and you have been
as kind, and hospitable, and benevolent as I assured him you would be.

As we spake all things to you in truth - Everything which I said to you
was said in truth. All my promises to you, and all my commands, and all
my reasonable expectations expressed to you, were sincere. I practiced
no disguise, and all that I have said thus far turned out to be true.

Even so our boasting ... - My boasting of your character, and of your
disposition to do right, which I made before Titus has turned out to be
true. It was as I said it would be. I did not commend you too highly to
him, as I did not overstate the matter to you in my Epistle.

[2 Corinthians 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co2 7:15</span></span>

And his inward affection ... - He has become deeply and tenderly
attached to you. His affectionate regard for you has been greatly
increased by his visit. On the meaning of the word here rendered "inward
affection" (σπλάγχια splangchia, Margin, bowels) see the note on [Co2
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#012). It denotes here: deep, tender
attachment, or love.

How with fear and trembling ye received him - With fear of offending,
and with deep apprehension of the consequences of remaining in sin. He
saw what a fear there was of doing wrong, and what evidence there was,
therefore, that you were solicitous to do right.

[2 Corinthians 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 7:16</span></span>

I rejoice, therefore, that I have confidence ... - I have had the most
ample proof that you are disposed to obey God, and to put away
everything that is offensive to him. The address of this part of the
Epistle, says Doddridge, is wonderful. It is designed, evidently, not
merely to commend them for what they had done, and to show them the deep
attachment which he had for them, but in a special manner to prepare
them for what he he was about to say in the following chapter,
respecting the collection which he had so much at heart for the poor
saints at Jerusalem. What he here says was admirably adapted to
introduce that subject. They had thus far showed the deepest regard for
him. They had complied with all his directions. All that he had said of
them had proved to be true. And as he had boasted of them to Titus [Co2
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#014), and expressed his entire
confidence that they would comply with his requisitions, so he had also
boasted of them to the churches of Macedonia and expressed the utmost
confidence that they would be liberal in their benefactions, [Co2
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#002). All that Paul here says in their
favor, therefore, was eminently adapted to excite them to liberality,
and prepare them to comply with his wishes in regard to that
contribution.

Remarks

1\. Christians are bound by every solemn and sacred consideration to
endeavor to purify themselves, [Co2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001). They who have the promises of
eternal life, and the assurance that God will be to them a father, and
evidence that they are his sons and daughters, should not indulge in the
filthiness of the flesh and spirit.

2\. Every true Christian will aim at perfection, [Co2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001). He will desire to be perfect; he
will strive for it; he will make it a subject of unceasing and constant
prayer. No man can be a Christian to whom it would not be a pleasure to
be at once as perfect as God. And if any man is conscious that the idea
of being made at once perfectly holy would be unpleasant or painful, he
may set it down as certain evidence that he is a stranger to religion.

3\. No man can be a Christian who voluntarily indulges in sin, or in
what he knows to be wrong, [Co2 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001). A
man who does that cannot be aiming at perfection. A man who does that
shows that he has no real desire to be perfect.

4\. How blessed will be heaven, [Co2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001). There we shall be perfect. And
the crowning glory of heaven is not that we shall be happy, but that we
shall be holy. Whatever there is in the heart that is good shall there
be perfectly developed; whatever there is that is evil shall be removed,
and the whole soul will be like God. The Christian desires heaven
because he will be there perfect. He desires no other heaven. He could
be induced to accept no other if it were offered to him. He blesses God
day by day that there is such a heaven, and that there is no other: that
there is one world which sin does not enter, and where evil shall be
unknown.

5\. What a change will take place at death, [Co2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001). The Christian will be there made
perfect. How this change will be there produced we do not know. Whether
it will be by some extraordinary influence of the Spirit of God on the
heart, or by the mere removal from the body, and from a sinful world to
a world of glory, we know not. The fact seems to be clear, that at death
the Christian will be made at once as holy as God is holy, and that he
will ever continue to be in the future world.

6\. What a desirable thing it is to die, [Co2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001). Here, should we attain to the age
of the patriarchs, like them we should continue to be imperfect. Death
only will secure our perfection; and death, therefore, is a desirable
event. The perfection of our being could not be attained but for death;
and every Christian should rejoice that he is to die. It is better to be
in heaven than on earth; better to be with God than to be away from him;
better to be made perfect than to be contending here with internal
corruption, and to struggle with our sins. "I would not live always,"
was the language of holy Job; "I desire to depart and to be with
Christ," was the language of holy Paul.

7\. It is often painful to be compelled to use the language of reproof,
[Co2 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#008). Paul deeply regretted the
necessity of doing it in the case of the Corinthians, and expressed the
deepest anxiety in regard to it. No man, no minister, parent, or friend
can use it but with deep regret that it is necessary. But the
painfulness of it should not prevent our doing it. It should be done
tenderly but faithfully. If done with the deep feeling, with the tender
affection of Paul, it will be done right; and when so done, it will
produce the desired effect, and do good. No man should use the language
of reproof with a hard heart, or with severity of feeling. If he is,
like Paul, ready to weep when he does it, it will do good. If he does it
because he delights in it, it will do evil.

8\. It is a subject of rejoicing where a people exercise repentance,
[Co2 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#008). A minister has pleasure not
in the pain which his reproofs cause; not in the deep anxiety and
distress of the sinner, and not in the pain which Christians feel under
his reproofs, but he has joy in the happy results or the fruits which
follow from it. It is only from the belief that those tears will produce
abundant joy that he has pleasure in causing them, or in witnessing
them.

9\. The way to bring people to repentance is to present to them the
simple and unvarnished truth, [Co2
7:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#008). Paul stated simple and plain
truths to the Corinthians. He did not abuse them; he did not censure
them in general terms; he stated things just as they were, and specified
the things on account of which there was occasion for repentance. So if
ministers wish to excite repentance in others, they must specify the
sins over which others should weep; if we wish, as individuals, to feel
regret for our sins, and to have true repentance toward God, we must
dwell on those particular sins which we have committed, and should
endeavor so to reflect on them that they may make an appropriate
impression on the heart. No man will truly repent by general reflections
on his sin; no one who does not endeavor so to dwell on his sins as that
they shall make the proper impression which each one is suited to
produce on the soul. Repentance is that state of mind which a view of
the truth in regard to our own depravity is suited to produce.

10\. There is a great difference between godly sorrow and the sorrow of
the world, [Co2 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010). All people feel
sorrow. All people, at some period of their lives, grieve over their
past conduct. Some in their sorrow are pained because they have offended
God, and go to God, and find pardon and peace in him. That sorrow is
unto salvation. But the mass do not look to God. They turn away from him
even in their disappointments, and in their sorrows, and in the bitter
consciousness of sin. They seek to alleviate their sorrows in worldly
company, in pleasure, in the intoxicating bowl; and such sorrow works
death. It produces additional distress, and deeper gloom here, and
eternal woe hereafter.

11\. We may learn what constitutes true repentance, [Co2
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#011). There should be. and there will
be, deep feeling. There will be "carefulness," deep anxiety to be freed
from the sin; there will be a desire to remove it; "indignation" against
it; "fear" of offending God; "earnest desire" that all that has been
wrong should be corrected; "zeal" that the reformation should be entire;
and a wish that the appropriate "revenge," or expression of displeasure,
should be excited against it. The true penitent hates nothing so
cordially as he does his sin. He hates nothing but sin. And his warfare
with that is decided, uncompromising, inexorable, and eternal.

12\. It is an evidence of mercy and goodness in God that the sorrow
which is felt about sin may be made to terminate in our good, and to
promote our salvation, [Co2 7:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010).
If sorrow for sin had been suffered to take its own course, and had
proceeded unchecked, it would in all cases have produced death. If it
had not been for the merciful interposition of Christianity, by which
even sorrow might be turned to joy, this world would have been
everywhere a world of sadness and of death. Man would have suffered. Sin
always produces, sooner or later, woe. Christianity has done nothing to
make people wretched, but it has done everything to bind up broken
hearts. It has revealed a way by which sorrow may be turned into joy,
and the bitterness of grief may be followed by the sweet calm and
sunshine of peace.

13\. The great purpose of Christian discipline is to benefit the whole
church, [Co2 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#012). It is not merely on
account of the offender, nor is it merely that the injured may receive a
just recompense. it is primarily that the church may be pure, and that
the cause of religion may not be dishonored. When the work of discipline
is entered on from any private and personal motives, it is usually
attended with bad feeling, and usually results in evil. When it is
entered on with a desire to honor God, and to promote the purity of the
church, when the whole aim is to deliver the church from opprobrium and
scandal, and to have just such a church as Jesus Christ desires, then it
will be prosecuted with good temper, and with right feeling, and then it
will lead to happy results. Let no man institute a process of discipline
on an offending brother from private, personal, and revengeful feelings.
Let him first examine his own heart, and let him be sure that his aim is
solely the glory of Christ, before he attempts to draw down the censure
of the church on an offending brother. How many cases of church
discipline would be arrested if this simple rule were observed! And
while the case before us shows that it is important in the highest
degree that discipline should be exercised on an offending member of the
church; while no consideration should prevent us from exercising that
discipline; and while every man should feel desirous that the offending
brother should be reproved or punished, yet this case also shows that it
should be done with the utmost tenderness, the most strict regard to
justice, and the deepest anxiety that the general interests of religion
should not suffer by the manifestation of an improper spirit, or by
improper motives in inflicting punishment on an offending brother.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 8](co2008)

</div>
