<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Colossians Index](col.md)  
  [Previous](col001)  [Next](col003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Colossians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001.md)

[Colossians](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">col 2:0</span></span>

This entire chapter may be regarded as designed to guard the Colossians
against the seductive influence of the false philosophy which tended to
draw them away from the gospel. It is evident from the chapter that
there were at Colossae, or in the vicinity, professed instructors in
religion, who taught an artful and plausible philosophy, adapting
themselves to the prejudices of the people, and inculcating opinions
that tended to lead them away from the truths which they had embraced.
These teachers were probably of Jewish origin, and had adopted many of
the arts of a plausible rhetoric, from the prevailing philosophy in that
region. See the Introduction, Section 4. Against the seductive
influences of this philosophy, it is the design of this chapter to guard
them, and though the apostle does not seem to have intended to pursue an
exact logical order; yet the argument in the chapter can be conveniently
regarded as consisting of two parts: A statement of the reasons why they
should be on their guard against the arts of that philosophy; and a
specification of the particular errors to which they were exposed:

I. A statement of the reasons why they should not allow themselves to be
drawn away by the influence of the prevalent philosophy; [Col
2:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001.md). This also consists of two
parts.

A. The importance of the subject; [Col
2:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001.md).

\(1\) the apostle felt great solicitude for them, and for all whom he
had not seen, that they might hold the truth in reference to the divine
existence and perfections; [Col 2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001.md).

\(2\) all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge were in Christ, and it
was, therefore, of the greatest importance to hold to the truth
respecting him; [Col 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003.md).

\(3\) they were in danger of being led astray by enticing words; [Col
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#004.md).

\(4\) Paul says that he was with them in spirit, and he exhorted them,
therefore, to remain rooted and grounded in the doctrines which they had
received respecting the Saviour; [Col
2:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#005.md).

B. Reasons why they should be steadfast and not drawn away by the
influence of false philosophy; [Col
2:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008.md).

\(1\) the danger of depending on traditions and worldly principles in
religion; of being "spoiled" or robbed by philosophy; [Col
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008.md).

\(2\) all that we need to desire is to be found in Christ; [Col
2:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009.md).

\(3\) we have received through him the true circumcision - the putting
away our sins; [Col 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011.md).

\(4\) we have been buried with him in baptism, and have solemnly devoted
ourselves to him, [Col 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012.md).

\(5\) we have been quickened by him; our sins have been forgiven; and
everything that hindered our salvation has been taken out of the way by
him, and he has triumphed over our foes; [Col
2:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#013.md).

II\. Specification of particular errors to which they were exposed, or
of particular things to be avoided; [Col
2:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016.md).

The chapter closes [Col 2:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#020.md) with
an earnest exhortation wholly to avoid these things; not to touch or
taste or handle them. However plausible the pretences might be on which
they were urged; whatever appearance of wisdom or humility there might
be, the apostle assures them that there was no real honor in them, and
that they were wholly to be avoided.

[Colossians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">col 2:1</span></span>

For I would that ye knew - I wish you knew or fully understood. He
supposes that this would deeply affect them if they understood the
solicitude which he had had on their account.

What great conflict - Margin, fear, or care. The Greek word is "agony" -
ἀγῶνα agōna. It is not, however, the word rendered "agony" in [Luk
22:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#044.md) - ἀγωνία agōnia - though that is
derived from this. The word is rendered conflict in [Phi
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#030.md); contention, [Th1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#002.md); fight, [Ti1
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#012.md); [Ti2
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#007.md); and race, [Heb
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#001.md). It properly refers to the
combats, contests, struggles, efforts at the public games; the toil and
conflict to obtain a victory. It refers here to the anxious care, the
mental conflict, the earnest solicitude which he had in their behalf, in
view of the dangers to which they were exposed from Judaizing Christians
and Pagan philosophy. This mental struggle resembled that which the
combatants had at the public games; compare the [Co1
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#025.md), note, 27, note. And for them at
Laodicea For Christians there, who were exposed to similar danger.
Laodicea was the capital of Phrygia, in Asia Minor, and a little south
of Colossae. See Introduction, Section 1. 6. Notes, [Col
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#016.md). There was a church early planted
there - the "lukewarm" church mentioned in [Rev
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014.md). Being in the vicinity of
Colossae, the church there would be exposed to the same perils, and the
rebuke in [Rev 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014.md), showed that the
fears of Paul were well founded, and that the arts of the false teachers
were too successful.

And for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh - That is,
evidently in that region. He had, doubtless, a general solicitude for
all Christians, but his remark here has reference to those in the
neighborhood of the church at Colossae, or in that church. On the
question which has been raised, whether this proves that the apostle
Paul had never been at Colossae or Laodicea, see Introduction, Section
2, 4. This passage does not seem to me to prove that he had not been
there. It may mean that he had great solicitude for those Christians
there whom he knew, and for all others there, or in the vicinity, even
though he was not personally acquainted with them. He may refer:

\(1\) to some churches in the neighborhood formed since he was there;
or.

\(2\) to strangers who had come in there since he was with them; or.

\(3\) to those who had been converted since he was there, and with whom
he had no personal acquaintance. For all these he would feel the same
solicitude, for they were all exposed to the same danger. To "see one's
face in the flesh," is a Hebraism, meaning to become personally
acquainted with him.

[Colossians 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">col 2:2</span></span>

That their hearts might be comforted - Like all other Christians in the
times of the apostles, they were doubtless exposed to trials and
persecutions.

Being knit together in love - The same word which is used here
(συμβιβάζω sumbibazō) occurs in [Eph
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#016.md), and is rendered compacted; see
the notes at that place. In [Act 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#022.md),
it is rendered proving; [Act 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#010.md),
assuredly gathering; [Co1 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#016.md),
instruct; and here, and in [Col 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#019.md),
knit together. It means, properly, to make to come together, and hence,
refers to a firm union, as where the heart of Christians are one. Here
it means that the way of comforting each other was by solid Christian
friendship, and that the means of cementing that was love. It was not by
a mere outward profession, or by mere speculative faith; it was by a
union of affection.

And unto all riches - On the meaning of the word "riches," as used by
the apostle Paul, see the notes at [Rom
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004.md). There is a great energy of
expression here. The meaning is, that the thing referred to - "the full
understanding" of the "mystery" of religion - was an invaluable
possession, like abundant wealth. This passage also shows the object for
which they should be united. It should be in order that they might
obtain this inestimable wealth. If they were divided in affections, and
split up into factions, they could not hope to secure it.

Of the full assurance of understanding - This word (πληροφορία
plērophoria) means firm persuasion, settled conviction. It occurs only
here and in [Th1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#005.md); [Heb
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#011.md); [Heb
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#022.md), and is rendered by assurance,
or full assurance, in every instance. See the verb, however, in [Luk
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001.md); [Rom
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#021.md); [Rom
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#005.md); [Ti2
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#005.md), [Ti2
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#017.md). It was the desire of the apostle
that they might have entire conviction of the truth of the Christian
doctrines.

To the acknowledgment - So as fully and openly to acknowledge or confess
this mystery.

The mystery - On the meaning of this word, see the [Rom
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025.md), note; [Eph
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#009.md), note. The meaning is, the
doctrine respecting God, which had before been concealed or hidden, but
which was now revealed in the gospel. It does not mean that there was
any thing unintelligible or incomprehensible respecting this doctrine
when it; was made known. That might be as clear as any other truth.

Of God - Of God as he actually subsists. This does not mean that the
mere fact of the existence of God was a "mystery," or a truth which had
been concealed, for that was not true. But the sense plainly is, that
there were truths now made known in the gospel to mankind, about the
mode of the divine existence, which had not before been disclosed; and
this "mystery" he wished them to retain, or fully acknowledge. The
"mystery," or the hitherto unrevealed truth, related to the fact that
God subsisted in more persons than one, as "Father," and as "Christ."

And of the Father - Or, rather, "even of the Father;" for so the word
καὶ kai (and) is often used. The apostle does not mean that he wished
them to acknowledge the hitherto unrevealed truth respecting "God' and
another being called "the Father;" but respecting "God" as the "Father,"
or of God as" Father' and as "Christ."

And of Christ - As a person of the Godhead. What the apostle wished them
to acknowledge was, the full revelation now made known respecting the
essential nature of God, as the "Father," and as "Christ." In relation
to this, they were in special danger of being corrupted by the prevalent
philosophy, as it is in relation to this that error of Christian
doctrine usually commences. It should be said, however, that there is
great variety of reading in the mss. on this whole clause, and that many
critics (see Rosenmuller) regard it as spurious. I do not see evidence
that it is not genuine; and the strain of exhortation of the apostle
seems to me to demand it.

[Colossians 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">col 2:3</span></span>

In whom - Margin, "wherein." The more correct translation is "in whom."
The reference is doubtless to Christ, as his name is the immediate
antecedent, and as what is affirmed here properly appertains to him.

Are hid - Like treasures that are concealed or garnered up. It does not
mean that none of those "treasures" had been developed; but that, so to
speak, Christ, as Mediator, was the great treasure-house where were to
be found all the wisdom and knowledge needful for people.

All the treasures - It is common to compare any thing valuable with
"treasures" of silver or gold. The idea here is, that in reference to
the wisdom and knowledge needful for us, Christ is what abundant
treasures are in reference to the supply of our wants.

Wisdom - The wisdom needful for our salvation. Notes, [Co1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024.md).

And knowledge - The knowledge which is requisite to guide us in the way
to life. Christ is able to instruct us in all that it is desirable for
us to know, so that it is not necessary for us to apply to philosophy,
or to the teachings of human beings.

[Colossians 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">col 2:4</span></span>

And this I say - Respecting the character and sufficiency of the truth
revealed in Christ.

Lest any man should beguile you - Deceive you, lead you away from the
truth.

With enticing words - Artful words, smooth and plausible arguments; such
as were employed by the Greek sophists and rhetoricians.

[Colossians 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">col 2:5</span></span>

For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit -
That is, I seem to see you; I feel as if I were there, and were looking
upon you; and I have the same solicitude as if I were there, and saw all
the danger which exists that your beautiful order and harmony should be
disturbed by the influence of false philosophy; see the notes at [Co1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#003.md). The word "spirit," here, does not
refer to the Holy Spirit, or to any inspiration by which the apostle was
enabled to see them; but it is equivalent to what we mean when we say,
"My heart is with you." He seemed to be beholding them.

Joying and beholding your order - That is, I rejoice as if I saw your
order. He had such confidence that everything would be done among them
as became Christians, that he could rejoice as if he actually saw it.

[Colossians 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">col 2:6</span></span>

As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord - Have received him
by faith as your Saviour, or as you were instructed respecting his rank,
character, and work. The object here is to induce them not to swerve
from the views which they had of Christ when he was made known to them.
They had at first probably received their ideas of the Saviour from the
apostle himself (see the Introduction); and, at any rate, the apostle
designs to assure them that the views which they had when they "received
him," were founded in truth.

So walk in him - Continue in those views of Christ; live in the
maintenance of them; let them regulate your whole conduct. The word
walk, in the Scriptures, is used to denote the manner of life; and the
sense here is, that they should live and act wholly under the influence
of the conceptions which they had of the Saviour when they first
embraced him. The particle "so" is supplied by our translators, and
rather weakens the sense. No stress should be laid on it, as is often
done. The meaning is, simply, "Since you have received Christ as your
Lord, as he was preached to you, hold fast the doctrine which you have
received, and do not permit yourselves to be turned aside by any Jewish
teachers, or teachers of philosophy."

[Colossians 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">col 2:7</span></span>

Rooted ...in him - As a tree strikes its roots deep in the earth, so our
faith should strike deep into the doctrine respecting the Saviour. See
the phrase used here explained in the parallel place in [Eph
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017.md).

And established in the faith, as ye have been taught - To wit, by the
founders of the church, and by those faithful ministers who had
succeeded them; Notes, [Col 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#007.md).

Abounding therein with thanksgiving - Expressing overflowing thanks to
God that you have been made acquainted with truths so precious and
glorious. If there is any thing for which we ought to be thankful, it is
for the knowledge of the great truths respecting our Lord and Saviour.

[Colossians 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">col 2:8</span></span>

Beware lest any man spoil you - The word "spoil" now commonly means, to
corrupt, to cause to decay and perish, as fruit is spoiled by keeping
too long, or paper by wetting, or hay by a long rain, or crops by
mildew. But the Greek word used here means to spoil in the sense of
plunder, rob, as when plunder is taken in war. The meaning is, "Take
heed lest anyone plunder or rob you of your faith and hope by
philosophy." These false teachers would strip them of their faith and
hope, as an invading army would rob a country of all that was valuable.

Through philosophy - The Greek philosophy prevailed much in the regions
around Colossae, and perhaps also the oriental or Gnostic philosophy.
See the Introduction They were exposed to the influences of these
plausible systems. They consisted much of speculations respecting the
nature of the divine existence; and the danger of the Colossians was,
that they would rely rather on the deductions of that specious
reasoning, than on what they had been taught by their Christian
teachers.

And vain deceit - Mere fallacy. The idea is, that the doctrines which
were advanced in those systems were maintained by plausible, not by
solid arguments; by considerations not fitted to lead to the truth, but
to lead astray.

After the tradition of men - There appear to have been two sources of
danger to which the Christians at Colesso were exposed, and to which the
apostle in these cautions alludes, though he is not careful to
distinguish them. The one was that arising from the Grecian philosophy;
the other, from Jewish opinions. The latter is that to which he refers
here. The Jews depended much on tradition (see the notes at [Mat
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#002).md); and many of those traditions
would have tended much to corrupt the gospel of Christ.

After the rudiments of the world - Margin, elements. See this explained
in the Notes at [Gal 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#003.md).

And not after Christ - Not such as Christ taught.

[Colossians 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">col 2:9</span></span>

For in him dwelleth - That is, this was the great and central doctrine
that was to be maintained about Christ, that all the fulness of the
Godhead dwelt in him. Every system which denied this was a denial of the
doctrine which they had been taught; and against every thing that would
go to undermine this; they were especially to be on their guard. Almost
all heresy has been begun by some form of the denial of the great
central truth of the incarnation of the Son of God.

All the fulness - Notes, [Col 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#019.md).

Of the Godhead - Of the Divinity, the divine nature - θεότης theotēs.
The word is one that properly denotes the divine nature and perfections.
Robinson, Lexicon. It occurs nowhere else in the New Testament.

Bodily - σωματικῶς sōmatikōs. This word also is found nowhere else in
the New Testament, though the adjective bodily - σωματικὸς sōmatikos -
occurs twice; [Luk 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#022.md), "in a bodily
shape;" and [Ti1 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008.md), "for bodily
exercise profiteth little." The word means, "having a bodily appearance,
instead of existing or appearing in a spiritual form;" and the fair
sense of the phrase is, that the fullness of the divine nature became
incarnate, and was indwelling in the body of the Redeemer. It does not
meet the case to say, as Crellius does, that the "whole divine will was
in him," for the word θεότη theotē - "godhead" - does not mean the will
of God; and it is as certainly true that the inspired prophets were
under the control of the divine will, as that the Saviour was. Nor can
it mean, as Socinus supposes, that the fulness of divine knowledge dwelt
in him, for this is not the proper meaning of the word (θεότης theotēs)
"godhead;" nor can it mean, for the same reason, that a fullness of
divine gifts was intrusted to him. The language is such as would be
obviously employed on the supposition that God became incarnate, and
appeared in human form; and there is no other idea which it so naturally
expresses, nor is there any other which it can be made to express
without a forced construction. The meaning is, that it was not anyone
attribute of the Deity that became incarnate in the Saviour; that he was
not merely endowed with the knowledge, or the power, or the wisdom of
God; but that the whole Deity thus became incarnate, and appeared in
human form; compare [Joh 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009.md); [Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018.md). No language could, therefore,
more clearly demonstrate the divinity of Christ. Of what mere man - of
what angel, could it be used?

[Colossians 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">col 2:10</span></span>

And ye are complete in him - Having no need, for the purposes of
salvation, of any aid to be derived from the philosophy of the Greeks,
or the traditions of the Jews. All that is necessary to secure your
salvation is to be found in the Lord Jesus. There is a completion, or a
filling up, in him, so as to leave nothing wanting. This is true in
respect:

\(1\) to the wisdom which is needful to guide us;

\(2\) the atonement to be made for sin;

\(3\) the merit by which a sinner can be justified; and,

\(4\) the grace which is needful to sustain us in the trials, and to aid
us in the duties, of life; compare the notes at [Co1
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030.md).

There is no necessity, therefore, that we should look to the aid of
philosophy, as if there was a defect in the teachings of the Saviour; or
to human strength, as if he were unable to save us; or to the merits of
the saints, as if those of the Redeemer were not sufficient to meet all
our wants. The sentiment advanced in this verse would overthrow the
whole papal doctrine of the merits of the saints, and, of course, the
whole doctrine of papal "indulgences."

Which is the head - See the notes at [Eph
1:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021.md).

[Colossians 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">col 2:11</span></span>

In whom - In connection with whom, or in virtue of whose religion.

Ye are circumcised - You have received that which was designed to be
represented by circumcision - the putting away of sin; Notes, [Phi
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#003.md).

With the circumcision made without hands - That made in the heart by the
renunciation of all sin. The Jewish teachers insisted on the necessity
of the literal circumcision in order to salvation (compare [Eph
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#011).md); and hence, this subject is so
often introduced into the writings of Paul, and he is at so much pains
to show that, by believing in Christ, all was obtained which was
required in order to salvation. Circumcision was an ordinance by which
it was denoted that all sin was to be cut off or renounced, and that he
who was circumcised was to be devoted to God and to a holy life. All
this, the apostle says, was obtained by the gospel; and, consequently
they had all that was denoted by the ancient rite of circumcision. What
Christians had obtained, moreover, related to the heart; it was not a
mere ordinance pertaining to the flesh.

In putting off the body of the sins of the flesh - That is, in
renouncing the deeds of the flesh, or becoming holy. The word "body,"
here, seems to be used with reference to circumcision. In that
ordinance, the body of the FLesH was subjected to the rite; with
Christians, it is the body of Sin that is cut off.

By the circumcision of Christ - Not by the fact that Christ was
circumcised, but that we have that kind of circumcision which Christ
established, to wit, the renouncing of sin. The idea of the apostle here
seems to be, that since we have thus been enabled by Christ to renounce
sin, and to devote ourselves to God, we should not, be induced by any
plausible arguments to return to an ordinance pertaining to the flesh,
as if that were needful for salvation.

[Colossians 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">col 2:12</span></span>

Buried with him in baptism - See the notes at [Rom
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004.md).

Wherein also - In which ordinance, or by virtue of that which is
signified by the ordinance.

Ye are risen with him - From the death of sin to the life of religion;
Notes, [Rom 6:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004.md); compare the notes
at [Eph 2:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#005.md).

Through the faith of the operation of God - By a firm belief on the
agency of God in raising him up; that is, a belief of the fact that God
has raised him from the dead. The resurrection of Christ is often
represented as the foundation of all our hopes; and, as he was raised
from the grave to die no more, so, in virtue of that we are raised from
the death of sin to eternal spiritual life. The belief of this is shown
by our baptism, whatever be the mode in which that ordinance is
performed, and as well shown in one mode as another.

[Colossians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">col 2:13</span></span>

And you, being dead in your sins - Notes, [Eph
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001.md).

And the uncircumcision of your flesh - That is, Gentiles, and giving
unrestrained indulgence to the desires of the flesh. They lived as those
who had not by any religious rite or covenant brought themselves under
obligations to lead holy lives.

Hath he quickened - Notes, [Eph 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001.md).

Together with him - In virtue of his being restored to life. That is,
the resurrection of the Lord Jesus was the means of imparting to us
spiritual life.

[Colossians 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">col 2:14</span></span>

Blotting out the handwriting - The word rendered handwriting means
something written by the hand, a manuscript; and here, probably, the
writings of the Mosaic law, or the law appointing many ordinances or
observances in religion. The allusion is probably to a written contract,
in which we bind ourselves to do any work, or to make a payment, and
which remains in force against us until the bond is cancelled. That
might be done, either by blotting out the names, or by drawing lines
through it, or, as appears to have been practiced in the East, by
driving a nail through it. The Jewish ceremonial law is here represented
as such a contract, binding those under it to its observance, until it
was nailed to the cross. The meaning here is, that the burdensome
requirements of the Mosaic law are abolished, and that its necessity is
superseded by the death of Christ. His death had the same effect, in
reference to those ordinances, as if they had been blotted from the
statute-book. This it did by fulfilling them, by introducing a more
perfect system, and by rendering their observance no longer necessary,
since all that they were designed to typify had been now accomplished in
a better way; compare the notes at [Eph
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015.md).

Of ordinances - Prescribing the numerous rites and ceremonies of the
Jewish religion.

That was against us - That is, against our peace, happiness, comfort; or
in other words, which was oppressive and burdensome; compare the notes
at [Act 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#010.md). Those ordinances bound
and lettered the soul, restrained the expansive spirit of true piety
which seeks the salvation of all alike, and thus operated as a hindrance
to the enlarged spirit of true religion. Thus, they really operated
against the truly pious Jew, whose religion would lead him to seek the
salvation of the world; and to the Gentile, since he was not in a
situation to avail himself of them, and since they would be burdensome
if he could. It is in this sense, probably, that the apostle uses the
word "us," as referring to all, and as cramping and restraining the true
nature of religion.

Which was contrary to us - Operated as a hindrance, or obstruction, in
the matter of religion. The ordinances of the Mosaic law were necessary,
in order to introduce the gospel; but they were always burdensome. They
were to be confined to one people; and, if they were continued, they
would operate to prevent the spread of the true religion around the
world; compare [Co2 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007.md), note, 9,
note. Hence, the exulting language of the apostle in view of the fact
that they were now taken away, and that the benefits of religion might
be diffused all over the world. The gospel contains nothing which is
"against," or "contrary to," the true interest and happiness of any
nation or any class of people.

And took it out of the way - Greek, "Out of the midst;" that is, he
wholly removed it. He has removed the obstruction, so that it no longer
prevents union and harmony between the Jews and the Gentiles.

Nailing it to his cross - As if he had nailed it to his cross, so that
it would be entirely removed out of our way. The death of Jesus had the
same effect, in regard to the rites and institutions of the Mosaic
religion, as if they had been affixed to his cross. It is said that
there is an allusion here to the ancient method by which a bond or
obligation was cancelled, by driving a nail through it, and affixing it
to a post. This was practiced, says Grotius, in Asia. In a somewhat
similar manner, in our banks now, a sharp instrument like the blade of a
knife is driven through a check, making a hole through it, and
furnishing to the teller of the bank a sign or evidence that it has been
paid. If this be the meaning, then the expression here denotes that the
obligation of the Jewish institutions ceased on the death of Jesus, as
if he had taken them and nailed them to his own cross, in the manner in
which a bond was cancelled.

[Colossians 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">col 2:15</span></span>

And having spoiled - Plundered as a victorious army does a conquered
country. Notes, [Col 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008.md). The terms
used in this verse are all military, and the idea is, that Christ has
completely subdued our enemies by his death. A complete victory was
achieved by his death, so that every thing is now in subjection to him,
and we have nothing to fear.

Principalities and powers - Notes, [Eph
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021.md); [Eph
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012.md), note. The "principalities and
powers" here referred to, are the formidable enemies that had held man
in subjection, and prevented his serving God. There can be no doubt, I
think, that the apostle refers to the ranks of fallen, evil spirits
which had usurped a dominion over the world, [Joh
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031.md), note; [Eph
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002.md), note. The Saviour, by his death,
wrested the dominion from them, and seized upon what they had captured
as a conqueror seizes upon his prey. Satan and his legions had invaded
the earth and drawn its inhabitants into captivity, and subjected them
to their evil reign. Christ, by his death. subdues the invaders and
recaptures those whom they had subdued.

He made a show of them openly - As a conqueror, returning from a
victory, displays in a triumphal procession the kings and princes whom
he has taken, and the spoils of victory. This was commonly done when a
"triumph" was decreed for a conqueror. On such occasions it sometimes
happened that a considerable number of prisoners were led along amidst
the scenes of triumph see the notes at [Co2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#014.md). Paul says that this was now done
"openly" - that is, it was in the face of the whole universe - a grand
victory; a glorious triumph over all the powers of hell It does not
refer to any public procession or display on the earth; but to the grand
victory as achieved in view of the universe, by which Christ, as a
conqueror, dragged Satan and his legions at his triumphal car; compare
[Rom 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020.md).

Triumphing over them in it - Margin, or, "himself." Either "by the
cross," or "by himself." Or, it may mean, as Rosenmuller suggests, that
"God [Col 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012.md) triumphed over these
foes in him; i. e., in Christ. The sense is substantially the same, that
this triumph was effected by the atonement made for sin by the Redeemer.
See the word "triumph" explained in the Notes on [Co2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#014.md). The meaning of all this is, that
since Christ has achieved for us such a victory, and has subdued all the
foes of man, we should not be led captive, but should regard ourselves
as freemen. We should not be made again the slaves of custom, or habit,
or ritual observances, or superstitious rites, or anything whatever that
has its origin in the kingdom of darkness. We are bound to assert and to
use our freedom, and should not allow any hostile power in the form of
philosophy or false teaching of any kind, to plunder or "spoil" us; [Col
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008.md). The Christian is a freeman. His
great Captain has subdued all his enemies, and we should not allow them
again to set up their dark empire over our souls. The argument of the
apostle in these verses [Col 2:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#013.md)
is derived from what Christ has done for us. He mentions four things:

\(1\) He has given us spiritual life.

\(2\) he has forgiven all our trespasses.

\(3\) he has blotted out or abolished the "ordinances" that were against
us.

\(4\) he has triumphed over all our foes. From all this he infers ([Col
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016) ff.md) that we should not be made
captive or subdued by any of the rites of superstition, or any of the
influences of the kingdom of darkness.

[Colossians 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">col 2:16</span></span>

Let no man, therefore, judge you - compare [Rom
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010.md), note, 13, note. The word judge
here is used in the sense of pronouncing a sentence. The meaning is,
"since you have thus been delivered by Christ from the evils which
surrounded you: since you have been freed from the observances of the
law, let no one sit in judgment on you, or claim the right to decide for
you in those matters. You are not responsible to man for your conduct,
but to Christ; and no man has a right to impose that on you as a burden
from which he has made you free."

In meat - Margin, or eating and drinking. The meaning is, "in respect to
the various articles of food and drink." There is reference here,
undoubtedly, to the distinctions which the Jews made on this subject,
implying that an effort had been made by Jewish teachers to show them
that the Mosaic laws were binding on all.

Or in respect of a holy day - Margin, part. The meaning is, "in the
part, or the particular of a holy day; that is, in respect to it" The
word rendered "holy-day" - ἑορτὴ heortē - means properly a "feast" or
"festival;" and the allusion here is to the festivals of the Jews. The
sense is, that no one had a right to impose their observance on
Christians, or to condemn them if they did not keep them. They had been
delivered from that obligation by the death of Christ; [Col
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014.md).

Or of the new moon - On the appearance of the new moon, among the
Hebrews, in addition to the daily sacrifices, two bullocks, a ram, and
seven sheep, with a meat offering, were required to be presented to God;
[Num 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#010.md); [Num
28:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#011.md). The new moon in the
beginning of the month Tisri (October) was the beginning of their civil
year, and was commanded to be observed as a festival; [Lev
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#024.md), [Lev
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#025.md).

Or of the Sabbath days - Greek, "of the Sabbaths." The word Sabbath in
the Old Testament is applied not only to the seventh day, but to all the
days of holy rest that were observed by the Hebrews, and particularly to
the beginning and close of their great festivals. There is, doubtless,
reference to those days in this place, since the word is used in the
plural number, and the apostle does not refer particularly to the
Sabbath properly so called. There is no evidence from this passage that
he would teach that there was no obligation to observe any holy time,
for there is not the slightest reason to believe that he meant to teach
that one of the ten commandments had ceased to be binding on mankind. If
he had used the word in the singular number - "the Sabbath," it would
then, of course, have been clear that he meant to teach that that
commandment had ceased to be binding, and that a Sabbath was no longer
to be observed. But the use of the term in the plural number, and the
connection, show that he had his eye on the great number of days which
were observed by the Hebrews as festivals, as a part of their ceremonial
and typical law, and not to the moral law, or the Ten Commandments. No
part of the moral law - no one of the ten commandments could be spoken
of as "a shadow of good things to come." These commandments are, from
the nature of moral law, of perpetual and universal obligation.

[Colossians 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">col 2:17</span></span>

Which are a shadow of things to come - See the notes at [Heb
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005.md); [Heb
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001.md), note. They were only a dim
outline of future things, not the reality.

But the body is of Christ - The reality, the substance. All that they
signified is of or in Christ. Between those things themselves which are
in Christ, and those which only represented or prefigured them, there is
as much difference as there is between a body and a shadow; a solid
substance and a mere outline. Having now, therefore, the thing itself
the shadow can be to us of no value; and that having come which was
prefigured, that which was designed merely to represent it, is no longer
binding.

[Colossians 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">col 2:18</span></span>

Let no man beguile you of your reward - Margin, judge against you. The
word used here - καταβραβεύω katabrabeuō - occurs nowhere else in the
New Testament. It is a word which was employed with reference to the
distribution of prizes at the Grecian games, and means, to give the
prize against anyone, to deprive of the palm. Hence, it means to deprive
of a due reward: and the sense here is, that they were to be on their
guard lest the "reward" - the crown of victory to which they looked
forward - should be wrested from them by the arts of others. That would
be done if they should be persuaded to turn back, or to falter in the
race. The only way to secure the prize was to hold on in the race which
they then were running; but if they yielded to the philosophy of the
Greeks, and the teachings of the Jews, they would be defrauded of this
reward as certainly as a racer at the games would if the crown of
victory should be unjustly awarded to another. In this case, too, as
real injustice would be done, though the apostle does not say it would
be in the same manner. Here it would be by art; in the case of the racer
it would be by a wrong decision - but in either case the crown was lost.
This exhortation has the more force from this consideration. Against an
unjust judge we could have no power; but we may take care that the
reward be not wrested from us by fraud.

In a voluntary humility - Margin," being a voluntary in humility."
Tyndale renders this," Let no man make you shoot at a wrong mark, which,
after his own imagination, walketh in the humbleness of angels." The
word used here (ταπεινοφροσύνη tapeinophrosunē) means "lowliness of
mind, modesty, humbleness of deportment;" and the apostle refers,
doubtless, to the spirit assumed by those against whom he would guard
the Colossians - the spirit of modesty or of humble inquirers. The
meaning is, that they would not announce their opinions with dogmatic
certainty, but they would put on the appearance of great modesty. In
this way, they would become really more dangerous - for no false
teachers are so dangerous as those who assume the aspect of great
humility, and who manifest great reverence for divine things. The word
rendered "voluntary" here - θέλων thelōn - does not, properly, belong to
the word rendered "humility." It rather appertains to the subsequent
part of the sentence, and means that the persons referred to were
willing, or had pleasure in attempting, to search into the hidden and
abstruse things of religion. They were desirous of appearing to do this
with an humble spirit - even with the modesty of an angel - but still
they had pleasure in that profound and dangerous kind of inquiry.

And worshipping of angels - θρησκείᾳ τῶν ἀγγέλων thrēskeia tōn angelōn.
This does not mean, as it seems to me, that they would themselves
worship angels or that they would teach others to do it for there is no
reason to believe this. Certainly the Jewish teachers, whom the apostle
seems to have had particularly in his eye, would not do it; nor is there
any evidence that any class of false teachers would deliberately teach
that angels were to be worshipped The reference is rather to the
profound reverence; the spirit of lowly piety which the angels evinced,
and to the fact that the teachers referred to would assume the same
spirit, and were, therefore, the more dangerous. They would come
professing profound regard for the great mysteries of religion, and for
the incomprehensible perfections of the divinity, and would approach the
subject professedly with the awful veneration which the angels have when
they "look into these things;" [Pe1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012.md). There was no bold, irreverent,
or confident declamation, but the danger in the case arose from the fact
that they assumed so much the aspect of modest piety; so much the
appearance of the lowly devotion of angelic beings. The word rendered
here "worship" - θρησκεία thrēskeia - occurs in the New Testament only
here, in [Act 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#005.md); and [Jam
1:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#026.md), in each of which places it is
rendered "religion." It means here the religion, or the spirit of humble
reverence and devotion which is evinced by the angels; and this accords
well with the meaning in [Jam 1:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#026.md).

Intruding into those things which he hath not seen - Or inquiring into
them. The word used here (ἐμβατεύων embateuōn) means to go in, or enter;
then to investigate, to inquire. It has not, properly, the meaning of
intruding, or of impertinent inquiry (see Passow), and I do not see that
the apostle meant to characterize the inquiry here as such. He says that
it was the object of their investigations to look, with great professed
modesty and reverence, into those things which are not visible to the
eye of mortals. The "things" which seem here to be particularly referred
to, are the abstruse questions respecting the mode of the divine
subsistence; the ranks, orders, and employments of angelic beings; and
the obscure doctrines relating to the divine government and plans. These
questions comprised most of the subjects of inquiry in the Oriental and
Grecian philosophy, and inquiries on these the apostle apprehended would
tend to draw away the mind from the "simplicity that is in Christ." Of
these subjects what can be known more than is revealed?

Vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind - Notwithstanding the avowed
"humility," the modesty, the angelic reverence, yet the mind was full of
vain conceit, and self-confident, carnal wisdom. The two things are by
no means incompatible - the men apparently most meek and modest being
sometimes the most bold in their speculations, and the most reckless in
regard to the great landmarks of truth. It is not so with true modesty,
and real "angelic veneration," but all this is sometimes assumed for the
purpose of deceiving; and sometimes there is a native appearance of
modesty which is by no means an index of the true feelings of the soul.
The most meek and modest men in appearance are sometimes the most proud
and reckless in their investigations of the doctrines of religion.

[Colossians 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">col 2:19</span></span>

And not holding the Head - Not holding the true doctrine respecting the
Great Head of the church, the Lord Jesus Christ; Notes, [Eph
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022.md). This is regarded here as
essential to the maintenance of all the other doctrines of religion. He
who has just views of the Redeemer will not be in much danger of erring
respecting the other points of religious belief.

From which all the body ... - This passage is almost word for word the
same as in [Eph 4:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015.md). See it
explained in the notes there.

[Colossians 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">col 2:20</span></span>

Wherefore - In view of all that has been said. If it be true that you
are really dead to the world, why do you act as if you still lived under
the principles of the world?

If ye be dead with Christ - If you are dead to the world in virtue of
his death. The apostle here, as elsewhere, speaks of a very close union
with Christ. We died with him; that is, such was the efficacy of his
death, and such is our union with him, that we became dead also to the
world; Notes, [Rom 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002.md), note, 4, note,
8, note, 11, note.

From the rudiments of the world - Margin, "elements." The elements or
principles which are of a worldly nature, and which reign among worldly
men; see the notes at [Gal 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#003.md).

Why, as though living in the world - Why do you allow them to influence
you, as though you were living and acting under those worldly
principles? They ought no more to do it, than the things of this world
influence those who are in their graves.

Are ye subject to ordinances - The rites and ceremonies of the Jewish
religion; see the notes at [Gal 5:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001.md).

[Colossians 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">col 2:21</span></span>

Tough not; taste not; handle not - These words seem intended as a
specimen of the kind of ordinances which the apostle refers to, or an
imitation of the language of the Jewish teachers in regard to various
kinds of food and drink. "Why are ye subject to ordinances of various
kinds, such as this - Touch not, taste not, handle not?" That is, such
as prohibit you from even touching certain kinds of food, or tasting
certain kinds of drink, or handling certain prohibited things. The rapid
succession of the words here, without any connecting particle, is
supposed to denote the eagerness of the persons who imposed this
injunction, and their earnestness in warning others from contaminating
themselves with the prohibited things. Many injunctions of this kind are
found in the writings of the Jewish rabbis; and the ancient Jewish sect
of the Essenes (Notes, [Mat 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007).md)
abounded in precepts of this kind.

See Schoetgen, and Pict. Bib. in loc. "They allowed themselves no food
that was pleasant to the taste, but ate dry, coarse bread, and drank
only water. Many of them ate nothing until sunset, and, if anyone
touched them who did not belong to their sect, they washed themselves as
if they had been most deeply defiled. Perhaps there was at Colossae a
society of this kind, as there were in many other places out of Judea;
and, if there was, it is not improbable that many Christians imitated
them in the uniqueness of their rules and observances;" compare
Jenning's Jew. Ant. i. 471, and Ros. Alt. u. neu. Morgenland, in loc. If
this be the correct interpretation, then these are not the words of the
apostle, forbidding Christians to have anything to do with these
ordinances, but are introduced as a specimen of the manner in which they
who enjoined the observance of those ordinances pressed the subject on
others.

There were certain things which they prohibited, in conformity with what
they understood to be the law of Moses; and they were constantly saying,
in regard to them, "do not touch them, taste them, handle them." These
words are often used as a kind of motto in reference to the use of
intoxicating drinks. They express very well what is held by the friends
of total abstinence; but it is obvious that they had no such reference
as used by the apostle, nor should they be alleged as an authority, or
as an argument, in the question about the propriety or impropriety of
the use of spirituous liquors. They may as well be employed in reference
to anything else as that, and would have no authority in either case.
Intoxicating drinks should be abstained from; but the obligation to do
it should be made to rest on solid arguments, and not on passages of
Scripture like this. This passage could with more plausibility be
pressed into the service of the enemies of the total abstinence
societies, than into their support; but it really has nothing to do with
the subject, one way or the other.

[Colossians 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">col 2:22</span></span>

Which all are to perish with the using - This is commonly marked as a
part of the parenthesis, or the quotation; and there is considerable
difficulty in ascertaining its true meaning. It seems most probable that
these are the words of the apostle himself, thrown in in the rapidity of
composition, and that they are not to be connected with the phrase
"touch not," etc. If so, the idea is, that it cannot be of so much
consequence as the Jewish teachers supposed, to mark distinctly the
difference between meats and drinks. They were all to perish with the
use of them. Nothing was permanent about them. It could really then be
of no great importance what was eaten, or what was drunk, provided it
was not in itself injurious. These ordinances had a value among the
Hebrews when it was designed to keep them as a distinct people; but they
had no value in themselves, so as to make them binding on all mankind.
To suppose this, was the common error of the Jews; and hence, the
apostle so frequently labored to show that the Jewish rites had no
permanent value; see the [Rom 14:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001.md)
notes; [Co1 8:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001.md), note; compare the
notes at [Mat 15:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#017.md). According to
this interpretation, [Col 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#021.md) should
be regarded as expressing the common maxim of the Jewish teachers, and
the clause before us as the words of the apostle, and should be marked
as a parenthesis. So it is marked in Hahn's Ed. of the New Testament.

After the commandments and doctrines of men - Many of the ordinances on
which the Jews insisted were those which were handed down by tradition.
They depended on human authority only, and of course, should not bind
the conscience. Others take the words here to mean, "All which things
tend to the corruption of religion (Doddridge), or are cause of
destruction or condemnation (Robinson, Lexicon), by the use of these
things, according to the commandments and doctrines of these men."

[Colossians 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">col 2:23</span></span>

Which things - Which scrupulous observance of the numerous precepts
enjoining rites and ceremonies, the observance of days, and the
distinctions between meats and drinks.

Have indeed a show of wisdom - Have a great appearance of piety and of
regard for the will of God They have a show of "wisdom," too, or of a
deep acquaintance with divine things. They who insist on them appear to
be learned in what constitutes religion, and to have a deep insight into
its mysteries. Doubtless they who urged the obligation of these things
laid claim to uncommon acquaintance with the nature of religion, and
urged the observance of these things on the ground of their tendency to
promote piety, just as they always do who insist much on the observance
of religious rites and ceremonies.

In will-worship - Voluntary worship; i. e., worship beyond what God
strictly requires-supererogatory service. Probably many of these things
they did not urge as being strictly required, but as conducing greatly
to piety. The plea doubtless was, that piety might be promot ed by
service rendered beyond what was absolutely enjoined, and that thus
there would be evinced a spirit of uncommon piety - a readiness not only
to obey all that God required, but even to go beyond this, and to render
him voluntary service. There is much plausibility in this; and this has
been the foundation of the appointment of the fasts and festivals of the
church; of penances and self-inflicted tortures; of painful vigils and
pilgrimages; of works of supererogation, and of the merits of the
"saints." A large part of the corruptions of religion have arisen from
this plausible but deceitful argument. God knew best what things it was
most conducive to piety for his people to observe; and we are most safe
when we adhere most closely to what he has appointed, and observe no
more days and ordinances than he has directed. There is much apparent
piety about these things; but there is much wickedness of heart at the
bottom, and there is nothing that more tends to corrupt pure religion.

And humility - Notes, [Col 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018.md). There
is a great show of reverence for divine things in the manner in which
they pursue their investigations, and in their humble and meek
compliance with painful rites and ceremonies; in fastings, abstinence,
and penances. Under all this there lurks often the worst kind of pride;
because:

"Pride may be pampered while the flesh grows lean."

And neglecting the body - Putting on sackcloth and ashes; subjecting it
to painful fastings and penances; appearing in a form of squalid
poverty, as if the body were not worth regarding, and as if the
attention were so much engrossed by the nobler care of the soul, as to
be entirely regardless of the body. Yet, we may observe,

\(1\) God made the body as well as the soul, and has shown his care of
it by its" being fearfully and wonderfully made," and by all the
provision which he has made for all its needs.

\(2\) Religion pertains to the body as well as the soul, and should
teach a man properly to regard it. Man is bound so to take care of the
body, as to have the most health and the longest life possible in the
service of his Creator, and so as to be able to employ it in the best
manner. There is no religion in ragged or squalid clothing, in a dirty
face, in offensive personal habits, in filth and defilement, and in
setting at defiance the decencies of life.

\(3\) much affected sanctity may exist where there is a most proud and
corrupt heart. A long face, a demure countenance, a studied disregard of
the decencies of dress and the courtesies of life, as if they were
unworthy of notice, may be the exponent of the most hateful pride, and
of the basest purposes of the soul. A man should be on his guard always
against one who, under pretence of extraordinary sanctity, professes to
despise the ordinary dress and usages of society.

Not in any honour - That is, there is no real honor in these things;
there is nothing to ennoble and elevate the soul; nothing that is to be
commended.

To the satisfying of the flesh - The only effect is, to satisfy or
please the flesh; that is, the carnal and corrupt nature, for so the
word "flesh" is often used in the Scriptures. The effect of these
observances, on which so much stress is laid as if they would promote
piety, is merely to gratify pride, self-righteousness, the love of
distinction, and the other carnal propensities of our nature. There
seems to be a great deal of humility and piety in them; there is really
little else than pride, selfishness, and ambition.

Remarks On Colossians 2

1\. We should feel a deep interest for the welfare of other Christians,
even those whom we have never seen; [Col
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001.md). All belong to the same family,
have the same enemies to contend with, are engaged in the same warfare,
are traveling to the same heaven. By our prayers and sympathy, we may
often do much good to those whom we shall never see until we meet them
in heaven.

2\. We should be on our guard against the seductive arts of false
teachers. They are often plausible; they can urge arguments which we may
not be able to answer; they may have much more learning than we have;
and they may put on the appearance of great humility and of real piety;
[Col 2:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003.md).3. It is, in general, a
safe rule for a Christian to abide by the views which he had on the
great subjects of religion when he became converted; [Col
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#006.md). Then the heart was tender and
soft - like wax - and received the impression which the Spirit made on
it. There are some things in which the heart judges better than the
head; and in which we are quite as likely to go right if we follow the
former as we are the latter. In relation to the performance of many of
the duties of life - the duties of kindness and charity - the heart is
often a more safe guide than the head; and so in many things pertaining
more immediately to religion, a man is more likely to judge right if he
follows the promptings of his feelings in the happiest moments of piety,
than he is to wait for the more cool and cautious course of argument.
The same thing may be true even of many of the doctrines of religion.
When a poor sinner trembles on the verge of hell, he feels that none but
an Almighty Saviour can deliver him, and he goes and commits himself to
Jesus as God - and he is not in much danger of erring in that. He will
be more likely to be drawn aside from the truth by the artful reasonings
of the advocates of error, than he will by his feelings at that moment.

4\. Our views of the "mystery of God" - of the divine nature, and
especially of the rank and character of Christ, will determine all our
views of theology; [Col 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#002.md). This has
been so in all ages; and however it may be accounted for, the fact is
undoubted, that if at any time we can ascertain what are the prevalent
views of Christ we can easily see what is the prevailing character of
the theology of that age. The influence of this will be felt on the
views which are held of the native character of man: of regeneration,
the divine purposes, the nature of holiness, and the retributions beyond
the grave. Hence, the reason why the apostle Paul insisted so much on
this, and urged so earnestly the importance of adhering to just views of
the Saviour.

5\. Christ has laid us under the highest obligations to love and serve
him; [Col 2:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011.md). He has enabled us
to put off our sins; he has raised us from spiritual death to spiritual
life; he has removed the old ordinances that were against us, and has
made religion easy and pleasant; he has subdued our enemies, and
triumphed over them. He achieved a glorious victory over "principalities
and powers," and has led our great enemy captive. He met the enemy of
man when on earth, and overcame his power of temptation; expelled him
from the bodies of men; laid the foundation for a permanent victory over
him on the cross, and triumphed over him when he rose and ascended to
heaven. Satan is now an humbled foe. His power is broken and limited,
and the Lord Jesus will yet completely triumph over him. He will return
from heaven; raise all the dead; and reascend, in the face of the
universe, to his native skies, with all his ransomed hosts - the
"spoils" of victory. We should not then fear what Satan can do to us;
nor should we fear that the great enemy of the church will ever be
triumphant:

Stand up, my soul, shake off thy fears,

And gird the gospel armor on;

March to the gates of endless joy,

Where thy great Captain Saviour's gone.

Hell and thy sins resist thy course,

But hell and sin are vanquish'd foes;

Thy Jesus nail'd them to the cross,

And sung the triumph when he rose.

Then let my soul march boldly on,

Press forward to the heavenly gate;

There peace and joy eternal reign,

And glittering robes for conquerors wait.

Then shall I wear a starry crown,

And triumph in Almighty grace;

While all the armies of the skies.

Join in my glorious Leader's praise.

6\. No individual has a right to appoint ceremonies and ordinances in
the church to be binding on the consciences of others; nor is this
authority intrusted to any body of men; [Col
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016.md). What God has enjoined is to be
obeyed. What man enjoins beyond that, is of no binding force on the
conscience: and it is the solemn and sacred duty of all Christians to
resist all such attempts to make ceremonial observances binding on the
conscience. Christ has appointed a few ordinances of religion - and they
are enough. They are simple, easily observed, and all adapted to promote
piety. He appointed baptism and the Lord's supper; but he appointed no
stated festivals or fasts; no days in commemoration of the saints, or of
his own birth or death; he enjoined no rites of religion but those which
are most simple and which are easily observed. He well knew how those
observances would be abused to the purposes of superstition, and obscure
the great doctrine of justification by faith. He knew how ready men
would be to rely on them rather than on the merits of the great
Sacrifice, and hence he appointed no ordinance where that danger could
exist.

7\. Pride is often united with apparent humility; [Col
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018.md). It is easy to assume the
appearance of humility in the outer deportment, but no such assumed
appearance reaches the heart. That remains the same, whatever external
appearance is assumed, until it is renewed by the grace of God.

8\. A meek, modest, and candid demeanor is consistent with great
boldness and daring in speculation; [Col
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018.md). The most daring speculators in
religion; they who make the most reckless attacks on the truth, are
often, to appearance, eminently candid, and even put on the aspect of
angelic devotion. Yet they are bold "where angels fear to tread;" and
they declaim with confidence on subjects which must be forever beyond
the grasp of the human mind.

9\. We should not infer, because a man is modest and humble, and because
he appears to be endued with uncommon meekness and piety, that,
therefore, he is a good man or a safe guide; [Col
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018.md). The teachers in Colossae,
against whom Paul warned the Christians there, appear to have been men
just of this stamp; and this is commonly assumed by those who would lead
their fellow men into error. "Satan is often transformed into an angel
of light."

10\. We should not attempt to penetrate into those things which lie
beyond the grasp of the human mind; [Col
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018.md). We should not "intrude into
those things which are unseen." There is an outer limit to our
investigations on all subjects, and we soon reach it. In life we are to
act chiefly on facts; not on the reason why those facts exist. When we
have ascertained or established a fact, our feet stand on a solid rock;
and there we shall stand securely. We act safely and wisely if we act in
view of that fact; we do not act safely or wisely if we disregard that,
and act on theory or imagination.

11\. Many real Christians are in danger of being "beguiled of the
reward" which they might obtain; [Col
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018.md). They are allured by the world;
they are drawn into error by the arts of philosophy; they obscure the
lustre of their piety by conformity to the world, and thus they lose the
high recompense which they might have obtained in heaven. For the
rewards of heaven will be strictly in proportion to the measure of our
religion here - the zeal, and faith, and love which we evince in the
cause of our Master.

12\. Many persons are in danger of losing the "reward" altogether - for
the "reward" of a life of piety is set before all; [Col
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018.md). Heaven is offered freely to all,
and there is no one who might not obtain it. But, alas! how many there
are who are drawn aside by the allurements of error and of sin; who are
led to defer to a future time the great subject of preparation for
death; who spend their lives in disregard of the commands of God and the
invitations of mercy, until it is too late to seek salvation, and they
sink down to final ruin. Every impenitent sinner is in imminent danger
of losing his soul. The great deceiver is endeavoring to blind him and
decoy him down to death, and a thousand snares on every side are spread
for his feet, into which he is in constant danger of falling. In a world
of allurements, where the work of death from the beginning has been
carried on chiefly by deception, with what solicitude should man guard
himself lest he be "beguiled of heaven" and sink to a world where heaven
will be offered no more!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians Chapter 3](col003.md)

</div>
