<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Daniel Index](dan.md)  
  [Previous](dan000)  [Next](dan002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001.md)

Section I. - Authenticity of the Chapter

For the general argument in favor of the genuineness and authenticity of
the Book of Daniel, see the Introduction, Sections II and III. To the
genuineness and authenticity of each particular chapter in detail,
however, objections, derived from something peculiar in each chapter,
have been urged, which it is proper to meet, and which I propose to
consider in a particular introduction to the respective chapters. These
objections it is proper to consider, not so much because they have been
urged by distinguished German critic - De Wette, Bertholdt, Bleek,
Eichhorn, and others - for their writings will probably fall into the
hands of few persons who will read these Notes - but

\(a\) because it may be presumed that men of so much learning, industry,
acuteness, and ingenuity, have urged all the objections which can, with
any appearance of plausibility, be alleged against the book; and

\(b\) because the objections which they have urged may be presumed to be
felt, to a greater or less degree, by those who read the book, though
they might not be able to express them with so much clearness and force.
There are numerous objections to various portions of the Scriptures
floating in the minds of the readers of the Bible, and many difficulties
which occur to such readers which are not expressed, and which it would
be desirable to remove, and which it is the duty of an expositor of the
Bible, if he can, to remove. Sceptical critics, in general, but collect
and embody in a plausible form difficulties which are felt by most
readers of the Scriptures. It is for this reason, and with a view to
remove what "seems" to furnish plausible arguments against the different
portions of this book, that the objections which have been urged,
principally by the authors above referred to, will be noticed in special
sections preceding the exposition of each chapter.

The only objection to the genuineness and authenticity of the first
chapter which it seems necessary to notice is, that the account of
Daniel in the chapter is inconsistent with the mention of Daniel by
Ezekiel. The objection substantially is, that it is improbable that the
Daniel who is mentioned by Ezekiel should be one who was a cotemporary
with himself, and who at that time lived in Babylon. Daniel is three
times mentioned in Ezekiel, and in each case as a man of eminent piety
and integrity; as one so distinguished by his virtues as to deserve to
be classed with the most eminent of the patriarchs. Thus in [Eze
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014.md), "Though these three men, Noah,
Daniel, and Job, were in it, they should deliver but their own souls by
their righteousness, saith the Lord God." So again, [Eze
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#020.md), "Though Noah, Daniel, and Job,
were in it, as I live, saith the Lord God, they shall deliver neither
son nor daughter, they shall deliver but their own souls by their
righteousness."

And again, [Eze 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#003.md), speaking of the
prince of Tyre, "Behold thou art wiser than Daniel." The objection urged
in respect to the mention of Daniel in these passages is substantially
this - that if the account in the book of Daniel is true, he must have
been a cotemporary with Ezekiel, and must have been, when Ezekiel
prophesied, a young man; that it is incredible that he should have
gained a degree of reputation which would entitle him to be ranked with
Noah and Job; that he could not have been so well known as to make it
natural or proper to refer to him in the same connection with those
eminent men; and "especially" that he could not have been thus known to
the prince of Tyre, as is supposed of those mentioned by Ezekiel in the
passages referred to, for it cannot be presumed that a man so young had
acquired such a fame abroad as to make it proper to refer to him in this
manner in an address to a pagan prince. This objection was urged by
Bernstein (uber das Buch Hiob, in den Analekten von Keil und Tzschirner,
i. 3, p. 10), and it is found also in Bleek, p. 284, and De Wette,
"Einl." p. 380. De Wette says that it is probable that the author of the
book of Daniel used the name of "an ancient mythic or poetic person
falsely," in order to illustrate his work.

Now, in regard to this objection, it may be remarked

\(a\) that, according to all the accounts which we have in the Bible,
Ezekiel and Daniel "were" cotemporary, and were in Babylon at the same
time. As Daniel, however, lived a long time in Babylon after this, it is
to be admitted, also, that at the period referred to by Ezekiel, he must
have been comparatively a young man. But it does not follow that he
might not then have had a well-known character for piety and integrity,
which would make it proper to mention his name in connection with the
most eminent saints of ancient times. If the account in the book of
Daniel "itself" is a correct account of him, this will not be doubted,
for he soon attracted attention in Babylon; he soon evinced that
extraordinary piety which made him so eminent as a man of God, and that
extraordinary wisdom which raised him to the highest rank as an officer
of state in Babylon. It was very soon after he was taken to Babylon that
the purpose was formed to tram him, and the three other selected youths,
in the learning of the Chaldeans [Dan
1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001.md), and that Daniel showed that he
was qualified to pass the examination, preparatory to his occupying an
honorable place in the court [Dan
1:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#018.md); and it was only in the second
year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar that the remarkable dream occurred,
the interpretation of which gave to Daniel so much celebrity Dan. 2.

According to computation of Hengstenberg ("Authentie des Daniel," p.
71), Daniel was taken to Babylon full ten years before the prophecy of
Ezekiel in which the first mention of him was made; and if so, there can
be no real ground for the objection referred to. In that time, if the
account of his extraordinary wisdom is true; if he evinced the character
which it is said that he did evince - and against this there is no
intrinsic improbability; and if he was exalted to office and rank, as it
is stated that he was, there can be no improbability in what Ezekiel
says of him, that he had a character which made it proper that he should
be classed with the most eminent men of the Jewish nation.

\(b\) As to the objection that the name of Daniel could not have been
known to the king of Tyre, as would seem to be implied in [Eze
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#003.md), it may be remarked, that it is
not necessary to suppose that these prophecies were ever known to the
king of Tyre, or that they were ever designed to influence him. The
prophecies which were directed against the ancient pagan kings were
uttered and published among the Hebrew people, primarily for "their"
guidance, and were designed to furnish to them, and to others in future
times, arguments for the truth of religion, though they assumed the form
of direct addresses to the kings themselves. Such an imaginary appeal
may have been made in this case by Ezekiel to the king of Tyre; and, in
speaking of him, and of his boasted wisdom, Ezekiel may have made the
comparison which would then naturally occur to him, by mentioning him in
connection with the most eminent man for wisdom of that age.

But it should be said, also, that there can be no certain evidence that
the name of Daniel was "not" known to the king of Tyre, and no intrinsic
improbability in the supposition that it was. If Daniel had at that time
evinced the remarkable wisdom at the court of Babylon which it is said
in this book that he had; if he had been raised to that high rank which
it is affirmed he had reached, there is no improbability in supposing
that so remarkable a circumstance should have been made known to the
king of Tyre. Tyre was taken by Nebuchadnezzar, 572 b.c., after a siege
of thirteen years, and it is in no way improbable that the king of Tyre
would be made acquainted with what occurred at the court of the
Chaldeans. The prophecy in Ezekiel, where Daniel is mentioned [Eze
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#003.md), could not have been uttered long
before Tyre was taken, and, in referring to what was to occur, it was
not unnatural to mention the man most distinguished for wisdom at the
court of Babylon, and in the councils of Nebuchadnezzar, with the
presumption that his name and celebrity would not be unknown to the king
of Tyre.

\(c\) As to the objection of Bernstein, that it would be improbable, if
Daniel lived there, and if he was comparatively a young man, that his
name would be placed "between" that of Noah and Job [Eze
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014.md), as if he had lived "before"
Job, it may be remarked, that there might be a greater similarity
between the circumstances of Noah and Daniel than between Noah and Job,
and that it was proper to refer to them in this order. But the mere
circumstance of the "order" in which the names are mentioned cannot be
adduced as a proof that one of the persons named did not exist at that
time. They may have occurred in this order to Ezekiel, because in his
apprehension, that was the order in Which the degree of their piety was
to be estimated.

To this objection thus considered, that the mention of Daniel in
connection with Noah and Job, proves that Ezekiel referred to some one
of ancient times, it may be further replied, that, if this were so, it
is impossible to account for the fact that no such person is mentioned
by any of the earlier prophets and writers. How came his name to be
known to Ezekiel? And if there had been a patriarch so eminent as to be
ranked with Noah and Job, how is it to be accounted for that all the
sacred writers, up to the time of Ezekiel, are wholly silent in regard
to him? And why is it that, when "he" mentions him, he does it as of one
who was well known? The mere mention of his name in this manner by
Ezekiel, proves that his character was well known to those for whom he
wrote. Noah and Job were thus known by the ancient records; but how was
"Daniel" thus known? He is nowhere mentioned in the ancient writings of
the Hebrews; and if he was so well known that he could be referred to in
the same way as Noah and Job, it must be either because there was some
"tradition" in regard to him, or because he was then living, and his
character was well understood by those for whom Ezekiel wrote. But there
is no evidence that there was any such tradition, and no probability
that there was; and the conclusion, then, is inevitable, that he was
then so well known to the Hebrews in exile, that it was proper for
Ezekiel to mention him just as he did Noah and Job. If so, this
furnishes the highest evidence that he actually lived in the time of
Ezekiel; that is, in the time when this book purports to have been
written.

Section II. - Analysis of the Chapter

This chapter is entirely historical, the prophetic portions of the book
commencing with the second chapter. The "object" of this chapter seems
to be to state the way in which Daniel, who subsequently acted so
important a part in Babylon, was raised to so distinguished favor with
the king and court. It was remarkable that a Jewish captive, and a young
man, should be so honored; that he should be admitted as one of the
principal counselors of the king, and that he should ultimately become
the prime-minister of the realm; and there was a propriety that there
should be a preliminary statement of the steps of this extraordinary
promotion. This chapter contains a record of the way in which the future
premier and prophet was introduced to the notice of the reigning
monarch, and by which his wonderful genius and sagacity were discovered.
It is a chapter, therefore, that may be full of interest and instruction
to all, and especially to young men. The chapter contains the record of
the following points, or steps, which led to the promotion of Daniel:

I. The history of the Jewish captivity, as explanatory of the reason why
those who are subsequently referred to were in Babylon. They were
exiles, having been conveyed as captives to a foreign land, [Dan
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001.md).

II\. The purpose of the king, Nebuchadnezzar, to bring forward the
principal talent to be found among the Jewish captives, and to put it
under a process of training, that it might be employed at the court,
[Dan 1:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003.md). In carrying out this
purpose, a confidential officer of the court, Ashpenaz, was directed to
search out among the captives the most promising youths, whether by
birth or talent, and to put them under a process of training, that they
might become fully instructed in the science of the Chaldeans. What were
the reasons which led to this cannot be known with certainty. They may
have been such as these;

\(1\) The Chaldeans had devoted themselves to science, especially to
those sciences which promised any information respecting future events,
the secrets of the unseen world, etc. Hence, they either originated or
adopted the science of astrology; they practiced the arts of magic; they
studied to interpret dreams; and, in general, they made use of all the
means which it was then supposed could be employed to unlock the secrets
of the invisible world, and to disclose the future.

\(2\) They could not have been ignorant of the fact, that the Hebrews
claimed to have communications with God. They had doubtless heard of
their prophets, and of their being able to foretell what was to occur.
This kind of knowledge would fall in with the objects at which the
Chaldeans aimed, and if they could avail themselves of it, it would
enable them to secure what they so ardently sought. It is probable that
they considered this as a sort of "permanent" power which the Hebrew
prophets had, and supposed that at all times, and on all subjects, they
could interpret dreams, and solve the various questions about which
their own magicians were so much engaged. It is not to be presumed that
they had any very accurate knowledge of the exact character of the
Hebrew prophecies, or the nature of the communication which the prophets
had with God; but it was not unnatural for them to suppose that this
spirit of prophecy or divination would be possessed by the most noble
and the most talented of the land. Hence, Ashpenaz was instructed to
select those of the royal family, and those in whom there was no
blemish, and who were handsome, and who were distinguished for
knowledge, and to prepare them, by a suitable course, for being
presented to the king.

\(3\) It may have been the purpose of the Chaldean monarch to bring
forward all the talent of the realm, whether native or foreign, to be
employed in the service of the government. There is no reason to suppose
that there was any jealousy of foreign talent, or any reluctance to
employ it in any proper way, in promoting the interests of the kingdom.
As the Chaldean monarch had now in his possession the Hebrew royal
family, and all the principal men that had been distinguished in Judea,
it was not unnatural to suppose that there might be valuable talent
among them of which he might avail himself, and which would add to the
splendor of his own court and cabinet. It might have been naturally
supposed, also, that it would tend much to conciliate the captives
themselves, and repress any existing impatience, or insubordination, to
select the most noble and the most gifted of them, and to employ them in
the service of the government; and in any questions that might arise
between the government and the captive nation, it would be an advantage
for the government to be able to employ native-born Hebrews in making
known the wishes and purposes of the government. It was, moreover, in
accordance with the proud spirit of Nebuchadnezzar (see Dan. 4) to
surround himself with all that would impart splendor to his own reign.

III\. The method by which this talent was to be brought forward, [Dan
1:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#005.md). This was by a course of living
in the manner of the royal household, with the presumption that at the
end of three years, in personal appearance, and in the knowledge of the
language of the Chaldeans [Dan 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004.md),
they would be prepared to appear at court, and to be employed in the
service to which they might be appointed.

IV\. The resolution of Daniel not to corrupt himself with the viands
which had been appointed for him and his brethren, [Dan
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#008.md). He had heretofore been strictly
temperate; he had avoided all luxurious living; he had abstained from
wine; and, though now having all the means of luxurious indulgence at
command, and being unexpectedly thrown into the temptations of a
splendid Oriental court, he resolved to adhere stedfastly to his
principles.

V. The apprehension of the prince of the eunuchs that this would be a
ground of offence with his master, the king, and that he would himself
be held responsible, [Dan 1:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#009.md). This
was a very natural apprehension, as the command seems to have been
positive, and as an Oriental monarch was entirely despotic. It was not
unreasonable for him to whom this office was entrusted to suppose that a
failure on his part to accomplish what he had been directed to do would
be followed by a loss of place or life.

VI\. The experiment, and the result, [Dan
1:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#011.md). Daniel asked that a trial
might be made of the effects of temperance in preparing him and his
companions for presentation at court. He requested that they might be
permitted, even for a brief time, yet long enough to make a fair
experiment, to abstain from wine, and the other luxuries of the royal
table, and that then it might be determined whether they should be
allowed to continue the experiment. The result was as he had
anticipated. At the end of ten days, on a fair comparison with those who
had indulged in luxurious living, the benefit of their course was
apparent, and they were permitted to continue this strict abstinence
during the remainder of the time which was deemed necessary for their
preparation to appear at court.

VII\. The presentation at court, [Dan
1:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#018.md). At the end of the time
appointed for preparation, Daniel and his selected companions were
brought into the royal presence, and met with the most favorable
reception which could have been hoped for. They were distinguished, it
would seem, for beauty and manly vigour, and as much distinguished for
wisdom as they were for the beauty and healthfulness of their bodily
appearance. They at once took an honorable station, greatly surpassing
in true wisdom and knowledge those at the court who were regarded as
skilled in the arts of divination and astrology. These years of
preparation we are not to suppose were spent in merely cultivating the
beauty of their personal appearance, but they were doubtless employed,
under all the advantages of instruction which could be afforded them, in
the careful cultivation of their mental powers, and in the acquisition
of all the knowledge which could be obtained under the best masters at
the court of the Chaldeans. Compare [Dan
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004.md).

[Daniel 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 1:1</span></span>

In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah came
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon unto Jerusalem - This event occurred,
according to Jahn ("History of the Hebrew Commonwealth"), in the year
607 b.c., and in the 368th year after the revolt of the ten tribes.
According to Usher, it was in the 369th year of the revolt, and 606 b.c.
The computation of Usher is the one generally received, but the
difference of a year in the reckoning is not material. Compare
Michaelis, Anmerkung, zu 2 Kon. xxiv. 1. Jehoiakim was a son of Josiah,
a prince who was distinguished for his piety, [Kg2
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#002.md); [Ch2
35:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#001.md). After the death of Josiah, the
people raised to the throne of Judah Jehoahaz, the youngest son of
Josiah, probably because he appeared better qualified to reign than his
elder brother, [Kg2 23:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#030.md); [Ch2
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#001.md). He was a wicked prince, and
after he had been on the throne three months, he was removed by
Pharaoh-nechoh, king of Egypt, who returned to Jerusalem from the
conquest of Phoenicia, and placed his elder brother, Eliakim, to whom he
gave the name of Jehoiakim, on the throne, [Kg2
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#034.md); [Ch2
36:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#004.md).

Jehoahaz was first imprisoned in Riblah, [Kg2
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#033.md), and was afterward removed to
Egypt, [Ch2 36:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#004.md). Jehoiakim, an
unworthy son of Josiah, was, in reality, as he is represented by
Jeremiah, one of the worst kings who reigned over Judah. His reign
continued eleven years, and as he came to the throne 611 b.c., his reign
continued to the year 600 b.c. In the third year of his reign, after the
battle of Megiddo, Pharaoh-nechoh undertook a second expedition against
Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, with a numerous army, drawn in part from
Western Africa, Lybia and Ethiopia. - Jahn's Hist. Heb. "Commonwealth,"
p. 134. This Nabopolassar, who is also called Nebuchadnezzar I, was at
this time, as Berosus relates, aged and infirm. He therefore gave up a
part of his army to his son Nebuchadnezzar, who defeated the Egyptian
host at Carchemish (Circesium) on the Euphrates, and drove Nechoh out of
Asia. The victorious prince marched directly to Jerusalem, which was
then under the sovereignty of Egypt. After a short siege Jehoiakim
surrendered, and was again placed on the throne by the Babylonian
prince.

Nebuchadnezzar took part of the furniture of the temple as booty, and
carried back with him to Babylon several young men, the sons of the
principal Hebrew nobles, among whom were Daniel and his three friends
referred to in this chapter. It is not improbable that one object in
conveying them to Babylon was that they might be hostages for the
submission and good order of the Hebrews in their own land. It is at
this time that the Babylonian sovereignty over Judah commences, commonly
called the Babylonian captivity, which, according to the prophecy of
Jeremiah, [Jer 25:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001.md); [Jer
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#010.md), was to continue seventy years.
In [Jer 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001.md); [Jer
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002.md), it is said that this was in the
fourth year of Jehoiakim; in the passage before us it is said that it
was the third year. This difference, says Jahn, arises from a different
mode of computation: "Jehoiakim came to the throne at the end of the
year, which Jeremiah reckons as the first (and such a mode of reckoning
is not uncommon), but Daniel, neglecting the incomplete year, numbers
one less:" For a more full and complete examination of the objection to
the genuineness of Daniel from this passage, I would refer to Prof.
Stuart on Daniel, "Excursus" I. (See App. I. to this Vol.)

And besieged it - Jerusalem was a strongly-fortified place, and it was
not easy to take it, except as the result of a siege. It was, perhaps,
never carried by direct and immediate assault. Compare [Kg2
25:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#001.md), for an account of a siege of
Jerusalem a second time by Nebuchadnezzar. At that time the city was
besieged about a year and a half. How long the siege here referred to
continued is not specified.

[Daniel 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 1:2</span></span>

And the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand - Jehoiakim was
taken captive, and it would seem that there was an intention to convey
him to Babylon [Ch2 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#006.md), but that for
some cause he was not removed there, but died at Jerusalem [Kg2
24:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#005.md), though he was not honorably
buried there, [Jer 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#019.md); [Jer
36:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#030.md). In the second book of
Chronicles [Ch2 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#006.md), it is said that
"Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up, and bound Jehoiakim in fetters,
to take him to Babylon." Jahn supposes that an error has crept into the
text in the book of Chronicles, as there is no evidence that Jehoiakim
was taken to Babylon, but it appears from [Kg2
24:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001.md), that Jehoiakim was continued
in authority at Jerusalem under Nebuchadnezzar three years, and then
rebelled against him, and that then Nebuchadnezzar sent against him
"bands of the Chaldees, and bands of the Syrians, and bands of the
Moabites, and bands of the children of Ammon, and sent them against
Judah to destroy it." There is no necessity of supposing an error in the
text in the account in the book of Chronicles. It is probable that
Jehoiakim was taken, and that the "intention" was to take him to
Babylon, according to the account in Chronicles, but that, from some
cause not mentioned, the purpose of the Chaldean monarch was changed,
and that he was placed again over Judah, under Nebuchadnezzar, according
to the account in the book of Kings, and that he remained in this
condition for three years until he rebelled, and that then the bands of
Chaldeans, etc., were sent against him. It is probable that at this
time, perhaps while the siege was going on, he died, and that the
Chaldeans dragged his dead body out of the gates of the city, and left
it unburied, as Jeremiah had predicted, [Jer
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#019.md); [Jer
36:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#030.md).

With part of the vessels of the house of God - [Ch2
36:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#007.md). Another portion of the vessels
of the temple at Jerusalem was taken away by Nebuchadnezzar, in the time
of Jehoiachin, the successor of Jehoiakim, [Ch2
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#010.md). On the third invasion of
Palestine, the same thing was repeated on a more extensive scale, [Kg2
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#013.md). At the fourth and final
invasion, under Zedekiah, when the temple was destroyed, all its
treasures were carried away, [Kg2
25:6-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#006.md). A part of these treasures
were brought back under Cyrus, [Ezr
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#007.md); the rest under Darius, [Ezr
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#005.md). Why they were not "all" taken
away at first does not appear, but perhaps Nebuchadnezzar did not then
intend wholly to overthrow the Hebrew nation, but meant to keep them
tributary to him as a people. The temple was not at that time destroyed,
but probably he allowed the worship of Jehovah to be celebrated there
still, and he would naturally leave such vessels as were absolutely
necessary to keep up the services of public worship.

Which he carried into the land of Shinar - The region around Babylon.
The exact limits of this country are unknown, but it probably embraced
the region known as Mesopotamia - the country between the rivers Tigris
and Euphrates. The derivation of the name "Shinar" is unknown. It occurs
only in [Gen 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010.md); [Gen
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#002.md); [Gen
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001.md), [Gen
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#009.md); [Jos
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#021.md); [Isa
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011.md); [Dan
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#002.md); [Zac
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#011.md).

To the house of his god - To the temple of Bel, at Babylon. This was a
temple of great magnificence, and the worship of Bel was celebrated
there with great splendor. For a description of this temple, and of the
god which was worshipped there, see the notes at [Isa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001.md). These vessels were subsequently
brought out at the command of Belshazzar, at his celebrated feast, and
employed in the conviviality and revelry of that occasion. See [Dan
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#003.md).

And he brought the vessels into the treasure-house of his god - It would
seem rom this that the vessels had been taken to the temple of Bel, or
Belus, in Babylon, not to be used in the worship of the idol, but to be
laid up among the valuable treasures there. As the temples of the gods
were sacred, and were regarded as inviolable, it would be natural to
make them the repository of valuable spoils and treasures. Many of the
spoils of the Romans were suspended around the walls of the temples of
their gods, particularly in the temple of Victory. Compare Eschenberg,
"Manual of Class." Literally, pt. iii. Sections 149, 150.

[Daniel 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 1:3</span></span>

And the king spake unto Ashpenaz the master of his eunuchs - On the
general reasons which may have influenced the king to make the selection
of the youths here mentioned, see the analysis of the chapter. Of
Ashpenaz, nothing more is known than is stated here. Eunuchs were then,
as they are now, in constant employ in the harems of the East, and they
often rose to great influence and power. A large portion of the slaves
employed at the courts in the East, and in the houses of the wealthy,
are eunuchs. Compare Burckhardt's "Travels in Nubia," pp. 294, 295. They
are regarded as the guardians of the female virtue of the harem, but
their situation gives them great influence, and they often rise high in
the favor of their employers, and often become the principal officers of
the court. "The chief of the black eunuchs is yet, at the court of the
Sultan, which is arranged much in accordance with the ancient court of
Persia, an officer of the highest dignity. He is called Kislar-Aga, the
overseer of the women, and is the chief of the black eunuchs, who guard
the harem, or the apartments of the females. The Kislar-Aga enjoys,
through his situation, a vast influence, especially in regard to the
offices of the court, the principal Agas deriving their situations
through him." See Jos. von Hammers "des Osmanischen Reichs
Staatsverwalt," Thes i. s. 71, as quoted in Rosenmuller's "Alte und neue
Morgenland," ii. 357, 358.

That it is common in the East to desire that those employed in public
service should have vigorous bodies, and beauty of form, and to train
them for this, will be apparent from the following extract: "Curtius
says, that in all barbarous or uncivilized countries, the stateliness of
the body is held in great veneration; nor do they think him capable of
great services or action to whom nature has not vouchsafed to give a
beautiful form and aspect. It has always been the custom of eastern
nations to choose such for their principal officers, or to wait on
princes and great personages. Sir Paul Ricaut observes, 'That the youths
that are designed for the great offices of the Turkish empire must be of
admirable features and looks, well shaped in their bodies, and without
any defect of nature; for it is conceived that a corrupt and sordid soul
can scarcely inhabit in a serene and ingenuous aspect; and I have
observed, not only in the seraglio, but also in the courts of great men,
their personal attendants have been of comely lusty youths, well
habited, deporting themselves with singular modesty and respect in the
presence of their masters; so that when a Pascha Aga Spahi travels, he
is always attended with a comely equipage, followed by flourishing
youths, well clothed, and mounted, in great numbers. '" - Burder. This
may serve to explain the reason of the arrangement made in respect to
these Hebrew youths.

That he should bring certain of the children of Israel - Hebrew, "of the
sons of Israel." Nothing can with certainty be determined respecting
their "age" by the use of this expression, for the phrase means merely
the descendants of Jacob, or Israel, that is, "Jews," and it would be
applied to them at any time of life. It would seem, however, from
subsequent statements, that those who were selected were young men. It
is evident that young men would be better qualified for the object
contemplated - to be "trained" in the language and the sciences of the
Chaldeans [Dan 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004.md) - than those who
were at a more advanced period of life.

And of the king's seed, and of the princes - That the most illustrious,
and the most promising of them were to be selected; those who would be
most adapted to accomplish the object which he had in view. Compare the
analysis of the chapter. It is probable that the king presumed that
among the royal youths who had been made captive there would be found
those of most talent, and of course those best qualified to impart
dignity and honor to his government, as well as those who would be most
likely to be qualified to make known future events by the interpretation
of dreams, and by the prophetic intimations of the Divine will.

[Daniel 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 1:4</span></span>

Children in whom was no blemish - The word rendered "children" in this
place (ילדים yelâdı̂ym) is different from that which is rendered
"children" in [Job 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#003.md) - בנים
bânnı̂ym). That word denotes merely that they were "sons," or
"descendants," of Israel, without implying anything in regard to their
age; the word here used would be appropriate only to those who were at
an early period of life, and makes it certain that the king meant that
those who were selected should be youths. Compare [Gen
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#023.md), where the word is rendered "a
young man." It is sometimes, indeed, used to denote a son, without
reference to age, and is then synonymous with בן bên, a "son." But it
properly means "one born;" that is, "recently born;" a child, [Gen
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#008.md); [Exo
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#017.md); [Exo
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#003.md); and then one in early life. There
can be no doubt that the monarch meant to designate youths. So the
Vulgate, pueros, and the Greek, νεανισκους neaniskous, and so the
Syriac. All these words would be applicable to those who were in early
life, or to young men. Compare Introduction to Daniel, Section I. The
word "blemish" refers to bodily defect or imperfection. The object was
to select those who were most perfect in form, perhaps partly because it
was supposed that beautiful youths would most grace the court, and
partly because it was supposed that such would be likely to have the
brightest intellectual endowments. It was regarded as essential to
personal beauty to be without blemish, [Sa2
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#025.md) : "But in all Israel there was
none to be so much praised as Absalom for beauty; from the sole of Iris
foot even to the crown of his head there was no blemish in him." [Sol
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#007.md) : "thou art all fair, my love;
there is no spot in thee." The word is sometimes used in a moral sense,
to denote corruption of heart or life [Deu
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#005.md); [Job
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#015.md); [Job
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#007.md), but that is not the meaning
here.

But well-favored - Hebrew, "good of appearance;" that is, beautiful.

And skillful in all wisdom - Intelligent, wise - that is, in all that
was esteemed wise in their own country. The object was to bring forward
the most talented and intelligent, as well as the most beautiful, among
the Hebrew captives.

And cunning in knowledge - In all that could be known. The distinction
between the word here rendered "knowledge" (דעת da‛ath) and the word
rendered "science" (מדע maddâ‛) is not apparent. Both come from the word
ידע yâda‛ to "know," and would be applicable to any kind of knowledge.
The word rendered "cunning" is also derived from the same root, and
means "knowing," or "skilled in." We more commonly apply the word to a
particular kind of knowledge, meaning artful, shrewd, astute, sly,
crafty, designing. But this was not the meaning of the word when the
translation of the Bible was made, and it is not employed in that sense
in the Scriptures. It is always used in a good sense, meaning
intelligent, skillful, experienced, well-instructed. Compare [Gen
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#027.md); [Exo
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#001.md); [Exo
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#015.md); [Exo
38:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#023.md); [Sa1
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#016.md); [Ch1
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#007.md); [Psa
137:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#005.md); [Isa
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#003.md).

And understanding science - That is, the sciences which prevailed among
the Hebrews. They were not a nation distinguished for "science," in the
sense in which that term is now commonly understood - embracing
astronomy, chemistry, geology, mathematics, electricity, etc.; but their
science extended chiefly to music, architecture, natural history,
agriculture, morals, theology, war, and the knowledge of future events;
in all which they occupied an honorable distinction among the nations.
In many of these respects they were, doubtless, far in advance of the
Chaldeans; and it was probably the purpose of the Chaldean monarch to
avail himself of what they knew.

And such as had ability in them to stand in the king's palace - Hebrew,
"had strength" - כח kôach. Properly meaning, who had strength of body
for the service which would be required of them in attending on the
court. "A firm constitution of body is required for those protracted
services of standing in the hall of the royal presence." - Grotius. The
word "palace" here (היכל hêykâl) is commonly used to denote the temple
([Kg2 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#013.md); [Ch2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#017.md); [Jer
50:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#028.md); [Hag
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#015.md). Its proper and primitive
signification, however, is a large and magnificent building - a palace -
and it was given to the temple as the "palace" of Jehovah, the abode
where he dwelt as king of his people.

And whom they might teach - That they might be better qualified for the
duties to which they might be called. The purpose was, doubtless (see
analysis), to bring forward their talent, that it might contribute to
the splendor of the Chaldean court; but as they were, doubtless,
ignorant to a great extent of the language of the Chaldeans, and as
there were sciences in which the Chaldeans were supposed to excel, it
seemed desirable that they should have all the advantage which could be
delayed from a careful training under the best masters.

The learning - - ספר sêpher. literally, "writing" [Isa
29:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#011.md). Gesenius supposes that this
means the "writing" of the Chaldeans; or that they might be able to read
the language of the Chaldeans. But it, doubtless, included "the
knowledge" of what was written, as well as the ability "to read" what
was written; that is, the purpose was to instruct them in the sciences
which were understood among the Chaldeans. They were distinguished
chiefly for such sciences as these:

\(1\) Astronomy. This science is commonly supposed to have had its orion
on the plains of Babylon, and it was early carried there to as high a
degree of perfection as it attained in any of the ancient nations. Their
mild climate, and their employment as shepherds, leading them to pass
much of their time at night under the open heavens, gave them the
opportunity of observing the stars, and they amused themselves in
marking their positions and their changes, and in mapping out the
heavens in a variety of fanciful figures, now called constellations.

\(2\) Astrology. This was at first a branch of astronomy, or was almost
identical with it, for the stars were studied principally to endeavor to
ascertain what influence they exerted over the fates of men, and
especially what might be predicted from their position, on the birth of
an individual, as to his future life. Astrology was then deemed a
science whose laws were to be ascertained in the same way as the laws of
any other science; and the world has been slow to disabuse itself of the
notion that the stars exert an influence over the fates of men. Even
Lord Bacon held that it was a science to be "reformed," not wholly
rejected.

\(3\) Magic; soothsaying; divination; or whatever would contribute to
lay open the future, or disclose the secrets of the invisible world.
Hence, they applied themselves to the interpretation of dreams; they
made use of magical arts, probably employing, as magicians do, some of
the ascertained results of science in producing optical illusions,
impressing the common with the belief that they were familiar with the
secrets of the invisible world; and hence, the name "Chaldean" and
"magician" became almost synonymous terms [Dan
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002.md); [Dan
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#007.md); [Dan
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#007.md).

\(4\) It is not improbable that they had made advances in other
sciences, but of this we have little knowledge. They knew little of the
true laws of astronomy, geology, cheministry, electricity, mathematics;
and in these, and in kindred departments of science, they may be
supposed to have been almost wholly ignorant.

And the tongue of the Chaldeans - In regard to the "Chaldeans," see the
notes at [Job 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#017.md); and the notes at
[Isa 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#013.md). The kingdom of Babylon was
composed mainly of Chaldeans, and that kingdom was called "the realm of
the Chaldeans" [Dan 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#001.md). Of that
realm, or kingdom, Babylon was the capital. The origin of the Chaldeans
has been a subject of great perplexity, on which there is still a
considerable variety of opinions. According to Heeren, they came from
the North; by Gesenius they are supposed to have come from the mountains
of Kurdistan; and by Michaelis, from the steppes of Scythia. They seem
to have been an extended race, and probably occupied the whole of the
region adjacent to what became Babylonia. Heeren expresses his opinion
as to their origin in the following language: "It cannot be doubted
that, at some remote period, antecedent to the commencement of
historical records. "one mighty race" possessed these vast plains,
varying in character according to the country which they inhabited; in
the deserts of Arabia, pursuing a nomad life; in Syria, applying
themselves to agriculture, and taking up settled abodes; in Babylonia,
erecting the most magnificent cities of ancient times; and in Phoenicia,
opening the earliest ports, and constructing fleets, which secured to
them the commerce of the known world."

There exists at the present time, in the vicinity of the Bahrein
Islands, and along the Persian Gulf, in the neighborhood of the Astan
River, an Arab tribe, of the name of the "Beni Khaled," who are probably
the same people as the "Gens Chaldei" of Pliny, and doubtless the
descendants of the ancient race of the Chaldeans. On the question when
they became a kingdom, or realm, making Babylon their capital, see the
notes at [Isa 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#013.md). Compare, for an
interesting discussion of the subject, "Forster's Historical Geography
of Arabia," vol. i. pp. 49-56. The language of the Chaldeans, in which a
considerable part of the book of Daniel is written (see the Introduction
Section IV., III.), differed from the Hebrew, though it was a branch of
the same Aramean family of languages. It was, indeed, very closely
allied to the Hebrew, but was so different that those who were
acquainted with only one of the two languages could not understand the
other. Compare [Neh 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#008.md). Both were the
offspring of the original Shemitish language. This original language may
be properly reduced to three great branches:

\(1\) The Aramean, which prevailed in Syria, Babylonia, and Mesopotamia;
and which may, therefore, be divided into the Syriac or West-Aramean,
and the Chaldee or East-Aramean, called after the Babylonian Aramean.

\(2\) The Hebrew, with which the fragments of the Phoenician coincide.

\(3\) The Arabic, under which belongs the Ethiopic as a dialect. The
Aramean, which, after the return from the Babylonian captivity, was
introduced into Palestine, and which prevailed in the time of the
Saviour, is commonly called the Syro-Chaldaic, because it was a mixture
of the Eastern and Western dialects. The Chaldee, or East Aramean, and
the Hebrew, had in general the same stock of original words, but they
differed in several respects, such as the following:

\(a\) Many words of the old primitive language which had remained in one
dialect had been lost in the other.

\(b\) The same word was current in both dialects, but in different
significations, because in the one it retained the primitive
signification, while in the other it had acquired different meaning.

\(c\) The Babylonian dialect had borrowed expressions from the Northern
Chaldeans, who had made various irruptions into the country. These
expressions were foreign to the Shemitish dialects, and belonged to the
Japhetian language, which prevailed among the Armenians, the Medes, the
Persians, and the Chaldeans, who were probaby related to these. Traces
of these foreign words are found in the names of the officers of state,
and in expressions having reference to the government.

\(d\) The Babylonian pronunciation was more easy and more sonorous than
the Hebrew. It exchanged the frequent sibilants of the Hebrew, and the
other consonants which were hard to pronounce, for others which were
less difficult: it dropped the long vowels which were not essential to
the forms of words; it preferred the more sonorous "a" to the long "o,"
and assumed at the end of nouns, in order to lighten the pronunciation,
a prolonged auxiliary vowel (the so-called emphatic א ('); it admitted
contractions in pronouncing many words) and must have been, as the
language of common life, far better adapted to the sluggish Orientals
than the harsher Hebrew. See an article "On the Prevalence of the
Aramean Language in Palestine in the age of Christ and the Apostles," by
Henry F. Pfannkuche, in the "Biblical Repository," vol. i. pp. 318, 319.
On this verse also, compare the notes at [Isa
39:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#007.md).

[Daniel 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 1:5</span></span>

And the king appointed them - Calvin supposes that this arrangement was
resorted to in order to render them effeminate, and, by a course of
luxurious living, to induce them gradually to forget their own country,
and that with the same view their names were changed. But there is no
evidence that this was the object. The purpose was manifestly to train
them in the manner in which it was supposed they would be best fitted,
in bodily health, in personal beauty, and in intellectual attainments,
to appear at court; and it was presumed that the best style of living
which the realm furnished would conduce to this end. That the design was
not to make them effeminate, is apparent from [Dan
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#015.md).

A daily provision - Hebrew, "The thing of a day in his day;" that is, he
assigned to them each day a portion of what had been prepared for the
royal meal. It was not a permanent provision, but one which was made
each day. The word rendered "provision" - פת path - means a bit,
"crumb," "morsel," [Gen 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#005.md); [Jdg
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#005.md); [Psa
147:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#017.md).

Of the king's meat - The word "meat" here means "food," as it does
uniformly in the Bible, the Old English word having this signification
when the translation was made, and not being limited then, as it is now,
to animal food. The word in the original - בג bag - is of Persian
origin, meaning "food." The two words are frequently compounded - פתבג
pathebag [Dan 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#005.md), [Dan
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#008.md), [Dan
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#013.md), [Dan
1:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#015.md); [Dan
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#026.md); and the compound means delicate
food, dainties; literally, food of the father, i. e., the king; or,
according to Lorsbach, in Archiv. f. "Morgenl." Litt. II., 313, food for
idols, or the gods; - in either case denoting delicate food; luxurious
living. - Gesenius, "Lex."

And of the wine which he drank - Margin, "of his drink." Such wine as
the king was accustomed to drink. It may be presumed that this was the
best kind of wine. From anything that appears, this was furnished to
them in abundance; and with the leisure which they had, they could
hardly be thrown into stronger temptation to excessive indulgence.

So nourishing them three years - As long as was supposed to be necessary
in order to develop their physical beauty and strength, and to make them
well acquainted with the language and learning of the Chaldeans. The
object was to prepare them to give as much dignity and ornament to the
court as possible.

That at the end thereof they might stand before the king - Notes, [Dan
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004.md). On the arrangements made to bring
forward these youths, the editor of the "Pictorial Bible" makes the
following remarks, showing the correspondence between these arrangements
and what usually occurs in the East: "There is not a single intimation
which may not be illustrated from the customs of the Turkish seraglio
until some alterations were made in this, as in other matters, by the
present sultan (Mahmoud). The pages of the seraglio, and officers of the
court, as well as the greater part of the public functionaries and
governors of provinces, were originally Christian boys, taken captive in
war, or bought or stolen in time of peace. The finest and most capable
of these were sent to the palace, and, if accepted, were placed under
the charge of the chief of the white eunuchs. The lads did not
themselves become eunuchs; which we notice, because it has been
erroneously inferred, that Daniel and the other Hebrew youths "must"
have been made eunuchs, "because" they were committed to the care of the
chief eunuch.

The accepted lads were brought up in the religion of their masters; and
there were schools in the palace where they received such complete
instruction in Turkish learning and science as it was the lot of few
others to obtain. Among their accomplishments we find it mentioned, that
the greatest pains were taken to teach them to speak the Turkish
language (a foreign one to them) with the greatest purity, as spoken at
court. Compare this with "Teach them the learning and tongue of the
Chaldeans." The lads were clothed very neatly, and well, but temperately
dieted. They slept in large chambers, where there were rows of beds.
Every one slept separately; and between every third or fourth bed lay a
white eunuch, who served as a sort of guard, and was bound to keep a
careful eye upon the lads near him, and report his observations to his
superior. When any of them arrived at a proper age, they were instructed
in military exercises, and pains taken to make them active, robust, and
brave.

Every one, also, according to the custom of the country, was taught some
mechanical or liberal art, to serve him as a resource in adversity. When
their education was completed in all its branches, those who had
displayed the most capacity and valor were employed about the person of
the king, and the rest given to the service of the treasury, and the
other offices of the extensive establishment to which they belonged. In
due time the more talented or successful young men got promoted to the
various high court offices which gave them access to the private
apartments of the seraglio, so that they at almost any time could see
and speak to their great master. This advantage soon paved the way for
their promotion to the government of provinces, and to military
commands; and it has often happened that favorite court officers have
stepped at once into the post of grand vizier, or chief minister, and
other high offices of state, without having previously been abroad in
the world as pashas and military commanders. How well this agrees to,
and illustrates the usage of the Babylonian court, will clearly appear
to the reader without particular indication. See Habesci's "Ottoman
Empire;" Tavernier's "Relation de l'Interieur du Srail du Grand
Seigneur."

[Daniel 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">dan 1:6</span></span>

Now among these were of the children of Judah - That is, these were a
part of those who were selected. They are mentioned because they became
so prominent in the transactions which are subsequently recorded in this
book, and because they evinced such extraordinary virtue in the
development of the principles in which they had been trained, and in the
remarkable trials through which they were called to pass. It does not
appear that they are mentioned here particularly on account of any
distinction of birth or rank, for though they were among the noble and
promising youth of the land, yet it is clear that others of the same
rank and promise also were selected, [Dan
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003.md). The phrase "the children of
Judah" is only another term to denote that they were Hebrews. They
belonged to the tribe, or the kingdom of Judah.

Daniel - This name (דניאל dânı̂yê'l) means properly "judge of God;" that
is, one who acts as judge in the name of God. Why this name was given to
him is not known. We cannot, however, fail to be struck with its
appropriateness, as the events of his life showed. Nor is it known
whether he belonged to the royal family, or to the nobles of the land,
but as the selection was made from that class it is probable. Those who
were at first carried into captivity were selected exclusively from the
more elevated classes of society, and there is every reason to believe
that Daniel belonged to a family of rank and consequence. The Jews say
that he was of the royal family, and was descended from Hezekiah, and
cite his history in confirmation of the prophecy addressed by Isaiah to
that monarch, "Of thy sons which shall issue from thee, which thou shalt
beget, shall they take away; and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of
the king of Babylon," [Isa 39:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#007.md).
Compare Introduction Section I.

Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah - Of the rank and early history of these
young men nothing is known. They became celebrated for their refusal to
worship the golden image set up by Nebuchadnezzar, [Dan
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#012.md), following.

[Daniel 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 1:7</span></span>

Unto whom the prince of the eunuchs gave names - This practice is common
in Oriental courts. "The captive youths referred to in the notes on [Dan
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#005.md), in the Turkish court also receive
new names, that is, Mahometan names, their former names being
Christian." - "Pict. Bible." It is "possible" that this changing of
their names may have been designed to make them forget their country,
and their religion, and to lead them more entirely to identify
themselves with the people in whose service they were now to be
employed, though nothing of this is intimated in the history. Such a
change, it is easy to conceive, might do much to make them feel that
they were identified with the people among whom they were adopted, and
to make them forget the customs and opinions of their own country. It is
a circumstance which may give some additional probability to this
supposition, that it is quite a common thing now at missionary stations
to give new names to the children who are taken into the
boarding-schools, and especially the names of the Christian benefactors
at whose expense they are supported. Compare the same general character,
for this change of names may have been, that the name of the true God
constituted a part of their own names, and that thus they were
constantly reminded of him and his worship. In the new names given them,
the appellation of some of the idols worshipped in Babylon was
incorporated, and this might serve as remembrancers of the divinities to
whose service it was doubtless the intention to win them.

For he gave unto Daniel the name of Belteshazzar - The name Belteshazzar
(בלטשׁאצר bêlṭesha'tstsar) is compounded of two words, and means
according to Gesenius, "Bel's prince;" that is, he whom Bel favors.
"Bel" was the principal divinity worshipped at Babylon (notes, [Isa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001).md), and this name would, therefore,
be likely to impress the youthful Daniel with the idea that he was a
favorite of this divinity, and to attract him to his service. It was a
flattering distinction that he was one of the favorites of the principal
god worshipped in Babylon, and this was not improbably designed to turn
his attention from the God whose name had been incorporated in his own.
The giving of this name seemed to imply, in the apprehension of
Nebuchadnezzar, that the spirit of the gods was in him on whom it was
conferred. See [Dan 4:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#008.md).

And to Hananiah, of Shadrach - The name "Hananiah" (חנניה chănanyâh)
means, "whom Jehovah has graciously given," and is the same with Ananias
(Greek, Ανανίας Ananias), and would serve to remind its possessor of the
name of "Jehovah," and of his mercy. The name Shadrach (שׁדרך shadrak),
according to Lorsbach, means "young friend of the king;" according to
Bohlen, it means "rejoicing in the way," and this last signification is
the one which Gesenius prefers. In either signification it would
contribute to a forgetfulness of the interesting significancy of the
former name, and tend to obliterate the remembrance of the early
training in the service of Jehovah.

And to Mishael, of Meshach - The name "Mishael" (מישׁאל mı̂yshâ'êl)
means, "who is what God is?" - from מי mı̂y "who," שׁ sha "what," and אל
ēl "God." It would thus be a remembrancer of the greatness of God; of
his supremacy over all his creatures, and of his "incomparable"
exaltation over the universe. The signification of the name "Meshach"
(מישׁך mêyshak) is less known. The Persian word ovicula means a little
sheep (Gesenius), but why this name was given we are not informed. Might
it have been on account of his beauty, his gentleness, his lamb-like
disposition? If so, nothing perhaps would be better fitted to turn away
the thoughts from the great God and his service to himself.

And to Azariah, of Abednego - The name "Azaziah" (עזריה ‛ăzaryâh) means,
"whom Jehovah helps," from עזר ‛âzar "to help," and יה yâh, the same as
"Jah" (a shortened form of Jehovah, יהוה yehovâh), This name, therefore,
had a striking significancy, and would be a constant remembrancer of the
true God, and of the value of his favor and protection. The name
Abed-nego (עבד נגו ‛ăbêd negô) means, "a servant of Nego," or perhaps of
"Nebo" - נבו nebô. This word "Nebo," among the Chaldeans, probably
denoted the planet Mercury. This planet was worshipped by them, and by
the Arabs, as the celestial scribe or writer. See the notes at [Isa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001.md). The Divine worship paid to this
planet by the Chaldeans is attested, says Gesenius, by the many compound
proper names of which this name forms a part; as Nebuchadnezzar,
Nebushasban, and others mentioned in classic writers; as Nabonedus,
Nabonassar, Nabonabus, etc. This change of name, therefore, was designed
to denote a consecration to the service of this idol-god, and the change
was eminently adapted to make him to whom it was given forget the true
God, to whom, in earlier days, he had been devoted. It was only
extraordinary grace which could have kept these youths in the paths of
their early training, and in the faithful service of that God to whom
they had been early consecrated, amidst the temptations by which they
were now surrounded in a foreign land, and the influences which were
employed to alienate them from the God of their fathers.

[Daniel 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 1:8</span></span>

But Daniel purposed in his heart - Evidently in concurrence with the
youths who had been selected with him. See [Dan
1:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#011.md). Daniel, it seems, formed this
as a "decided" purpose, and "meant" to carry it into effect, as a matter
of principle, though he designed to secure his object, if possible, by
making a request that he might be "allowed" to pursue that course [Dan
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#012.md), and wished not to give offence,
or to provoke opposition. What would have been the result if he had not
obtained permission we know not; but the probability is, that he would
have thrown himself upon the protection of God, as he afterward did Dan.
6, and would have done what he considered to be duty, regardless of
consequences. The course which he took saved him from the trial, for the
prince of the eunuchs was willing to allow him to make the experiment,
[Dan 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#014.md). It is always better, even
where there is decided principle, and a settled purpose in a matter, to
obtain an object by a peaceful request, than to attempt to secure it by
violence.

That he would not defile himself with the portion of the king's meat -
Notes, [Dan 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#005.md). The word which is
rendered "defile himself" - יתגאל yı̂thegâ'al from גאל gā'al - is
commonly used in connection with "redemption," its first and usual
meaning being to redeem, to ransom. In later Hebrew, however, it means,
to be defiled; to be polluted, to be unclean. The "connection" between
these significations of the word is not apparent, unless, as redemption
was accomplished with the shedding of blood, rendering the place where
it was shed defiled, the idea came to be permanently attached to the
word. The defilement here referred to in the case of Daniel probably
was, that by partaking of this food he might, in some way, be regarded
as countenancing idolatry, or as lending his sanction to a mode of
living which was inconsistent with his principles, and which was
perilous to his health and morals. The Syriac renders this simply, "that
he would not eat," without implying that there would be defilement.

Nor with the wine which he drank - As being contrary to his principles,
and perilous to his morals and happiness.

Therefore he requested of the prince of the eunuchs that he might not
defile himself - That he might be permitted to abstain from the luxuries
set before him. It would seem from this, that he represented to the
prince of the eunuchs the real danger which he apprehended, or the real
cause why he wished to abstain - that he would regard the use of these
viands as contrary to the habits which he had formed, as a violation of
the principles of his religion; and as, in his circumstances, wrong as
well as perilous. This he presented as a "request." He asked it,
therefore, as a favor, preferring to use mild and gentle means for
securing the object, rather than to put himself in the attitude of open
resistance to the wishes of the monarch. What "reasons" influenced him
to choose this course, and to ask to be permitted to live on a more
temperate and abstemious diet, we are not informed. Assuming, however,
what is apparent from the whole narrative, that he had been educated in
the doctrines of the true religion, and in the principles of temperance,
it is not difficult to conceive what reasons "would" influence a
virtuous youth in such circumstances, and we cannot be in much danger of
error in suggesting the following:

\(1\) It is not improbable that the food which was offered him had been,
in some way, connected with idolatry, and that his participation in it
would be construed as countenancing the worship of idols. - Calvin. It
is known that a part of the animals offered in sacrifice was sold in the
market; and known, also, that splendid entertainments were often made in
honor of particular idols, and on the sacrifices which had been offered
to them. Compare [Co1 8:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001.md).
Doubtless, also, a considerable part of the food which was served up at
the royal table consisted of articles which, by the Jewish law, were
prohibited as unclean. It was represented by the prophets, as one part
of the evils of a captivity in a foreign land, that the people would be
under a necessity of eating what was regarded as unclean. Thus, in [Eze
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#013.md) : "And the Lord said, Even thus
shall the children of Israel eat their defiled bread among the Gentiles,
whither I will drive them." [Hos 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#003.md) :
"they shall not dwell in the Lord's land, but Ephraim shall return to
Egypt; and shall eat unclean things in Assyria." Rosenmuller remarks on
this passage ("Alte u. neue Morgenland," 1076), "It was customary among
the ancients to bring a portion of what was eaten and drank as an
offering to the gods, as a sign of thankful recognition that all which
men enjoy is their gift. Among the Romans these gifts were called
"libamina," so that with each meal there was connected an act of
offering. Hence Daniel and his friends regarded what was brought from
the royal table as food which had been offered to the gods, and
therefore as impure."

\(2\) Daniel and his friends were, doubtless, restrained from partaking
of the food and drink offered to them by a regard to the principles of
temperance in which they had been educated, and by a fear of the
consequences which would follow from indulgence. They had evidently been
trained in the ways of strict temperance. But now new scenes opened to
them, and new temptations were before them. They were among strangers.
They were noticed and flattered. They had an opportunity of indulging in
the pleasures of the table, such as captive youth rarely enjoyed. This
opportunity, there can be no doubt, they regarded as a temptation to
their virtue, and as in the highest degree perilous to their principles,
and they, therefore, sought to resist the temptation. They were captives
- exiles from their country - in circumstances of great depression and
humiliation, and they did not wish to forget that circumstance. -
Calvin. Their land was in ruins; the temple where they and their fathers
had worshipped had been desecrated and plundered; their kindred and
countrymen were pining in exile; everything called them to a mode of
life which would be in accordance with these melancholy facts, and they,
doubtless, felt that it would be in every way inappropriate for them to
indulge in luxurious living, and revel in the pleasures of a banquet.

But they were also, doubtless, restrained from these indulgences by a
reference to the dangers which would follow. It required not great
penetration or experience, indeed, to perceive, that in their
circumstances - young men as they were, suddenly noticed and honored -
compliance would be perilous to their virtue; but it did require
uncommon strength of principle to meet the temptation. Rare has been the
stern virtue among young men which could resist so strong allurements;
seldom, comparatively, have those who have been unexpectedly thrown, in
the course of events, into the temptations of a great city in a foreign
land, and flattered by the attention of those in the higher walks of
life, been sufficiently firm in principle to assert the early principles
of temperance and virtue in which they may have been trained. Rare has
it been that a youth in such circumstances would form the steady purpose
not to "defile himself" by the tempting allurements set before him, and
that, at all hazards, he would adhere to the principles in which he had
been educated.

[Daniel 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 1:9</span></span>

Now God had brought Daniel into favor - Compare [Gen
39:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#021.md); [Pro
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#007.md). By what means this had been done
is not mentioned. It may be presumed, however, that it was by the
attractiveness of his person and manners, and by the evidence of
promising talent which he had evinced. Whatever were the means, however,
two things are worthy of notice:

\(1\) The effect of this on the subsequent fortunes of Daniel. It was to
him a great advantage, that by the friendship of this man he was enabled
to carry out the purposes of temperance and religion which he had
formed, without coming in conflict with those who were in power.

\(2\) God was the author of the favor which was thus shown to Daniel. It
was by a controlling influence which he exerted, that this result had
been secured, and Daniel traced it directly to him. We may hence learn
that the favor of others toward us is to be traced to the hand of God,
and if we are prospered in the world, and are permitted to enjoy the
friendship of those who have it in their power to benefit us, though it
may be on account of our personal qualifications, we should learn to
attribute it all to God. There would have been great reason to apprehend
beforehand, that the refusal of Daniel and his companions to partake of
the food prepared for them would have been construed as an affront
offered to the king, especially if it was understood to be on the ground
that they regarded it as "defilement" or "pollution" to partake of it;
but God overruled it all so as to secure the favor of those in power.

[Daniel 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">dan 1:10</span></span>

And the prince of the eunuchs said unto Daniel, I fear my lord the king
- He was apprehensive that if Daniel appeared less healthful, or
cheerful, or beautiful, than it was supposed he would under the
prescribed mode of life, it would be construed as disobedience of the
commands of the king on his part, and that it would be inferred that the
wan and emaciated appearance of Daniel was caused by the fact that the
food which had been ordered had not been furnished, but had been
embezzled by the officer who had it in charge. We have only to remember
the strict and arbitrary nature of Oriental monarchies to see that there
were just grounds for the apprehensions here expressed.

For why should he see your faces worse liking - Margin, "sadder." The
Hebrew word (זעפים zo‛ăpı̂ym) means, properly, angry; and then morose,
gloomy, sad. The primary idea seems to be, that of "any" painful, or
unpleasant emotion of the mind which depicts itself on the countenance -
whether anger, sorrow, envy, lowness of spirits, etc. Greek, σκυθρωπὰ
skuthrōpa - stern, gloomy, sad, [Mat
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#016.md); [Luk
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#017.md). Here the reference is not to
the expression of angry feelings in the countenance, but to the
countenance as fallen away by fasting, or poor living. "Than the
children." The youths, or young men. The same word is here used which
occurs in [Dan 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004.md). Compare the note
at that verse.

Which are of your sort - Margin, "term," or "continuance." The Hebrew
word here used (גיל gı̂yl) means, properly, a circle, or circuit; hence
an age, and then the men of an age, a generation. - "Gesenius." The word
is not used, however, in the Scriptures elsewhere in this sense.
Elsewhere it is rendered "joy," or "rejoicing," [Job
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#022.md); [Psa
43:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#004.md); [Psa
45:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#015.md); [Psa
65:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#012.md); [Pro
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#024.md); [Isa
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#010.md); [Isa
35:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#002.md); [Isa
65:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#018.md); [Jer
48:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#033.md); [Hos
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#001.md); [Joe
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#016.md). This meaning it has from the
usual sense of the verb (גיל gı̂yl) "to exult," or "rejoice." The verb
properly means, to move in a circle; then to "dance" in a circle; and
then to exult or rejoice. The word "circle," as often used now to denote
those of a certain class, rank, or character, would accurately express
the sense here. Thus we speak of those in the "religious" circles, in
the social circles, etc. The reference here is to those of the same
class with Daniel; to wit, in the arrangements made for presenting them
before the king. Greek, συνήλικα ὑμῶν sunēlika humōn, of your age.

Then shall ye make me endanger my head to the king - As if he had
disregarded the orders given him, or had embezzled what had been
provided for these youths, and had furnished them with inferior fare. In
the arbitrary courts of the East, nothing would be more natural than
that such an apparent failure in the performance of what was enjoined
would peril his life. The word used here, and rendered "make me
endanger" - חוב chûb - occurs nowhere else in the Bible. It means, in
Piel, to make guilty; to cause to forfeit. Greek, καταδικάσητε
katadikasēte - you will condemn, or cause me to be condemned.

[Daniel 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 1:11</span></span>

Then said Daniel to Melzar, whom the prince of the eunuchs had set over
Daniel ... - Margin, or, the "steward." It is not easy to determine
whether the word here used (מלצר meltsâr) is to be regarded as a proper
name, or the name of an office. It occurs nowhere else, except in [Dan
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#016.md), applied to the same person.
Gesenius regards it as denoting the name of an office in the Babylonian
court - master of the wine, chief butler. Others regard it as meaning a
treasurer. The word is still in use in Persia. The Vulgate renders it as
a proper name - Malasar; and so the Syriac - Meshitzar; and so the Greek
- Ἀμελσὰδ Amelsad. The use of the article in the word (המלצר hameltsâr)
would seem to imply that it denoted the name of an "office," and nothing
would be more probable than that the actual furnishing of the daily
portion of food would be entrusted to a steward, or to some incumbent of
an office inferior to that sustained by Ashpenaz, [Dan
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003.md).

[Daniel 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">dan 1:12</span></span>

Prove thy servants, I beseech thee, ten days - A period which would
indicate the probable result of the entire experiment. If during that
period there were no indications of diminished health, beauty, or
vigour, it would not be unfair to presume that the experiment in behalf
of temperance would be successful, and it would not be improper then to
ask that it might be continued longer.

And let them give us pulse to eat - Margin, "of pulse that we may eat."
Hebrew, "Let them give us of pulse, and we will eat." The word "pulse"
with us means leguminous plants with thin seeds; that is, plants with a
pericarp, or seed-vessel, of two valves, having the seeds fixed to one
suture only. In popular language the "legume" is called a "pod;" as a
"pea-pod," or "bean-pod," and the word is commonly applied to peas or
beans. The Hebrew word (זרעים zēro‛ı̂ym) would properly have reference to
seeds of any kind - from זרע zâra‛, to disperse, to scatter seed, to
sow. Then it would refer to plants that bear seed, of all kinds, and
would be by no means limited to pulse - as pease or beans. It is
rendered by Gesenius, "seed-herbs, greens, vegetables; i. e., vegetable
food, such as was eaten in half-fast, opposed to meats and the more
delicate kinds of food." The word occurs only here and in [Dan
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#016.md). It is rendered in the Vulgate,
"legumina;" and in the Greek, ἀπὸ τῶν σπερμάτων apo tōn spermatōn -
"from seeds." It is not a proper construction to limit this to "pulse,"
or to suppose that Daniel desired to live solely on pease or beans; but
the fair interpretation is to apply it to what grows up from "seeds" -
such, probably, as would be sown in a garden, or, as we would now
express it, "vegetable diet." It was designed as an experiment - and was
a very interesting one - to show the legitimate effect of such a diet in
promoting beauty and health, and the result is worthy of special notice
as contrasted with a more luxurious mode of life.

And water to drink - This, also, was a most interesting and important
experiment, to show that wine was not necessary to produce healthfulness
of appearance, or manly strength and beauty. It was an experiment to
illustrate the effect of "cold water" as a beverage, made by an
interesting group of young men, when surrounded by great temptations,
and is, therefore, worthy of particular attention.

[Daniel 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 1:13</span></span>

Then let our countenances be looked upon - One of the "objects" to be
secured by this whole trial was to promote their personal beauty, and
their healthful appearance [Dan 1:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004.md),
and Daniel was willing that the trial should be made with reference to
that, and that a judgment should be formed from the observed effect of
their temperate mode of life. The Hebrew word rendered countenance (מראה
mar'eh) is not limited to the "face," as the word countenance is with
us. It refers to the whole appearance, the form, the "looks;" and the
expression here is equivalent to, "Then look on us, and see what the
result has been, and deal with us accordingly" The Greek is, αἱ ἰδέαι
ἡμῶν hai ideai hēmōn - our appearance.

Of the children - Youths; young men. Notes, [Dan
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004.md). The reference is, probably, to
the Chaldean youths who were trained up amidst the luxuries of the
court. It is possible, however, that the reference is to Hebrew youths
who were less scrupulous than Daniel and his companions.

And as thou seest, deal with thy servants - As the result shall be. That
is, let us be presented at court, and promoted or not, as the result of
our mode of living shall be. What the effect would have been if there
had been a failure, we are not informed. Whether it would have
endangered their lives, or whether it would have been merely a
forfeiture of the proffered honors and advantages, we have no means of
determining. It is evident that Daniel had no apprehension as to the
issue.

[Daniel 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">dan 1:14</span></span>

So he consented to them in this matter - Hebrew, "he heard them in this
thing." The experiment was such, since it was to be for so short a time,
that he ran little risk in the matter, as at the end of the ten days he
supposed that it would be easy to change their mode of diet if the trial
was unsuccessful.

[Daniel 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">dan 1:15</span></span>

And at the end of ten days their countenances appeared fairer - Hebrew,
"good;" that is, they appeared more beautiful and healthful. The
experiment was successful. There was no diminution of beauty, of vigour,
or of the usual indications of health. One of the results of a course of
temperance appears in the countenance, and it is among the wise
appointments of God that it should be so. He has so made us, that while
the other parts of the body may be protected from the gaze of men, it is
necessary that the "face" should be exposed. Hence, he has made the
countenance the principal scat of expression, for the chief muscles
which indicate expression have their location there. See the valuable
work of Sir Charles Bell on the "Anatomy of Expression," London, 1844.
Hence, there are certain marks of guilt and vice which always are
indicated in the countenance. God has so made us that the drunkard and
the glutton must proclaim their own guilt and shame.

The bloated face, the haggard aspect, the look of folly, the "heaviness
of the eye, the disposition to squint, and to see double, and a forcible
elevation of the eyebrow to counteract the dropping of the upper eyelid,
and preserve the eyes from closing," are all marks which God has
appointed to betray and expose the life of indulgence. "Arrangements are
made for these expressions in the very anatomy of the face, and no art
of man can prevent it." - Bell on the "Anatomy of Expression," p. 106.
God meant that if man "would" be intemperate he should himself proclaim
it to the world, and that his fellow-men should be apprised of his
guilt. This was intended to be one of the safeguards of virtue. The
young man who will be intemperate "knows" what the result must be. He is
apprised of it in the loathsome aspect of every drunkard whom he meets.
He knows that if he yields himself to indulgence in intoxicating drink,
he must soon proclaim it himself to the wide world.

No matter how beautiful, or fresh, or blooming, or healthful, he may now
be; no matter how bright the eye, or ruddy the cheek, or eloquent the
tongue; the eye, and the cheek, and the tongue will soon become indices
of his manner of life, and the loathsomeness and offensiveness of the
once beautiful and blooming countenance must pay the penalty of his
folly. And in like manner, and for the same reason, the countenance is
an indication of temperance and purity. The bright and steady eye, the
blooming cheek, the lips that eloquently or gracefully utter the
sentiments of virtue, proclaim the purity of the life, and are the
natural indices to our fellow-men that we live in accordance with the
great and benevolent laws of our nature, and are among the rewards of
temperance and virtue.

[Daniel 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">dan 1:16</span></span>

Thus Melzar took away the portion of their meat ... - Doubtless
permanently. The experiment had been satisfactory, and it was inferred
that if the course of temperance could be practiced for ten days without
unhappy results, there would be safety in suffering it to be continued.
We may remark on this:

I. That the experiment was a most important one, not only for the object
then immediately in view, but for furnishing lessons of permanent
instruction adapted to future times. It was worth one such trial, and it
was desirable to have one such illustration of the effect of temperance
recorded. There are so strong propensities in our nature to indulgence;
there are so many temptations set before the young; there is so much
that allures in a luxurious mode of life, and so much of conviviality
and happiness is supposed to be connected with the social glass, that it
was well to have a fair trial made, and that the result should be
recorded for the instruction of future times.

II\. It was especially desirable that the experiment should be made of
the effect of strict abstinence from the use of "wine." Distilled
liquors were indeed then unknown; but alcohol, the intoxicating
principle in all ardent spirits, then existed, as it does now, in wine,
and was then, as it is now, of the same nature as when found in other
substances. It was in the use of wine that the principal danger of
intemperance then lay; and it may be added, that in reference to a very
large class of persons of both sexes, it is in the use of wine that the
principal danger always lies. There are multitudes, especially of young
men, who are in little or no danger of becoming intemperate from the use
of the stronger kinds of intoxicating drinks. They would never "begin"
with them. But the use of "wine" is so respectable in the view of the
upper classes of society; it is deemed so essential to the banquet; it
constitutes so much, apparently, a mark of distinction, from the fact
that ordinarily only the rich can afford to indulge in it; its use is
regarded extensively as so proper for even refined and delicate females,
and is so often sanctioned by their participating in it; it is so
difficult to frame an argument against it that will be decisive; there
is so much that is plausible that may be said in favor or in
justification of its use, and it is so much sanctioned by the ministers
of religion, and by those of influence in the churches, that one of the
principal dangers of the young arises from the temptation to indulgence
in wine, and it was well that there should be a fair trial of the
comparative benefit of total abstinence. A trial could scarcely have
been made under better circumstances than in the case before us. There
was every inducement to indulgence which is ever likely to occur; there
was as much to make it a mere matter of "principle" to abstain from it
as can be found now in any circumstances, and the experiment was as
triumphant and satisfactory as could be desired.

III\. The result of the experiment.

\(a\) It was complete and satisfactory. "More" was accomplished in the
matter of the trial by abstinence than by indulgence. Those who
abstained were more healthful, more beautiful, more vigorous than the
others. And there was nothing miraculous - nothing that occurred in that
case which does not occur in similar cases. Sir John Chardin remarks,
respecting those whom he had seen in the East, "that the countenances of
the kechicks (monks) are in fact more rosy and smooth than those of
others; and that those who fast much, I mean the Armenians and the
Greeks, are, notwithstanding, very beautiful, sparkling with health,
with a clear and lively countenance." He also takes notice of the very
great abstemiousness of the Brahmins in the Indies, who lodge on the
ground, abstain from music, from all sorts of agreeable smells, who go
very meanly clothed, are almost always wet, either by going into water,
or by rain; "yet," says he, "I have seen also many of them very handsome
and healthful." Harmer's "Observa." ii. pp. 112, 113.

\(b\) The experiment has often been made, and with equal success, in
modern times, and especially since the commencement of the temperance
reformation, and an opportunity has been given of furnishing the most
decisive proofs of the effects of temperance in contrast with indulgence
in the use of wine and of other intoxicating drinks. This experiment has
been made on a wide scale, and with the same result. It is demonstrated,
as in the case of Daniel, that "more" will be secured of what men are so
anxious usually to obtain, and of what it is desirable to obtain, than
can be by indulgence.

\(1\) There will be "more" beauty of personal appearance. Indulgence in
intoxicating drinks leaves its traces on the countenance - the skin, the
eye, the nose, the whole expression - as God "meant" it should. See the
notes at [Dan 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#015.md). No one can hope to
retain beauty of complexion or countenance who indulges freely in the
use of intoxicating drinks.

\(2\) "More" clearness of mind and intellectual vigour can be secured by
abstinence than by indulgence. It is true that, as was often the case
with Byron and Burns, stimulating drinks may excite the mind to
brilliant temporary efforts; but the effect soon ceases, and the mind
makes a compensation for its over-worked powers by sinking down below
its proper level as it had been excited above. It will demand a penalty
in the exhausted energies, and in the incapacity for even its usual
efforts, and unless the exhausting stimulus be again applied, it cannot
rise even to its usual level, and when often applied the mind is
divested of "all" its elasticity and vigour; the physical frame loses
its power to endure the excitement; and the light of genius is put out,
and the body sinks to the grave. He who wishes to make the most of his
mind "in the long run," whatever genius he may be endowed with, will be
a temperate man. His powers will be retained uniformly at a higher
elevation, and they will maintain their balance and their vigour longer.

\(3\) the same is true in regard to everything which requires vigour of
body. The Roman soldier, who carried his eagle around the world, and who
braved the dangers of every clime - equally bold and vigorous, and
hardy, and daring amidst polar snows, and the burning sands of the
equator - was a stranger to intoxicating drinks. He was allowed only
vinegar and water, and his extraordinary vigour was the result of the
most abstemious fare. The wrestlers in the Olympic and Isthmian games,
who did as much to give suppleness, vigour, and beauty to the body, as
could be done by the most careful training, abstained from the use of
wine and all that would enervate. Since the temperance reformation
commenced in this land, the experiment has been made in every way
possible, and it has been "settled" that a man will do more work, and do
it better; that he can bear more fatigue, can travel farther, can better
endure the severity of cold in the winter, and of toil in the heat of
summer, by strict temperance, than he can if he indulges in the use of
intoxicating drinks. Never was the result of an experiment more uniform
than this has been; never has there been a case where the testimony of
those who have had an opportunity of witnessing it was more decided and
harmonious; never was there a question in regard to the effect of a
certain course on health in which the testimony of physicians has been
more uniform; and never has there been a question in regard to the
amount of labor which a man could do, on which the testimony of
respectable farmers, and master mechanics, and overseers of public
works, could be more decided.

\(4\) the full force of these remarks about temperance in general,
applies to the use of "wine." It was in respect to "wine" that the
experiment before us was made, and it is this which gives it, in a great
degree, its value and importance. Distilled spirits were then unknown,
but it was of importance that a fair experiment should be made of the
effect of abstinence from wine. The great danger of intemperance, taking
the world at large, has been, and is still, from the use of wine. This
danger affects particularly the upper classes in society and young men.
It is by the use of wine, in a great majority of instances, that the
peril commences, and that the habit of drinking is formed. Let it be
remembered, also, that the intoxicating principle is the same in wine as
in any other drink that produces intemperance. It is "alcohol" - the
same substance precisely, whether it be driven off by heat from wine,
beer, or cider, and condensed by distillation, or whether it remain in
these liquids without being distilled. It is neither more nor less
intoxicating in one form than it is in the other. It is only more
condensed and concentrated in one case than in the other, better capable
of preservation, and more convenient for purposes of commerce. Every
"principle," therefore, which applies to the temperance cause at all,
applies to the use of wine; and every consideration derived from health,
beauty, vigour, length of days, reputation, property, or salvation,
which should induce a young man to abstain from ardent spirits at all
should induce him to abstain, as Daniel did, from the use of wine.

[Daniel 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 1:17</span></span>

As for these four children - On the word "children," see the notes at
[Dan 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004.md). Compare [Dan
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#006.md).

God gave them knowledge and skill - See the notes at [Dan
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#009.md). There is no reason to suppose
that in the "knowledge and skill" here referred to, it is meant to be
implied that there was anything miraculous, or that there was any direct
inspiration. Inspiration was evidently confined to Daniel, and pertained
to what is spoken of under the head of "visions and dreams." The fact
that "all" this was to be attributed to God as his gift, is in
accordance with the common method of speaking in the Scriptures; and it
is also in accordance with "fact," that "all" knowledge is to be traced
to God. See [Exo 31:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#002.md). God formed
the intellect; he preserves the exercise of reason; he furnishes us
instructors; he gives us clearness of perception; he enables us to take
advantage of bright thoughts and happy suggestions which occur in our
own minds, as much as he sends rain, and dew, and sunshine on the fields
of the farmer, and endows him with skill. Compare [Isa
28:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#026.md), "For his God doth instruct
him." The knowledge and skill which we may acquire, therefore, should be
as much attributed to God as the success of the farmer should. Compare
[Job 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#008.md), "For there is a spirit in
man, and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding." In
the case before us, there is no reason to doubt that the natural powers
of these young men had been diligently applied during the three years of
their trial [Dan 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#005.md), and under the
advantages of a strict course of temperance; and that the knowledge here
spoken of was the result of such an application to their studies. On the
meaning of the words "knowledge" and "skill" here, see the notes at [Dan
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004.md).

In all learning and wisdom - See also the notes at [Dan
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004.md).

And Daniel had understanding - Showing that in that respect there was a
special endowment in his case; a kind of knowledge imparted which could
be communicated only by special inspiration. The margin is, "he made
Daniel understand." The margin is in accordance with the Hebrew, but the
sense is the same.

In all visions - On the word rendered "visions" - חזון châzôn - see the
notes at [Isa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md), and the
introduction to Isaiah, Section 7. (4). It is a term frequently employed
in reference to prophecy, and designates the usual method by which
future events were made known. The prophet was permitted to see those
events "as if" they were made to pass before the eye, and to describe
them "as if" they were objects of sight. Here the word seems to be used
to denote all supernatural appearances; all that God permitted him to
see that in any way shadowed forth the future. It would seem that men
who were not inspired were permitted occasionally to behold such
supernatural appearances, though they were not able to interpret them.
Thus their attention would be particularly called to them, and they
would be prepared to admit the truth of what the interpreter
communicated to them. Compare Dan. 4; [Dan
5:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#005.md); [Gen
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#005.md); [Gen
41:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#001.md). Daniel was so endowed that he
could interpret the meaning of these mysterious appearances, and thus
convey important messages to men. The same endowment had been conferred
on Joseph when in Egypt. See the passages referred to in Genesis.

And dreams - One of the ways by which the will of God was anciently
communicated to men. See Introduction to Isaiah, Section 7. (2), and the
notes at [Job 33:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#014.md). Daniel, like
Joseph before him, was supernaturally endowed to explain these messages
which God sent to men, or to unfold these preintimations of coming
events. This was a kind of knowledge which the Chaldeans particularly
sought, and on which they especially prided themselves; and it was
important, in order to "stain the pride of all human glory," and to make
"the wisdom of the wise" in Babylon to be seen to be comparative
"folly," to endow one man from the land of the prophets in the most
ample manner with this knowledge, as it was important to do the same
thing at the court of Pharaoh by the superior endowments of Joseph [Gen
41:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#008.md).

[Daniel 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">dan 1:18</span></span>

Now at the end of the days ... - After three years. See [Dan
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#005.md).

The prince of the eunuchs brought them in - Daniel, his three friends,
and the others who had been selected and trained for the same purpose.

[Daniel 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 1:19</span></span>

And the king communed with them - Hebrew, "spake with them." Probably he
conversed with them on the points which had constituted the principal
subjects of their studies; or he "examined" them. It is easy to imagine
that this must have been to these young men a severe ordeal.

And among them all was found none like Daniel ... - Daniel and his three
friends had pursued a course of strict temperance; they had come to
their daily task with clear heads and pure hearts - free from the
oppression and lethargy of surfeit, and the excitement of wine; they had
prosecuted their studies in the enjoyment of fine health, and with the
buoyousness and elasticity of spirit produced by temperance, and they
now showed the result of such a course of training. Young men of
temperance, other things being equal, will greatly surpass others in
their preparation for the duties of life in any profession or calling.

Therefore stood they before the king - It is not said, indeed, that the
others were not permitted also to stand before the monarch, but the
object of the historian is to trace the means by which "these youths"
rose to such eminence and virtue. It is clear, however, that whatever
may have been the result on the others, the historian means to say that
these young men rose to higher eminence than they did, and were
permitted to stand nearer the throne. The phrase "stood before the
king," is one which denotes elevated rank. They were employed in
honorable offices at the court, and received peculiar marks of the royal
favor.

[Daniel 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">dan 1:20</span></span>

And in all matters of wisdom and understanding - Margin, "of." The
Hebrew is, "Everything of wisdom of understanding." The Greek, "In all
things of wisdom "and" knowledge." The meaning is, in everything which
required peculiar wisdom to understand and explain it. The points
submitted were such as would appropriately come before the minds of the
sages and magicians who were employed as counselors at court.

He found them ten times better - Better counselors, better informed.
Hebrew, "ten "hands" above the magicians;" that is, ten "times," or
"many" times. In this sense the word "ten" is used in [Gen
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#007.md), [Gen
31:41](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#041.md); [Num
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#022.md); [Neh
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#012.md); [Job
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#003.md). They greatly surpassed them.

Than all the magicians - Greek, τοὺς ἐπαοιδοὺς tous epaoidous. The Greek
word means, "those singing to;" then those who propose to heal the sick
by singing; then those who practice magical arts or incantations -
particularly with the idea of charming with songs; and then those who
accomplish anything surpassing human power by mysterious and
supernatural means. - Passow. The Hebrew word (הרטמים chareṭummı̂ym),
occurs only in the following places in the Scriptures, in all of which
it is rendered "magicians:" - [Gen
41:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#008.md), [Gen
41:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#024.md); [Exo
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#011.md), [Exo
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#022.md); [Exo
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#007) (3), 18 (14), 19 (15.md); [Exo
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#011.md); [Dan
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#020.md); [Dan
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002.md). From this it appears that it
applied only to the magicians in Egypt and in Babylon, and doubtless
substantially the same class of persons is referred to. It is found only
in the plural number, "perhaps" implying that they formed companies, or
that they were always associated together, so that different persons
performed different parts in their incantations.

The word is defined by Gesenius to mean, "Sacred scribes, skilled in the
sacred writings or hieroglyphics - ἱερογραμματεῖς hierogrammateis - a
class of Egyptian priests." It is, according to him (Lex.), of Hebrew
origin, and is derived from חרט chereṭ, "stylus" - an instrument of
writing, and the formative מ (m). It is not improbable, he suggests,
that the Hebrews with these letters imitated a similar Egyptian word.
Prof. Stuart (in loc.) says that the word would be correctly translated
"pen-men," and supposes that it originally referred to those who were
"busied with books and writing, and skilled in them." It is evident that
the word is not of Persian origin, since it was used in Egypt long
before it occurs in Daniel. A full and very interesting account of the
Magians and their religion may be found in Creuzer, "Mythologie und
Symbolik," i. pp. 187-234. Herodotus mentions the "Magi" as a distinct
people, i. 101.

The word "Mag" or "Mog" (from the μάγοι magoi of the Greeks, and the
"magi" of the Romans) means, properly, a "priest;" and at a very early
period the names "Chaldeans" and "Magi" were interchangeable, and both
were regarded as of the same class. - Creuzer, i. 187, note. They were
doubtless, at first, a class of priests among the Medes and Persians,
who were employed, among other things, in the search for wisdom; who
were connected with pagan oracles; who claimed acquaintance with the
will of the gods, and who professed to have the power, therefore, of
making known future events, by explaining dreams, visions, preternatural
appearances, etc. The Magi formed one of the six tribes into which the
Medes were formerly divided (Herodotus, i. 101), but on the downfall of
the Median empire they continued to retain at the court of the conqueror
a great degree of power and authority. "The learning of the Magi was
connected with astrology and enchantment, in which they were so
celebrated that their name was applied to all orders of magicians and
enchanters." - Anthon, "Class. Dic." These remarks may explain the
reason why the word "magician" comes to be applied to this class of men,
though we are not to suppose that the persons referred to in Genesis and
Exodus, under the appellation of the Hebrew name there given to them
(הרטמים chareṭummı̂ym), or those found in Babylon, referred to in the
passage before us, to whom the same name is applied, were of that class
of priests.

The name "magi," or "magician," was so extended as to embrace "all" who
made pretensions to the kind of knowledge for which the magi were
distinguished, and hence, came also to be synonymous with the
"Chaldeans," who were also celebrated for this. Compare the notes at
[Dan 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002.md). In the passage before us it
cannot be determined with certainty, that the persons were of "Magian"
origin, though it is possible, as in [Dan
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002.md), they are distinguished from the
Chaldeans. All that is certainly meant is, that they were persons who
laid claim to the power of diving into future events; of explaining
mysteries; of interpreting dreams; of working by enchantments, etc.

And astrologers - - האשׁפים hâ'ashâpı̂ym. This word is rendered by the
Septuagint, μάγους magous, "magians." So also in the Vulgate, "magos."
The English word "astrologer" denotes "one who professes to foretell
future events by the aspects and situation of the stars." - Webster. The
Hebrew word - אשׁפים 'ashâpı̂ym - according to Gesenius, means
"enchanters, magicians." It is derived, probably, from the obsolete root
אשׁף 'âshap, "to cover," "to conceal," and refers to those who were
devoted to the practice of occult arts, and to the cultivation of
recondite and cabalistic sciences. It is supposed by some philologists
to have given rise, by dropping the initial א to the Greek σοφος sophos,
"wise, wise man," and the Persian sophi, an epithet of equivalent
import. See Gesenius on the word, and compare Bush on [Dan
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002.md). The word is found only in Daniel,
[Dan 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#020.md); [Dan
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002.md), [Dan
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#010.md), [Dan
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#027.md); [Dan
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#007) (4.md); [Dan
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#007.md), [Dan
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#011.md), [Dan
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#015.md), in every instance rendered
"astrologer" and "astrologers." There is no evidence, however, that the
science of astrology enters into the meaning of the word, or that the
persons referred to attempted to pracrise divination by the aid of the
stars. It is to be regretted that the term "astrologer" should have been
employed in our translation, as it conveys an intimation which is not
found in the original. It is, indeed, in the highest degree probable,
that a part of their pretended wisdom consisted in their ability to cast
the fates of men by the conjunctions and opposition of the stars, but
this is not necessarily implied in the word. Prof. Stuart renders it
"enchanters."

In all his realm - Not only in the capital, but throughout the kingdom.
These arts were doubtless practiced extensively elsewhere, but it is
probable that the most skillful in them would be assembled at the
capital.

[Daniel 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">dan 1:21</span></span>

And Daniel continued even unto the first year of king Cyrus - When the
proclamation was issued by him to rebuild the temple at Jerusalem, [Ezr
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001.md). That is, he continued in
influence and authority at different times during that period, and, of
course, during the whole of the seventy years captivity. It is not
necessarily implied that he did not "live" longer, or even that he
ceased then to have influence and authority at court, but the object of
the writer is to show that, during that long and eventful period, he
occupied a station of influence until the captivity was accomplished,
and the royal order was issued for rebuilding the temple. He was among
the first of the captives that were taken to Babylon, and he lived to
see the end of the captivity - "the joyful day of Jewish freedom." -
Prof. Stuart. It is commonly believed that, when the captives returned,
he remained in Chaldea, probably detained by his high employments in the
Persian empire, and that he died either at Babylon or at Shushan.
Compare the Introduction Section I.

Practical Remarks

In view of the exposition given of this chapter, the following remarks
may be made:

\(1\) There is in every period of the world, and in every place, much
obscure and buried talent that might be cultivated and brought to light,
as there are many gems in earth and ocean that are yet undiscovered. See
the notes at [Dan 1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001.md). Among these
captive youths - prisoners of war - in a foreign land, and as yet
unknown, there was most rich and varied talent - talent that was
destined yet to shine at the court of the most magnificent monarchy of
the ancient world, and to be honored as among the brightest that the
world has seen. And so in all places and at all times, there is much
rich and varied genius which might shine with great brilliancy, and
perform important public services, if it were cultivated and allowed to
develope itself on the great theater of human affairs. Thus, in obscure
rural retreats there may be bright gems of intellect; in the low haunts
of vice there may be talent that would charm the world by the beauty of
song or the power of eloquence; among slaves there may be mind which, if
emancipated, would take its place in the brightest constellations of
genius. The great endowments of Moses as a lawgiver, a prophet, a
profound statesman, sprang from an enslaved people, as those of Daniel
did; and it is not too much to say that the brightest talent of the
earth has been found in places of great obscurity, and where, but for
some remarkable dispensation of Providence, it might have remained
forever unknown. This thought has been immortalized by Gray:

"Full many a gem of purest ray serene,

The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear;

Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,

And waste its sweetness on the desert air.

"Some village Hampden, that with dauntless breast

The little tyrant of his fields withstood;

Some mute inglorious Milton here may rest.

Some Cromwell, guiltless of his country's blood."

There is at any time on the earth talent enough created for all that
there is to be done in any generation; and there is always enough for
talent to accomplish if it were employed in the purposes for which it
was originally adapted. There need be at no time any wasted or
unoccupied mind; and there need be no great and good plan that should
fail for the want of talent fitted to accomplish it, if what actually
exists on the earth were called into action.

\(2\) He does a great service to the world who seeks out such talent,
and gives it an opportunity to accomplish what it is fitted to, by
furnishing it the means of an education, [Dan
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003.md). Nebuchadnezzar, unconsciously,
and doubtless undesignedly, did a great service to mankind by his
purpose to seek out the talent of the Hebrew captives, and giving it an
opportunity to expand and to ripen into usefulness. Daniel has taken his
place among the prophets and statesmen of the world as a man of rare
endowments, and of equally rare integrity of character. He has, under
the leading of the Divine Spirit, done more than most other prophets to
lift the mysterious veil which shrouds the future; more than "could"
have been done by the penetrating sagacity of all the Burkes, the
Cannings, and the Metternichs of the world. So far as human appearances
go, all this might have remained in obscurity, if it had not been for
the purpose of the Chaldean monarch to bring forward into public notice
the obscure talent which lay hid among the Hebrew captives. He always
does a good service to mankind who seeks out bright and promising
genius, and who gives it the opportunity of developing itself with
advantage on the great theater of human affairs.

\(3\) We cannot but admire the arrangements of Providence by which this
was done. See the notes at [Dan 1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001.md).
This occurred in connection with the remarkable purpose of a pagan
monarch - a man who, perhaps more than any other pagan ruler, has
furnished an illustration of the truth that "the king's heart is in the
hand of the Lord." "That purpose was, to raise to eminence and influence
the talent that might be found among the Hebrew captives." There can be
no doubt that the hand of God was in this; that there was a secret
Divine influence on his mind, unknown to him, which secured this result;
and that, while he was aiming at one result, God was designing to secure
another. There was thus a double influence on his mind:

\(a\) what arose from the purpose of the monarch himself, originated by
considerations of policy, or contemplating the aggrandizement and
increased splendor of his court; and

\(b\) the secret and silent influence of God, shaping the plans of the
monarch to the ends which "He" had in view. Compare the notes at [Isa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005.md) following.

\(4\) as it is reasonable to suppose that these young men had been
trained up in the strict principles of religion and temperance [Dan
1:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#008.md), the case before us furnishes
an interesting illustration of the temptations to which those who are
early trained in the ways of piety are often exposed. Every effort seems
to have been made to induce them to abandon the principles in which they
had been educated, and there was a strong probability that those efforts
would be successful.

\(a\) They were among strangers, far away from the homes of their youth,
and surrounded by the allurements of a great city.

\(b\) Everything was done which could be done to induce them to "forget"
their own land and the religion of their fathers.

\(c\) They were suddenly brought into distinguished notice; they
attracted the attention of the great, and had the prospect of
associating with princes and nobles in the most magnificent court on
earth. They had been selected on account of their personal beauty and
their intellectual promise, and were approached, therefore, in a form of
temptation to which youths are commonly most sensitive, and to which
they are commonly most liable to yield.

\(d\) They were far away from the religious institutions of their
country; from the public services of the sanctuary; from the temple; and
from all those influences which had been made to bear upon them in early
life. It was a rare virtue which could, in these circumstances,
withstand the power of such temptations.

\(5\) young men, trained in the ways of religion and in the habits of
temperance, are often now exposed to similar temptations. They visit the
cities of a foreign country, or the cities in their own land. They are
surrounded by strangers. They are far away from the sanctuary to which
in early life they were conducted by their parents, and in which they
were taught the truths of religion. The eye of that unslumbering
vigilance which was upon them in their own land, or in the country
neighborhood where their conduct was known to all, is now withdrawn. No
one will know it if they visit the theater; no one will see them who
will make report if they are found in the gambling room, or the place of
dissipation. In those new scenes new temptations are around them. They
may be noticed, flattered, caressed. They may be invited to places by
the refined and the fashionable, from which, when at home, they would
have recoiled. Or, it may be, prospects of honor and affluence may open
upon them, and in the whirl of business or pleasure, they may be under
the strongest temptations to forget the lessons of early virtue, and to
abandon the principles of the religion in which they were trained.
Thousands of young men are ruined in circumstances similar to those in
which these youths were placed in Babylon, and amidst temptations much
less formidable titan those which encompassed them; and it is a rare
virtue which makes a young man safe amidst the temptations to which he
is exposed in a great city, or in a distant land.

\(6\) we have in this chapter an instructive instance of the value of
early training in the principles of religion and temperance. There can
be no doubt that these young men owed their safety and their future
success wholly to this. Parents, therefore, should be encouraged to
train their sons in the strictest principles of religion and virtue.
Seed thus sown will not be lost. In a distant land, far away from home,
from a parent's eye, from the sanctuary of God; in the midst of
temptations, when surrounded by flatterers, by the gay and by the
irreligious, such principles will be a safeguard to them which nothing
else can secure, and will save them when otherwise they would be
engulphed in the vortex of irreligion and dissipation. The best service
which a parent can render to a son, is to imbue his mind thoroughly with
the principles of temperance and religion.

\(7\) we may see the value of a purpose of entire abstinence from the
use of "wine," [Dan 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#008.md). Daniel
resolved that he would not make use of it as a beverage. His purpose, it
would seem, was decided, though he meant to accomplish it by mild and
persuasive means if possible. There were good reasons for the formation
of such a purpose then, and those reasons are not less weighty now. He
never had occasion to regret the formation of such a purpose; nor has
anyone who has formed a similar resolution ever had occasion to regret
it. Among the reasons for the formation of such a resolution, the
following may be suggested:

\(a\) A fixed resolution in regard to the course which one will pursue;
to the kind of life which he will live; to the principles on which he
will act, is of inestimable value in a young man. Our confidence in a
man is just in proportion as we have evidence that he has formed a
steady purpose of virtue, and that he has sufficient strength of
resolution to keep it.

\(b\) The same reasons exist for adopting a resolution of abstinence in
regard to the use of wine, which exist for adopting it in relation to
the use of ardent spirits, for

\(1\) The intoxicating principle in wine or other fermented liquors is
precisely the same as in ardent spirits. It is the result of
"fermentation," not of "distillation," and undergoes no change by
distillation. The only effect of that chemical process is to drive it
off by heat, condense, and collect it in a form better adapted to
commerce or to preservation, but the alcoholic principle is precisely
the same in wine as in distilled liquors.

\(2\) Intoxication itself is the same thing, whether produced by
fermented liquors or by distilled spirits. It produces the same effect
on the body, on the mind, on the affections. A man who becomes
intoxicated on wine - as he easily may - is in precisely the same
condition, so far as intoxication is produced, as he who becomes
intoxicated on distilled liquors.

\(3\) There is the same kind of "danger" of becoming intemperate in the
use of the one as of the other. The man who habitually uses wine is as
certainly in danger of becoming a drunkard as he who indulges in the use
of distilled liquors. The danger, too, arises from the same source. It
arises from the fact that he who indulges once will feel induced to
indulge again; that a strong and peculiar craving is produced for
stimulating liquors; that the body is left in such a state that it
demands a repetition of the stimulus; that it is a law in regard to
indulgence in this kind of drinks, that an increased "quantity" is
demanded to meet the exhausted state of the system; and that the demand
goes on in this increased ratio until there is no power of control, and
the man becomes a confirmed inebriate. All these laws operate in regard
to the use of wine as really as to the use of any other intoxicating
drinks; and, therefore, there is the same reason for the adoption of a
resolution to abstain from all alike.

\(4\) The temptations are often "greater" in relation to wine than to
any other kind of intoxicating drinks. There is a large class of persons
in the community who are in comparatively little danger of becoming
intemperate from any other cause than this. This remark applies
particularly to young men of wealth; to those who move in the more
elevated circles; to those who are in college, and to those who are
preparing for the learned professions. They are in peculiar danger from
this quarter, because it is regarded as genteel to drink a glass of
wine; because they are allured by the example of professed Christians,
of ministers of the gospel, and of ladies; and because they axe often in
circumstances in which it would not be regarded as respectable or
respectful to decline it.

\(c\) Third reason for adopting such a resolution is, that it is the
only security that anyone can have that he will not become a drunkard.
No one who indulges at all in the use of intoxicating liquors can have
any "certainty" that he will not yet become a confirmed inebriate. Of
the great multitudes who have been, and who are drunkards, there are
almost none who "meant" to sink themselves to that wretched condition.
They have become intemperate by indulging in the social glass when they
thought themselves safe, and they continued the indulgence until it was
too late to recover themselves from ruin. He who is in the habit of
drinking at all can have no "security" that he may not yet be all that
the poor drunkard now is. But he "will" be certainly safe from this evil
if he adopts the purpose of total abstinence, and steadfastly adheres to
it. Whatever other dangers await him, he will be secure against this;
whatever other calamities he may experience, he is sure that he will
escape all those that are caused by intemperance.

\(8\) We have in this chapter a most interesting illustration of the
"value" of temperance in "eating," [Dan
1:9-17](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#009.md). There are laws of our nature
relating to the quantity and quality of food which can no more be
violated with impunity than any other of the laws of God; and yet those
laws are probably more frequently violated than any other. There are
more persons intemperate in the use of food than in the use of drink,
and probably more diseases engendered, and more lives cut short, by
improper indulgence in eating than in drinking. At the same time it is a
more base, low, gross, and beastly passion. A drunkard is very often the
wreck of a generous and noble-minded nature. He was large-hearted, open,
free, liberal, and others took advantage of his generosity of
disposition, and led him on to habits of intoxication. But there is
nothing noble or generous in the gourmand. He approximates more nearly
to the lowest forms of the brutal creation than any other human being;
and if there is any man who should be looked on with feelings of
unutterable loathing, it is he who wastes his vigour, and destroys his
health, by gross indulgence in eating. There is almost no sin that God
speaks of in tones of more decided abhorrence than the sin of
"gluttony." Compare [Deu 21:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#020.md);
[Psa 141:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#004.md); [Pro
23:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#001.md), [Pro
23:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#020.md); [Luk
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019.md); [Luk
21:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#034.md).

\(9\) We have, in the close of the chapter before us, a most interesting
illustration of the effect of an early course of strict temperance on
the future character and success in life, [Dan
1:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#017.md). The trial in the case of
these young men was fairly made. It was continued through three years; a
period long enough for a "fair" trial; a period long enough to make it
an interesting example to young men who are pursuing a course of
literary studies, who are preparing to enter one of the learned
professions, or who are qualifying themselves for a life of mechanical
or agricultural pursuits. In the case of these young men, they were
strictly on "probation," and the result of their probation was seen in
the success which attended them when they passed the severe examination
before the monarch [Dan 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#019.md), and in
the honors which they reached at his court, [Dan
1:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#019.md). To make this case applicable
to other young men, and useful to them, we may notice two things: the
fact that every young man is on probation; and the effect of an early
course of temperance in securing the object of that probation.

\(a\) Every young man is on probation; that is, his future character and
success are to be determined by what he is when a youth.

\(1\) all the great interests of the world are soon to pass into the
hands of the young. They who now possess the property, and fill the
offices of the land, will pass away. Whatever there is that is valuable
in liberty, science, art, or religion, will pass into the hands of those
who are now young. They will preside in the seminaries of learning; will
sit down on the benches of justice; will take the vacated seats of
senators; will occupy the pulpits in the churches; will be entrusted
with all the offices of honor and emolument; will be ambassadors to
foreign courts; and will dispense the charities of the land, and carry
out and complete the designs of Christian benevolence. There is not an
interest of liberty, religion, or law, which will not soon be committed
to them.

\(2\) The world is favorably disposed toward young men, and they who are
now entrusted with these great interests, and who are soon to leave
them, are ready calmly to commit them to the guardianship of the rising
generation, as soon as they have the assurance that they are qualified
to receive the trust. They, therefore, watch with intense solicitude the
conduct of those to whom so great interests are so soon to be committed

\(3\) Early virtue is indispensable to a favorable result of the
probation of young men. A merchant demands evidence of integrity and
industry in a young man before he will admit him to share his business,
or will give him credit; and the same thing is true respecting a farmer,
mechanic, physician, lawyer, or clergyman. No young man can hope to have
the confidence of others, or to succeed in his calling, who does not
give evidence that he is qualified for success by a fair probation or
trial.

\(4\) Of no young man is it "presumed" that he is qualified to be
entrusted with these great and momentous interests until he has had a
fair trial. There is no such confidence in the integrity of young men,
or in their tendencies to virtue, or in their native endowments, that
the world is "willing" to commit great interests to them without an
appropriate probation. No advantage of birth or blood can secure this;
and no young man should presume that the world will be ready to confide
in him until he has shown that he is qualified for the station to which
he aspires.

\(5\) Into this probation, through which every young man is passing, the
question of "temperance" enters perhaps more deeply than anything else
respecting character. With reference to his habits on this point, every
young man is watched with aft eagle eye, and his character is well
understood, when perhaps he least suspects it. The public cannot be
deceived on this point, and every young man may be assured that there is
an eye of unslumbering vigilance upon him.

\(b\) The effect of an early course of temperance on the issue of this
probation. This is seen in the avoidance of a course of life which would
certainly blast every hope; and in its positive influence on the future
destiny.

1\. The avoidance of certain things which would blast every hope which a
young man could cherish. There are certain evils which a young man will
certainly avoid by a course of strict temperance, which would otherwise
certainly come upon him. They are such as these:

\(a\) Poverty, as arising from this source. He may, indeed, be poor if
he is temperate. He may lose his health, or may meet with losses, or may
be unsuccessful in business; but he is certain that he will never be
made poor from intemperance. Nine-tenths of the poverty in the community
is caused by this vice; nine-tenths of all who are in almshouses are
sent there as the result of it; but from all this he will be certain
that "he" will be saved. There is a great difference, if a man is poor,
between being such as the result of a loss of health, or other
Providential dispensations, and being such as the result of
intemperance.

\(b\) He will be saved from committing "crime" from this cause. About
ninetenths of the crimes that are committed are the results of
intoxicating drinks, and by a course of temperance a man is certain that
he will be saved from the commission of all those crimes. Yet if not
temperate, no man has any security that he will not commit any one of
them. There is nothing in himself to save him from the very worst of
them; and every young man who indulges in the intoxicating cup should
reflect that he has no security that he will not be led on to commit the
most horrid crimes which ever disgrace humanity.

\(c\) He will certainly be saved from the drunkard's death. He will
indeed die. He may die young, for, though temperate, he may be cut down
in the vigour of his days. But there is all the difference imaginable
between dying as a drunkard, and dying in the ordinary course of nature.
It would be a sufficient inducement for anyone to sign a temperance
pledge, and to adhere to it, if there were no other, that he might avoid
the horrors of a death by "delirium tremens," and be saved from the
loathsomeness of a drunkard's grave. It is much for a young man to be
able to say as he enters on life, and looks out on the future with
solicitude as to what is to come, "Whatever may await me in the unknown
future, of this one thing I am certain; I shall never be poor, and
haggard, and wretched, as the drunkard is. I shall never commit the
crimes to which drunkenness prompts. I shall never experience the
unutterable horrors of "delirium tremens." I shall never die the death
of unequalled wretchedness caused by a "mania a potu." Come what may, I
see, on the threshold of life, that I am to be free from the "worst"
evils to which man is ever exposed. If I am poor, I will not be poor as
the victim of intemperance is. If I die early, the world will not feel
it is benefited by my removal, and my friends will not go forth to my
grave with the unutterable anguish which a parent has who follows a
drunken son to the tomb."

2\. A course of temperance will have a direct and positive effect on the
issue of such a probation. So it had in the case of the young men in the
chapter before us; and so it will have in every case. Its effect will be
seen in the beauty, and healthfulness, and vigour of the bodily frame;
in the clearness of the intellect, and the purity of the heart; in
habits of industry, in general integrity of life, and in rendering it
more probable that the soul will be saved. In no respect whatever will a
steadfast adherence to the principles of temperance injure any young
man; in every respect, it may be the means of promoting his interests in
the present life, and of securing his final happiness in the world to
come. Why, then, should any young man hesitate about forming such a
resolution as Daniel did [Job 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#008.md), and
about expressing, in every proper way, in the most decided manner, his
determined purpose to adhere through life to the strictest principles of
temperance?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 2](dan002.md)

</div>
