<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan001)  [Next](dan003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 2:0</span></span>

Section I. - Authenticity of the Chapter

The objections to the authenticity and credibility of this chapter are
not numerous or important.

I. The first that is alleged, by Bertholdt (Com. pp. 192, 193), is
substantially this: "that if the account here is true, the records of
ancient times could not exhibit a more finished tyrant than
Nebuchadnezzar was, if he doomed so many persons to death, on so slight
and foolish an occasion, [Dan 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#005).
This cruelty, it is said, is wholly contrary to the general character of
Nebuchadnezzar as it is reported to us, and wholly incredible. It is
further said, that, though it was common in the East to trust in dreams,
and though the office of interpreting them was an honorable office, yet
no one was so unreasonable, or could be, as to require the interpreter
to reveal the dream itself when it was forgotten. The proper office of
the interpreter, it is said, was to interpret the dream, not to tell
what the dream was."

To this objection, which seems to have considerable plausibility, it may
be replied:

\(1\) Much reliance was placed on "dreams" in ancient times, alike among
the Hebrews and in the pagan world. The case of Pharaoh will at once
occur to the mind; and it need not be said that men everywhere relied on
dreams, and inquired earnestly respecting them, whether they "might" not
be the appointed means of communication with the spiritual world, and of
disclosing what was to occur in the future. There can be no objection,
therefore, to the supposition that this pagan monarch, Nebuchadnezzar,
felt all the solicitude which he is reported to have done respecting the
dream which he had. It may be further added, that in the dream itself
there is nothing improbable as a dream, for it has all the
characteristics of those mysterious operations of the mind; and, if God
ever communicated his will by a dream, or made known future events in
this way, there is no absurdity in supposing that he would thus
communicate what was to come, to him who was at that time at the head of
the empires of the earth, and who was the king over the first of those
kingdoms which were to embrace the world's history for so many ages.

\(2\) There is no improbability in supposing that a dream would vanish
from the distinct recollection, or that if it had vanished, the mind
would be troubled by some vague recollection or impression in regard to
it. This often occurs in our dreams now, as in the indistinct
recollection that we have had a pleasant or a frightful dream, when we
are wholly unable to recal the dream itself. This often occurs, too,
when we would be "glad" to recover the dream if we could, but when no
effort that we can make will recal its distinct features to our minds.

\(3\) There was, really, nothing that was unreasonable, absurd, or
tyrannical in the demand which Nebuchadnezzar made on the astrologers,
that they should recal the dream itself, and then interpret it.
Doubtless he could recollect it if they would suggest it, or at least he
could so far recollect it as to prevent their imposing on him: for
something like this constantly occurs in the operation of our own minds.
When we have forgotten a story, or a piece of history, though we could
not ourselves recal it, yet when it is repeated to us, we can then
distinctly recollect it, and can perceive that that is the same
narrative, for it agrees with all our impressions in regard to it.
Furthermore, though it was not understood to be a part of the office of
an interpreter of dreams to "recal" the dream if it had vanished from
the mind, yet Nebuchadnezzar reasoned correctly, that if they could
"interpret" the dream they ought to be presumed to be able to tell what
it was. The one required no more sagacity than the other: and if they
were, as they pretended to be, under the inspiration of the gods in
interpreting a dream, it was fair to presume that, under the same
inspiration, they could tell what it was. Compare the notes at [Dan
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#005). No objection, then, can lie
against the authenticity of this chapter from any supposed absurdity in
the demand of Nebuchadnezzar. It was not only strictly in accordance
with all the just principles of reasoning in the case, but was in
accordance with what might be expected from an arbitrary monarch who was
accustomed to exact obedience in all things.

\(4\) what is here said of the threatening of Nebuchadnezzar [Dan
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#005), accords with the general traits
of his character as history has preserved them. He had in him the
elements of cruelty and severity of the highest order, especially when
his will was not immediately complied with. In proof of this, we need
only refer to his cruel treatment of the king Zedekiah, when Jerusalem
was taken: "So they took the king, and brought him to the king of
Babylon to Riblah: and they gave judgment upon him. And they slew the
sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, and put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and
bound him with fetters of brass, and brought him to Babylon," [Kg2
25:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#006) : compare also, in [Kg2
25:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#018), the account of his slaying
the large number of persons that were taken by Nebuzar-adan, captain of
the guard, and brought by him to the king in Babylon. These were slain
in cold blood by order of Nebuchadnezzar himself. These facts make it
every way probable that, in a fit of passion, he would not hesitate to
threaten the astrologers with death if they did not comply at once with
his will. Compare [Jer 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#005),
following; [Jer 52:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#009). The truth
was, that though Nebuchadnezzar had some good qualities, and was
religious "in his way," yet he had all the usual characteristics of an
Oriental despot. He was a man of strong passions, and was a man who
would never hesitate in carrying out the purposes of an arbitrary, a
determined, and a stubborn will.

II\. A second objection made by Bertholdt, which may demand a moment's
notice, is, substantially, that the account bears the mark of a later
hand, for the purpose of conferring a higher honor on Daniel, and making
what he did appear the more wonderful: pp. 62, 63, 193-196. The
supposition of Bertholdt is, that the original account was merely that
Nebuchadnezzar required of the interpreter to explain the sense of the
dream, but that, in order to show the greatness of Daniel, the author of
this book, long after the affair occurred, added the circumstance that
Nebuchadnezzar required of them to make the "dream" known as well as the
"interpretation," and that the great superiority of Daniel was shown by
his being able at once to do this.

As this objection, however, is not based on any historical grounds, and
as it is throughout mere conjecture, it is not necessary to notice it
further. Nothing is gained by the conjecture; no difficulty is relieved
by it; nor is there any real difficulty "to be" relieved by any such
supposition. The narrative, as we have it, has, as we have seen, no
intrinsic improbability, nor is there anything in it which is contrary
to the well-known character of Nebuchadnezzar.

III\. A third objection to the authenticity of the chapter, which
deserves to be noticed, is urged by Luderwald, p. 40, following, and
Bleek, p. 280, that this whole narrative has a strong resemblance to the
account of the dreams of Pharaoh, and the promotion of Joseph at the
court of Egypt, and was apparently made up from that, or copied from it.

But to this we may reply,

\(a\) that, if either happened, there is no more improbability in
supposing that it should happen to Daniel in Babylon than to Joseph in
Egypt; and, taken as separate and independent histories, neither of them
is improbable.

\(b\) There is so much diversity in the two cases as to show that the
one is not copied from the other. They agree, indeed, in several
circumstances: - in the fact that the king of Egypt and the king of
Babylon had each a dream; in the fact that Joseph and Daniel were
enabled to interpret the dream; in the fact that they both ascribed the
ability to do this, not to themselves, but to God; and in the fact that
they were both raised to honor, as a consequence of their being able to
interpret the dream. But in nothing else do they agree. The dreams
themselves; the occasion; the explanation; the result; the bearing on
future events - in these, and in numerous other things, they differ
entirely. It may be added also, that if the one had been copied from the
other, it is probable that there would have been some undesigned
allusion by which it could be known that the writer of the one had the
other before him, and that he was framing his own narrative from that.
But, as a matter of fact, there are no two records in history that have
more the marks of being independent and original narratives of real
transactions, than the account of Joseph in Egypt, and of Daniel in
Babylon.

IV\. A fourth objection to the account in this chapter arises from an
alleged error in "chronology." For a consideration of this, see the
notes at [Dan 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001).

Section II. - Analysis of the Chapter

The subjects of this chapter are the following:

I. The dream of Nebuchadnezzar, [Dan
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001). In accordance with the common
belief among the ancients, he regarded this as a Divine message. The
dream, too, was of such a character as to make a deep impression on his
mind, though its distinct features and details had gone from him.

II\. The demand of Nebuchadnezzar that the Chaldeans should recal the
dream to his recollection, and expound its meaning, [Dan
2:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002). He ordered those whose business
it was professedly to give such interpretations, to come into his
presence, and to make known the dream and its meaning. But it would seem
that their pretensions went no further than to explain a dream when it
was known, and hence, they asked respectfully that the king would state
the dream in order that they might explain it. The king, in angel
threatened death, if they did not first recal the dream, and then make
known the interpretation, promising at the same time ample rewards if
they were able to do this. As all this, under Divine direction, was
designed to communicate important information of future events, it was
so ordered that the dream should be forgotten, thus entirely confounding
the art of the Chaldeans, and giving an opportunity to Daniei to make
the dream and its interpretation known, thus exalting a man from the
land of the prophets, and showing that it was not by the skill of the
pretended interpreters of dreams that future events could be made known,
but that it was only by those who were inspired for that purpose by the
true God.

III\. The acknowledged failure of the power of the astrologers and
Chaldeans, [Dan 2:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#010). They admitted
that they could not do what was demanded of them. Whatever might be the
consequence, they could not even "attempt" to recal a forgotten dream.
And as, though we may be unable to recal such a dream distinctly
ourselves, we could easily "recognize" it if it were stated to us; and
as we could not be imposed on by something else that anyone should
undertake to make us believe was the real dream, the magicians saw that
it was hopeless to attempt to palm a story of their own invention on
him, as if that were the real dream, and they therefore acknowledged
their inability to comply with the demand of the king.

IV\. The decree that they should die, [Dan
2:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#012). In this decree, Daniel and
his three friends who had been trained with him at court Dan. 1 were
involved, not because they had failed to comply with the demand of the
king, for there is the fullest evidence that the subject had not been
laid before them, but because they came under the general class of wise
men, or counselors, to whom the monarch looked to explain the
prognostics of coming events.

V. Daniel, when apprised of the decree, and the cause of it, went to the
king and requested a respite in the execution of the sentence, [Dan
2:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#014). It would seem that he had the
privilege of access to the king at pleasure. We may presume that he
stated that the thing had not in fact been laid before him, though he
had become involved in the general sentence, and it is no unreasonable
supposition that the king was so much troubled with the dream, that he
was so anxious to know its signification, and that he saw so clearly
that if the decree was executed, involving Daniel and his friends, "all"
hope of recalling and understanding it would be lost, that he was ready
to grasp at "any" hope, however slender, of being made acquainted with
the meaning of the vision. He was willing, therefore, that Daniel should
be spared, and that the execution of the decree should be suspended.

VI\. In these interesting and solemn circumstances, Daniel and his
friends gave themselves to prayer, [Dan
2:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#017). Their lives were in danger,
and the case was such that they could not be rescued but by a direct
Divine inter position. There was no power which they had of ascertaining
by any human means what was the dream of the monarch, and yet it was
indispensable, in order to save their lives, that the dream should be
made known. God only, they knew, could communicate it to them, and he
only, therefore, could save them from death; and in these circumstances
of perplexity they availed themselves of the privilege which all the
friends of God have - of carrying their cause at once before his throne.

VII\. The secret was revealed to Daniel in a night vision, and he gave
utterance to an appropriate song of praise, [Dan
2:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#019). The occasion was one which
demanded such an expression of thanksgiving, and that which Daniel
addressed to God was every way worthy of the occasion.

VIII\. The way was now prepared for Daniel to make known to the king the
dream and the interpretation. Accordingly he was brought before the
king, and he distinctly disclaimed any power of himself to recal the
dream, or to make known its signification, [Dan
2:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#024).

IX\. The statement of the dream and the interpretation, [Dan
2:31-45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#031).

X. The effect on Nebuchadnezzar, [Dan
2:46-49](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#046). He recognized the dream;
acknowledged that it was only the true God who could have made it known;
and promoted Daniel to distinguished honor. In his own honors, Daniel
did not forget the virtuous companions of his youth Dan. 1, and sought
for them, now that he was elevated, posts of honorable employment also,
[Dan 2:49](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#049).

[Daniel 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 2:1</span></span>

And in the second year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar - There is an
apparent chronological difficulty in this statement which has given some
perplexity to expositors. It arises mainly from two sources.

\(1\) That in [Jer 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001), it is said
that the first year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar corresponded with the
fourth year of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, and as the captivity was in the
third year of the reign of Jehoiakim [Dan
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001), the time here would be the
"fourth" year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, instead of the second.

\(2\) That we learn from [Dan 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#005),
[Dan 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#018), that Daniel and his three
friends had been in Babylon already three years, under a process of
training preparatory to their being presented at court, and as the whole
narrative leads us to suppose that it was "after" this that Daniel was
regarded as enrolled among the wise men (compare [Dan
2:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#013)), on the supposition that the
captivity occurred in the first year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar,
this would bring the time of the dream into the fourth year of his
reign. This difficulty is somewhat increased from the fact that when
Nebuchadnezzar went up to besiege Jerusalem he is called "king," and it
is evident that he did not go as a lieutenant of the reigning monarch;
or as a general of the Chaldean forces under the direction of another.
See [Kg2 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001), [Kg2
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#011). Various solutions of this
difficulty have been proposed, but the true one probably is, that
Nebuchadnezzar reigned some time conjointly with his father,
Nabopolassar, and, though the title "king" was given to him, yet the
reckoning here is dated from the time when he began to reign alone, and
that this was the year of his sole occupancy of the throne.

Berosus states that his father, Nabopolassar, was aged and infirm, and
that he gave up a part of his army to his son Nebuchadnezzar, who
defeated the Egyptian host at Carchemish (Circesium) on the Euphrates,
and drove Necho out of Asia. The victorious prince then marched directly
to Jerusalem, and Jehoiakim surrendered to him; and this was the
beginning of the seventy years, captivity. See "Jahn's History of the
Hebrew Commonwealth," p. 134. Nabopolassar probably died about two years
after that, and Nebuchadnezzar succeeded to the throne. The period of
their reigning together was two years, and of course the second year of
his single reign would be the fourth of his entire reign; and a
reckoning from either would be proper, and would not be misunderstood.
Other modes of solution have been adopted, but as this meets the whole
difficulty, and is founded on truth, it is unnecessary to refer to them.
Compare Prof. Stuart, on Daniel, Excursus I. and Excursus II. (See
Barnes' Appendix I and Appendix II to Daniel)

Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams - The plural is here used, though there is
but one dream mentioned, and probably but one is referred to, for
Nebuchadnezzar, when speaking of it himself [Dan
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#003), says, "I have dreamed a dream."
In the Latin Vulgate, and in the Greek, it is also in the singular. It
is probable that this is a popular use of words, as if one should say,
"I had strange dreams last night," though perhaps but a single dream was
intended. - Prof. Bush. Among the methods by which God made known future
events in ancient times, that by "dreams" was one of the most common.
See the notes at [Dan 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#017);
Introduction to Isaiah, Section 7. (2); compare [Gen
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#003), [Gen
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#006); [Gen
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#011); [Gen
37:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#005); [Gen
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#005); [Gen
41:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#007), [Gen
41:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#025); [Kg1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#005); [Num
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006); [Joe
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028); [Job
33:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#014). The belief that the will of
heaven was communicated to men by means of dreams, was prevalent
throughout the world in ancient times. Hence, the striking expression in
Homer, Iliad i. 63 - καὶ γάρ τ ̓ ὄναρ ἐκ Διός ἐστιν kai gar t' onar ek
Dios estin, "the dream is of Jove." So in the commencement of his second
Iliad, he represents the will of Jupiter as conveyed to Agamemnon by
Ὄνείρος Oneiros, or "the dream."

So Diogenes Laertius makes mention of a dream of Socrates, by which he
foretold his death as to happen in three days. This method of
communicating the Divine will was adopted, not only in reference to the
prophets, but also to those who were strangers to religion, and even to
wicked men, as in the case of Pharaoh, Abimelech, Nebuchadnezzar, the
butler and baker in Egypt, etc. In every such instance, however, it was
necessary, as in the case before us, to call in the aid of a true
prophet to interpret the dream; and it was only when thus interpreted
that it took its place among the certain predictions of the future. One
"object" of communicating the Divine will in this manner, seems to have
been to fix the attention of the person who had the dream on the
subject, and to prepare him to receive the communication which God had
chosen to make to him. Thus it cannot be doubted that by the belief in
dreams entertained by Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar, as disclosing future
events, and by the anxiety of mind which they experienced m regard to
the dreams, they were better prepared to receive the communications of
Joseph and Daniel in reference to the future than they could have been
by any other method of making known the Divine will.

They had no doubt that some important communication had been made to
them respecting the future, and they were anxious to know what it was.
They were prepared, therefore, to welcome any explanation which
commended itself to them as true, and in this way the servants of the
true God had a means of access to their hearts which they could have
found in no other way. By what laws it was so regulated that a dream
should be "known" to be a preintimation of coming events, we have now no
means of ascertaining. That it is "possible" for God to have access to
the mind in sleep, and to communicate his will in this manner, no one
can doubt. That it was, so far as employed for that purpose, a safe and
certain way, is demonstrated by the results of the predictions thus made
in the case of Abimelech, [Gen 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#003),
[Gen 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#006); of Joseph and his brethren,
[Gen 37:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#005); of Pharaoh, [Gen
41:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#007), [Gen
41:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#025); and of the butler and baker,
[Gen 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#005). It is not, however, to be
inferred that the same reliance, or that any reliance, is now to be
placed on dreams, for were there no other consideration against such
reliance, it would be sufficient that there is no authorized interpreter
of the wanderings of the mind in sleep. God now communicates his truth
to the souls of men in other ways.

Wherewith his spirit was troubled - Alike by the unusual nature of the
dream, and by the impression which he undoubtedly had that it referred
to some important truths pertaining to his kingdom and to future times.
See [Dan 2:31-36](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#031) The Hebrew word here
rendered "troubled" (פעם pâ‛am) means, properly, to "strike, to beat, to
pound;" then, in Niph., to be moved, or agitated; and also in Hithpa.,
to be agitated, or troubled. The proper signification of the word is
that of striking as on an anvil, and then it refers to any severe
stroke, or anything which produces agitation. The "verb" occurs only in
the following places: [Jdg 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#025),
where it is rendered "move;" and [Psa
67:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#004), (5); [Gen
41:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#008); [Dan
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001), [Dan
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#003), where it is rendered "troubled."
The "noun" is of frequent occurrence. "And his sleep brake from him."
Hebrew עליו נהיתה שׁנתו shenâthô nı̂heyethâh ‛ālâyv.

Literally, "His sleep was upon him." The Greek is, "his sleep was from
him;" i. e., left him. The Vulgate, "his sleep fled (fugit) from him."
But it may be doubted whether the Hebrew will bear this construction.
Probably the literal construction is the true one, by which the sense of
the Hebrew - על ‛al "upon" - will be retained. The meaning then would
be, that this remarkable representation occurred when he was "in" a
profound sleep. It was a "dream," and not "an open vision." It was such
a representation as passes before the mind when the senses are locked in
repose, and not such as was made to pass before the minds of the
prophets when they were permitted to see visions of the future, though
awake. Compare [Num 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#004), [Num
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#016). There is nothing in the words
which conveys the idea that there was anything preternatural in the
sleep that had come upon Nebuchadnezzar, but the thought is, that all
this occurred when he "was" sound asleep. Prof. Stuart, however, renders
this, "his sleep failed him," and so does also Gesenius. Winer renders
it, "his sleep went away from him." But it seems to me that the more
natural idea is what occurs in the literal translation of the words,
that this occurred as a dream, in a state of profound repose.

[Daniel 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 2:2</span></span>

Then the king commanded - That is, when he awoke. The particle rendered
"then," does not imply that this occurred immediately. When he awoke,
his mind was agitated; he was impressed with the belief that he had had
an important Divine communication; but he could not even recal the dream
distinctly, and he resolved to summon to his presence those whose
business it was to interpret what were regarded as prognostics of the
future.

The magicians, and the astrologers - These are the same words which
occur in [Dan 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#020). See the note at
that place.

And the sorcerers - Hebrew מכשׁפים mekashepı̂ym. Vulgate, malefici -
sorcerers. Greek, φαρμακεύς pharmakeus Syriac, "magician." The Hebrew
word is derived from כשׁף kâshaph - meaning, in Piel, to practice magic;
to use magic formulas, or incantations; to mutter; and it refers to the
various arts by which those who were addicted to magic practiced their
deceptions. The particular idea in this word would seem to be, that on
such occasions some forms of prayers were used, for the word in Syriac
means to offer prayers, or to worship. Probably the aid of idol gods was
invoked by such persons when they practiced incantations. The word is
found only in the following places: once as a "verb," [Ch2
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#006), and rendered "used witchcraft;"
and as a "participle," rendered "sorcerers," in [Exo
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#011); [Dan
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002); [Mal
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#005); and "witch," in [Exo
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#018) (17); [Deu
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#010). The noun (כשׁף kashâph and
כשׁפים keshâpı̂ym) is used in the following places, always with reference
to sorcery or witchcraft: [Jer 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#009);
[Kg2 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#022); [Isa
47:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#009); [Mic
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#012) (11); [Nah
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#004). It may not be easy to specify the
exact sense in which this word is used as distinguished from the others
which relate to the same general subject, but it would seem to be that
some form of "prayer" or "invocation" was employed. The persons referred
to did not profess to interpret the prognostics of future events by any
original skill of their own, but by the aid of the gods.

And the Chaldeans - See the notes at [Dan
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004). The Chaldeans appear to have been
but one of the tribes or nations that made up the community at Babylon
(compare the notes at [Isa 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#013)), and
it would seem that at this time they were particularly devoted to the
practice of occult arts, and secret sciences. It is not probable that
the other persons referred to in this enumeration were Chaldeans. The
Magians, if any of these were employed, were Medians (see the notes at
[Dan 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#020)), and it is not improbable
that the other classes of diviners might have been from other nations.
The purpose of Nebuchadnezzar was to assemble at his court whatever was
remarkable throughout the world for skill and knowledge (see analysis of
Dan. 1), and the wise men of the Chaldeans were employed in carrying out
that design. The Chaldeans were so much devoted to these secret arts,
and became so celebrated for them, that the name came, among the Greek
and Roman writers, to be used to denote all those who laid claim to
extraordinary powers in this department.

Diodorus Siculus (lib. ii.) says of the Chaldeans in Babylon, that "they
sustain the same office there that the priests do in Egypt, for being
devoted to the worship of God through their whole lives, they give
themselves to philosophy, and seek from astrology their highest glory."
Cicero also remarks (De Divin., p. 3), that "the Chaldeans, so named,
not from their art, but their nation, are supposed, by a prolonged
observation of the stars, to have wrought out a science by which could
be predicted what was to happen to every individual, and to what fate he
was born." Juvenal likewise (Sat. vi., verses 552-554), has this
passage: "Chaldaeis sed major erit fiducia; quidquid dixerit astrologus,
credent a fonte relatum Ammonis. - But their chief dependence is upon
the Chaldeans; whatever an astrologer declares, they will receive as a
response of (Jupiter) Ammon." Horace refers to the "Babylonians" as
distinguished in his time for the arts of magic, or divination:

"nec Babylonios,

tentaris numeros." - Car. lib. i.; xi.

It is not probable that the whole nation of Chaldeans was devoted to
these arts, but as a people they became so celebrated in this kind of
knowledge that it was their best known characteristic abroad. (See also
Barnes' Appendix to Daniel)

For to show the king his dreams - To show him what the dream was, and to
explain its import. Compare [Gen
41:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#024); [Jdg
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#012); [Kg1
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#003). That it was common for kings to
call in the aid of interpreters to explain the import of dreams, appears
from Herodotus. When Astyages ascended the throne, he had a daughter
whose name was Mandane. She had a dream which seemed to him so
remarkable that he called in the "magi," whose interpretation, Herodotus
remarks, was of such a nature that it "terrified him exceedingly." He
was so much influenced by the dream and the interpretation, that it
produced an entire change in his determination respecting the marriage
of his daughter. - Book i., 107: So again, after the marriage of his
daughter, Herodotus says (book i., cviii.): "Astyages had another
vision. A vine appeared to spring from his daughter which overspread all
Asia. On this occasion, also, he consulted his interpreters; the result
was, that he sent for his daughter from Persia, when the time of her
delivery approached. On her arrival, he kept a strict watch over her,
intending to destroy her child. The magi had declared the vision to
intimate that the child of his daughter should supplant him on the
throne." Astyages, to guard against this, as soon as Cyrus was born,
sent for Harpagus, a person in whom he had confidence, and commanded him
to take the child to his own house, and put him to death. These passages
in Herodotus show that what is here related of the king of Babylon,
demanding the aid of magicians and astrologers to interpret his dreams,
was by no means an uncommon occurrence.

[Daniel 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 2:3</span></span>

And the king said unto them, I have dreamed a dream, and my spirit was
troubled to know the dream - That is, clearly, to know all about it; to
recollect distinctly what it was, and to understand what it meant. He
was agitated by so remarkable a dream; he probably had, as Jerome
remarks, a shadowy and floating impression of what the dream was - such
as we often have of a dream that has agitated out minds, but of which we
cannot recal the distinct and full image; and he desired to recal that
distinctly, and to know exactly what it meant. See [Dan
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001).

[Daniel 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 2:4</span></span>

Then spake the Chaldeans to the king - The meaning is, either that the
Chaldeans spoke in the name of the entire company of the soothsayers and
magicians (see the notes, [Dan 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#020);
[Dan 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002)), because they were the most
prominent among them, or the name is used to denote the collective body
of soothsayers, meaning that this request was made by the entire
company.

In Syriac - In the original - ארמית 'ărâmı̂yt - in "Aramean." Greek,
Συριστὶ Suristi - "in Syriac." So the Vulgate. The Syriac retains the
original word. The word means Aramean, and the reference is to that
language which is known as East Aramean - a general term embracing the
Chaldee, the Syriac, and the languages which were spoken in Mesopotamia.
See the notes at [Dan 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004). This was
the vernacular tongue of the king and of his subjects, and was that in
which the Chaldeans would naturally address him. It is referred to here
by the author of this book, perhaps to explain the reason why he himself
makes use of this language in explaining the dream. The use of this,
however, is not confined to the statement of what the magicians said,
but is continued to the close of the seventh chapter. Compare the Intro.
Section IV. III. The language used is what is commonly called Chaldee.
It is written in the same character as the Hebrew, and differs from that
as one dialect differs from another. It was, doubtless, well understood
by the Jews in their captivity, and was probably spoken by them after
their return to their own land.

O king, live for ever - This is a form of speech quite common in
addressing monarchs. See [Sa1 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#024);
[Kg1 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#025) (margin); [Dan
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#009); [Dan
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#010). The expression is prevalent
still, as in the phrases, "Long live the king," "Vive l' empereur,"
"Vive le roi," etc. It is founded on the idea that long life is to be
regarded as a blessing, and that we can in no way express our good
wishes for anyone better than to wish him length of days. In this place,
it was merely the usual expression of respect and homage, showing their
earnest wish for the welfare of the monarch. They were willing to do
anything to promote his happiness, and the continuance of his life and
reign. It was especially proper for them to use this language, as they
wore about to make a rather unusual request, which "might" be construed
as an act of disrespect, implying that the king had not given them all
the means which it was equitable for them to have in explaining the
matter, by requiring them to interpret the dream when he had not told
them what it was.

Tell thy servants the dream, and we will show the interpretation - The
claim which they set up in regard to the future was evidently only that
of "explaining" what were regarded as the prognostics of future events.
It was not that of being able to recal what is forgotten, or even to
"originate" what might be regarded preintimations of what is to happen.
This was substantially the claim which was asserted by all the
astrologers, augurs, and soothsayers of ancient times. Dreams, the
flight of birds, the aspect of the entrails of animals slain for
sacrifice, the positions of the stars, meteors, and uncommon appearances
in the heavens, were supposed to be intimations made by the gods of what
was to occur in future times, and the business of those who claimed the
power of divining the future was merely to interpret these things. When
the king, therefore, required that they should recal the dream itself to
his own mind, it was a claim to something which was not involved in
their profession, and which they regarded as unjust. To that power they
made no pretensions. If it be asked why, as they were mere jugglers and
pretenders, they did not "invent" something and state "that" as his
dream, since he had forgotten what his dream actually was, we may reply,

\(1\) that there is no certain evidence that they were not sincere in
what they professed themselves able to do - for we are not to suppose
that all who claimed to be soothsayers and astrologers were hypocrites
and intentional deceivers. It was not at that period of the world
certainly determined that nothing could be ascertained respecting the
future by dreams, and by the positions of the stars, etc. Dreams "were"
among the methods by which the future was made known; and whether the
knowledge of what is to come could be obtained from the positions of the
stars, etc., was a question which was at that time unsettled Even Lord
Bacon maintained that the science of astrology was not to be "rejected,"
but to be "reformed."

\(2\) If the astrologers had been disposed to attempt to deceive the
king, there is no probability that they could have succeeded in palming
an invention of their own on him as his own dream. We may not be able
distinctly to recollect a dream, but we have a sufficient impression of
it - of its outlines - or of some striking, though disconnected, things
in it, to know what it is "not." We might instantly recognize it if
stated to us; we should see at once, if anyone should attempt to deceive
us by palming an invented dream on us, that "that" was not what we had
dreamed.

[Daniel 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 2:5</span></span>

The king answered and said to the Chaldeans, The thing is gone from me -
The Vulgate renders this, "Sermo recessit a me" - "The word is departed
from me." So the Greek, Ὁ λόγος ἀπ ̓ ἐμοῦ ἀπέστη Ho logos ap' emou
apestē. Luther, "Es ist mir entfallen" - "It has fallen away from me,"
or has departed from me. Coverdale, "It is gone from me." The Chaldee
word rendered "the thing" - מלתה mı̂llethâh - means, properly, "a word,
saying, discourse" - something which is "spoken;" then, like דבר dâbâr
and the Greek ῥῆμα rēma, a "thing." The reference here is to the matter
under consideration, to wit, the dream and its meaning. The fair
interpretation is, that he had forgotten the dream, and that if he
retained "any" recollection of it, it was only such an imperfect outline
as to alarm him. The word rendered "is gone" - אזדא 'azeddâ' - which
occurs only here and in [Dan 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#008), is
supposed to be the same as אזל 'ăzal - "to go away, to depart." Gesenius
renders the whole phrase, "The word has gone out from me; i. e., what I
have said is ratified, and cannot be recalled;" and Prof. Bush (in loc.)
contends that this is the true interpretation, and this also is the
interpretation preferred by John D. Michaelis, and Dathe. A construction
somewhat similar is adopted by Aben Ezra, C. B. Michaelis, Winer,
Hengstenberg, and Prof. Stuart, that it means, "My decree is firm, or
steadfast;" to wit, that if they did not furnish an interpretation of
the dream, they should be cut off. The question as to the true
interpretation, then, is between two constructions: whether it means, as
in our version, that the dream had departed from him - that is, that he
had forgotten it - or, that a decree or command had gone from him, that
if they could not interpret the dream they should be destroyed. That the
former is the correct interpretation seems to me to be evident.

\(1\) It is the natural construction, and accords best with the meaning
of the original words. Thus no one can doubt that the word מלה millâh,
and the words דבר dâbâr and ῥῆμα rēma, are used in the sense of "thing,"
and that the natural and proper meaning of the Chaldee verb אזד 'ăzad
is, to "go away, depart." Compare the Hebrew (אזל 'âzal) in [Deu
32:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#036), "He seeth that their power is
gone;" [Sa1 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#007), "The bread is spent
in our vessels;" [Job 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#011), "The
waters fail from the sea;" and the Chaldee (אזל 'ăzal) in [Ezr
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#023), "They went up in haste to
Jerusalem;" [Ezr 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#008), "We went into
the province of Judea;" and [Dan 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#017),
[Dan 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#024); [Dan
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#018) (19), 19(20).

\(2\) This interpretation is sustained by the Vulgate of Jerome, and by
the Greek.

\(3\) It does not appear that any such command had at that time gone
forth from the king, and it was only when they came before him that he
promulgated such an order. Even though the word, as Gesenins and Zickler
(Chaldaismus Dan. Proph.) maintain, is a feminine participle present,
instead of a verb in the preterit, still it would then as well apply to
the "dream" departing from him, as the command or edict. We may suppose
the king to say, "The thing leaves me; I cannot recal it."

\(4\) It was so understood by the magicians, and the king did not
attempt to correct their apprehension of what he meant. Thus, in [Dan
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#007), they say, "Let the king tell his
servants the dream, and we will show the interpretation thereof." This
shows that they understood that the dream had gone from him, and that
they could not be expected to interpret its meaning until they were
apprised what it was.

\(5\) It is not necessary to suppose that the king retained the memory
of the dream himself, and that he meant merely to try them; that is,
that he told them a deliberate falsehood, in order to put their ability
to the test. Nebuchadnezzar was a cruel and severe monarch, and such a
thing would not have been entirely inconsistent with his character; but
we should not needlessly charge cruelty and tyranny on any man, nor
should we do it unless the evidence is so clear that we cannot avoid it.
Besides, that such a test should be proposed is in the highest degree
improbable. There was no need of it; and it was contrary to the
established belief in such matters. These men were retained at court,
among other reasons, for the very purpose of explaining the prognostics
of the future. There was confidence in them; and they were retained
"because" there was confidence in them. It does not appear that the
Babylonian monarch had had any reason to distrust their ability as to
what they professed; and why should he, therefore, on "this" occasion
resolve to put them to so unusual, and obviously so unjust a trial?

For these reasons, it seems clear to me that our common version has
given the correct sense of this passage, and that the meaning is, that
the dream had actually so far departed from him that he could not repeat
it, though he retained such an impression of its portentous nature, and
of its appalling outline, as to fill his mind with alarm. As to the
objection derived from this view of the passage by Bertholdt to the
authenticity of this chapter, that it is wholly improbable that any man
would be so unreasonable as to doom others to punishment because they
could not recal his dream, since it entered not into their profession to
be able to do it (Commentary i. p. 192), it may be remarked, that the
character of Nebuchadnezzar was such as to make what is stated here by
Daniel by no means improbable. Thus it is said respecting him [Kg2
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#007), "And they slew the sons of
Zedekiah 'before his eyes,' and put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound
him with fetters of brass, and carried him to Babylon." Compare [Kg2
25:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#018); [Jer
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#005), following; [Jer
52:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#009). See also [Dan
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#017), where he is called "the basest
of men." Compare Hengstenberg, "Die Authentie des Daniel," pp. 79-81. On
this objection, see Introduction to the chapter, Section I. I.

If ye will not make known, unto me the dream, with the interpretation
thereof - Whatever may be thought as to the question whether he had
actually forgotten the dream, there can be no doubt that he demanded
that they should state what it was, and then explain it. This demand was
probably as unusual as it was in one sense unreasonable, since it did
not fall fairly within their profession. Yet it was not unreasonable in
this sense, that if they really had communication with the gods, and
were qualified to explain future events, it might be supposed that they
would be enabled to recal this forgotten dream. If the gods gave them
power to explain what was to "come," they could as easily enable them to
recal "the past."

Ye shall be cut in pieces - Margin, "made." The Chaldee is, "Ye shall be
made into pieces; "referring to a mode of punishment that was common to
many ancient nations. Compare [Sa1
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#033) : "And Samuel hewed Agag in
pieces before the Lord in Gilgal." Thus Orpheus is said to have been
torn in pieces by the Thracian women; and Bessus was cut in pieces by
order of Alexander the Great.

And your houses shall be made a dunghill - Compare [Kg2
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#027). This is an expression denoting
that their houses, instead of being elegant or comfortable mansions,
should be devoted to the vilest of uses, and subjected to all kinds of
dishonor and defilement. The language here used is in accordance with
what is commonly employed by Orientals. They imprecate all sorts of
indignities and abominations on the objects of their dislike, and it is
not uncommon for them to smear over with filth what is the object of
their contempt or abhorrenee. Thus when the caliph Omar took Jerusalem,
at the head of the Saracen army, after ravaging the greater part of the
city, he caused dung to be spread over the site of the sanctuary, in
token of the abhorrence of all Mussulmans, and of its being henceforth
regarded as the refuse and offscouring of all things. - Prof. Bush. The
Greek renders this, "And your houses shall be plundered;" the Vulgate,
"And your houses shall be confiscated." But these renderings are
entirely arbitrary. This may seem to be a harsh punishment which was
threatened, and some may, perhaps, be disposed to say that it is
improbable that a monarch would allow himself to use such intemperate
language, and to make use of so severe a threatening, especially when
the magicians had as yet shown no inability to interpret the dream, and
had given no reasons to apprehend that they would be unable to do it.
But we are to remember

\(1\) the cruel and arbitrary character of the king (see the references
above);

\(2\) the nature of an Oriental despotism, in which a monarch is
acccustomed to require all his commands to be obeyed, and his wishes
gratified promptly, on pain of death;

\(3\) the fact that his mind was greatly excited by the dream; and

\(4\) that he was certain that something portentous to his kingdom had
been prefigured by the dream, and that this was a case in which all the
force of threatening, and all the prospect of splendid reward, should be
used, that they might be induced to tax their powers to the utmost, and
allay the tumults of his mind.

[Daniel 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">dan 2:6</span></span>

But if ye show the dream - If you show what the dream was.

And the interpretation thereof - What it signifies. That is, they were
so to state the dream that Nebuchadnezzar would recognize it; and they
were to give such an explanation of it as would commend itself to his
mind as the true one. On this last point he would doubtless rely much on
their supposed wisdom in performing this duty, but it would seem clear,
also, that it was necessary that the interpretation should be seen to be
a "fair" interpretation, or such as would be "fairly" implied in the
dream. Thus, when Daniel made known the interpretation, he saw at once
that it met all the features of the dream, and he admitted it to be
correct. So also when Daniel explained the handwriting on the wall to
Belshazzar, he admitted the justness of it, and loaded him with honors,
[Dan 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#029). So when Joseph explained
the dreams of Pharaoh, he at once saw the appropriateness of the
explanation, and admitted it to be correct [Gen
41:39-45](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#039); and so in the case above
referred to (notes on [Dan 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002)), of
Astyages respecting the dreams of his daughter (Herod. 1, cvii.;
cviii.), he at once saw that the interpretation of the dreams proposed
by the Magi accorded with the dreams, and took his measures accordingly.

Ye shall receive of me gifts, and rewards, and great honor - Intending
to appeal to their highest hopes to induce them, if possible, to
disclose the meaning of the dream. He specifics no particular rewards,
but makes the promise general; and the evident meaning is, that, in such
a case, he would bestow what it became a monarch like him to give. That
the usual rewards in such a case were such as were adapted to stimulate
to the most vigorous exertions of their powers, may be seen from the
honor which he conferred on Daniel when he made known the dream [Dan
2:48](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#048), and from the rewards which
Belshazzar conferred on Daniel for making known the interpretation of
the writing on the wall [Dan 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#029) :
"Then commanded Belshazzar, and they clothed Daniel with scarlet, and
put a chain of gold about his neck, and made a proclamation concerning
him, that he should be the third ruler in the kingdom." Compare [Est
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#011); [Est
6:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#007).

[Daniel 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 2:7</span></span>

They answered again, and said, Let the king tell his servants the dream,
and we will show the interpretation of it - Certainly not an
unreasonable request, in any circumstances, and especially in theirs.
They did not profess, evidently, to be able to recal a dream that was
forgotten, but the extent of their profession on this subject appears to
have been, that they were able to "explain" what was commonly regarded
as a prognostic of a future event.

[Daniel 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 2:8</span></span>

The king answered and said, I know of certainty that ye would gain the
time - Margin, "buy." The Chaldee word זבנין zâbenı̂yn (from זבן zeban)
means, to get for oneself, buy, gain, procure. Greek, ἐξαγοράζετε
exagorazete - "that ye redeem time;" and so the Vulgate - quod tempus
redimitis. The idea is, that they saw that they could not comply with
his requisition, and that their asking him [Dan
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#007) to state the dream was only a
pretext for delay, in the hope that in the interval some device might be
hit on by them to appease him, or to avert his threatened indignation.
It would be natural to suppose that they might hope that on reflection
he would become more calm, and that, although they "might" not be able
to recal the dream and explain it, yet it would be seen to be
unreasonable to expect or demand it. The king seems to have supposed
that some such thoughts were passing through their minds, and he charges
on them such a project. The argument of the king seems to have been
something like this: "They who can explain a dream correctly can as well
tell what it is as what its interpretation is, for the one is as much
the result of Divine influence as the other; and if men can hope for
Divine help in the one case, why not in the other? As you cannot,
therefore, recal the dream, it is plain that you cannot interpret it;
and your only object in demanding to know it is, that you may ward off
as long as possible the execution of the threatened sentence, and, if
practicable, escape it altogether." It is not improbable that what they
said was more than the simple request recorded in [Dan
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#007). They would naturally enlarge on
it, by attempting to show how unreasonable was the demand of the king in
the case, and their arguments would give a fair pretext for what he here
charges on them.

Because ye see the thing is gone from me - According to the
interpretation proposed in [Dan 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#005),
the "dream." The meaning is, "You see that I have forgotten it. I have
made a positive statement on that point. There can be no hope,
therefore, that it can be recalled, and it is clear that your only
object must be to gain time. Nothing can be gained by delay, and the
matter may therefore be determined at once, and your conduct be
construed as a confession that you cannot perform what is required, and
the sentence proceed without delay." This makes better sense, it seems
to me, than to suppose that he means that a sentence had gone forth from
him that if they could not recal and interpret it they should be put to
death.

[Daniel 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 2:9</span></span>

But if ye will not make known unto me the dream, there is but one decree
for you - That is, you shall share the same fate. You shall all be cut
to pieces, and your houses reduced to ruin, [Dan
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#005). There shall be no favor shown to
any class of you, or to any individual among you. It seems to have been
supposed that the responsibility rested on them individually as well as
collectively, and that it would be right to hold each and every one of
them bound to explain the matter. As no difference of obligation was
recognized, there would be no difference of criminality. It should be
said, however, that there is a difference of interpretation here.
Gesenius, and some others, render the word translated "decree" - דת dâth
- "counsel, plan, purpose," and suppose that it means, "this only is
your counsel, or plan;" that is, to prepare lying words, and to gain
time. So Prof. Stuart renders the verse, "If ye will not make known to
me the dream, one thing is your purpose, both a false and deceitful word
have ye agreed to utter before me, until the time shall have changed;
therefore tell me the dream, and then I shall know that you can show me
the interpretation thereof." The original word, however, is most
commonly used in the sense of law or decree. See [Deu
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002); [Est
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#008), [Est
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#013), [Est
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#015), [Est
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#019); [Est
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#008); [Est
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#008), [Est
3:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#014); [Est
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#003), [Est
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#008), [Est
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#011), [Est
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#016); [Est
8:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#013), [Est
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#017); [Est
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#001), [Est
9:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#013); and there seems to be no
necessity for departing from the common translation. It contains a sense
according to the truth in the case, and is in accordance with the Greek,
Latin, and Syriac versions.

For ye have prepared lying and corrupt words to speak before me - That
is, "You have done this in asking me to state the dream [Dan
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#004), [Dan
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#007), and in the demand that the dream
should be made known to you, in order that you may interpret it. I shall
know by your inability to recal the dream that you have been acting a
false and deceitful part, and that your pretensions were all false. Your
wish, therefore, to have me state the dream will be shown to be a mere
pretence, an artifice for delay, that you might put off the execution of
the sentence with the hope of escaping altogether."

Till the time be changed - That is, until a new state of things shall
occur; either until his purpose might change, and his anger should
subside or until there should be a change of government: It was natural
for such thoughts to pass through the mind of the king, since, as
matters could be no "worse" for them if the subject was delayed, there
was a possibility that they might be "better" - for any change would be
likely to be an advantage. There does not appear to have been any great
confidence or affection on either side. The king suspected that they
were influenced by bad motives, and they certainly had no strong reasons
for attachment to him. Compare the notes at [Dan
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#021), and [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025).

[Daniel 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">dan 2:10</span></span>

The Chaldeans answered before the king, and said - Perhaps the
"Chaldeans" answered because they were the highest in favor, and were
those in whom most confidence was usually reposed in such matters. See
the notes at [Dan 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002). On such an
occasion, those would be likely to be put forward to announce their
inability to do this who would be supposed to be able to interpret the
dream, if any could, and on whom most reliance was usually placed.

There is not a man upon the earth that can show the king's matter -
Chaldee, על־יבשׁתא ‛al-yabeshethâ' - "upon the dry ground." Compare [Gen
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#010). The meaning is, that the thing
was utterly beyond the power of man. It was what none who practiced the
arts of divining laid claim to. They doubtless supposed that as great
proficients in that art as the world could produce might be found among
the wise men assembled at the court of Babylon, and if they failed, they
inferred that all others would fail. This was, therefore, a decided
confession of their inability in the matter; but they meant to break the
force of that mortifying confession, and perhaps to appease the wrath of
the king, by affirming that the thing was wholly beyond the human
powers, and that no one could be expected to do what was demanded.

Therefore" there is "no king, lord, nor ruler, that asked such things -
No one has ever made a similar demand. The matter is so clear, the
incompetency of man to make such a disclosure is so manifest, that no
potentate of any rank ever made such a request. They designed,
undoubtedly, to convince the king that the request was so unreasonable
that he would not insist on it. They were urgent, for their life
depended on it, and they apprehended that they had justice on their
side.

[Daniel 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 2:11</span></span>

And it is a rare thing that the king requireth - Chaldee, יקירה
yaqqı̂yrâh - meaning, "choice, valuable, costly;" then, "heavy, hard,
difficult." Greek, βαρύς barus. Vulgate, "gravis - heavy, weighty." The
idea is not so much that the thing demanded by the king was "uncommon"
or "rarely made" - though that was true, as that it was so difficult as
to be beyond the human powers. They would not have been likely on such
an occasion to say that the requirement was absolutely unjust or
unreasonable. The term which they used was respectful, and yet it
implied that no man could have any hope of solving the question as it
was proposed by him.

And there is none other that can show it before the king except the
gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh - This was clearly true, that a
matter of that kind could not be disclosed except by Divine assistance.
It would seem from this that these persons did not claim to be inspired,
or to have communication with the gods; or, at least, that they did not
claim to be inspired by the Supreme God, but that they relied on their
own natural sagacity, and their careful and long study of the meaning of
those occurrences which prefigured future events, and perhaps on the
mystic arts derived from their acquaintance with science as then
understood. The word "gods" here - אלהין 'ĕlâhı̂yn, the same as the
Hebrew אלהים 'ĕlohı̂ym - is in the plural number, but might be applied to
the true God, as the Hebrew אלהים 'ĕlohı̂ym often is. It is by no means
certain that they meant to use this in the plural, or to say that it was
an admitted truth that the gods worshipped in Babylon did not dwell with
people.

It was, undoubtedly, the common opinion that they did; that the temples
were their abode; and that they frequently appeared among men, and took
part in human affairs. But it was a very early opinion that the Supreme
God was withdrawn from human affairs, and had committed the government
of the world to intermediate beings - internuncii - demons, or aeons:
beings of power far superior to that of men, who constantly mingled in
human affairs. Their power, however, though great, was limited; and may
not the Chaldeans here by the word אלהין 'ĕlâhı̂yn - have meant to refer
to the Supreme God, and to say that this was a case which pertained to
him alone; that no inferior divinity could be competent to do such a
thing as he demanded; and that as the Supreme God did not dwell among
men it was hopeless to attempt to explain the matter? Thus understood,
the result will convey a higher truth, and will show more impressively
the honor put on Daniel. The phrase, "whose dwelling is not with flesh,"
means "with men - in human bodies."

On the supposition that this refers to the Supreme God, this undoubtedty
accords with the prevailing sentiment of those times, that however often
the inferior divinities might appear to men, and assume human forms, yet
the Supreme God was far removed, and never thus took up his abode on the
earth. They could hope, therefore, for no communication from Him who
alone would be competent to the solution, of such a secret as this. This
may be regarded, therefore, as a frank confession of their entire
failure in the matter under consideration. They acknowledged that "they"
themselves were not competent to the solution of the question, and they
expressed the opinion that the ability to do it could not be obtained
from the help which the inferior gods rendered to men, and that it was
hopeless to expect the Supreme God - far withdrawn from human affairs -
to interpose. It was a public acknowledgment that their art failed on a
most important trial, and thus the way was prepared to show that Daniel,
under the teaching of the true God, was able to accomplish what was
wholly beyond all human power.

The trial had been fairly made. The wisest men of the Chaldean realm had
been applied to. They on whom reliance had been placed in such
emergencies; they who professed to be able to explain the prognostics of
future events; they who had been assembled at the most important and
magnificent court of the world - the very center of Pagan power; they
who had devoted their lives to investigations of this nature, and who
might be supposed to be competent to such a work, if any on earth could,
now openly acknowledged that their art failed them, and expressed the
conviction that there was no resource in the case.

[Daniel 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">dan 2:12</span></span>

For this cause the king was angry - Because they failed in explaining
the subject which had been referred to them. It is true that his anger
was unjust, for their profession did not imply that they would undertake
to explain what he demanded, but his wrath was not unnatural. His mind
was alarmed, and he was troubled. He believed that what he had seen in
his dream foreboded some important events, and, as an arbitrary
sovereign, unaccustomed to restrain his anger or to inquire into the
exact jusrice of matters which excited Iris indignation, it was not
unnatural that he should resolve to wreak his vengeance on all who made
any pretensions to the arts of divining.

And very furious - Wrought up to the highest degree of passion. Chaldee,
"Much enraged." It was not a calm and settled purpose to execute his
threat, but a purpose attended with a high degree of excitement.

And commanded to destroy all the wise men of Babylon - That is, all who
made pretensions to this kind of wisdom; all who came under the
wellknown denomination of "wise men," or "sages." He had called that
class before him [Dan 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002); he had
demanded of them an explanation of his dream; he had been assured by the
leading men among them, the Chaldeans [Dan
2:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#010), that they could not recall
his dream; and, as he supposed that all who could be relied on in such a
case had failed, he resolved to cut them off as impostors.

Where Daniel was at this time is not known. It would seem, however, that
from some reason he had not been summoned before the king with the
others, probably because, although he had shown himself to be eminently
endowed with wisdom [Dan 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#020), he had
not yet made any pretensions to this kind of knowledge, and was not
numbered with the Magi, or Chaldeans. When, however, the decree went
forth that "all" the "wise men of Babylon" should be slain, the
exhibition of wisdom and knowledge made by him [Dan
1:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#018) was recollected, and the
executioners of the sentence supposed that tie and his companions were
included in the general instructions. Whether the word "Babylon" here
relates to the city of Babylon, or to the whole realm, there is no
certain way of determining. Considering, however, the character of
Oriental despotisms, and the cruelty to which absolute sovereigns have
usually been transported in their passion, there would be no
improbability in supposing that the command included the whole realm,
though it is probable that most of this class would be found in the
capital.

[Daniel 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 2:13</span></span>

And the decree went forth that the wise men should be slain - The
original here will bear a somewhat different translation, meaning, "the
decree went forth, "and" the wise men were slain;" that is, the
execution of the sentence was actually commenced. So the Vulgate: Et
egressa sententia, sapientes interficiebantur. So also the Greek
version: καὶ οἱ σοφοί ἀπεκτέννοντο kai hoi sophoi apektennonto - "and
the wise men were slain." This seems to me to be the more probable
interpretation, and better to suit the connection. Then it would mean
that they had actually begun to execute the decree, and that in the
prosecution of their bloody work they sought out Daniel and his
companions, and that by his influence with Arioch the execution of the
sentence was arrested.

And they sought Daniel and his fellows to be slain - His three
companions [Dan 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#006), who probably had
not been among those who were summoned to court to explain the matter.
Had they been consulted at first, the issuing of the decree would have
been prevented, but it seems to have been the design of Providence to
give the fairest trial of the ability of these sages, and to allow
matters to come to a crisis, in order to show that what was done was
wholly beyond human power.

[Daniel 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">dan 2:14</span></span>

Then Daniel answered - Margin, "returned." The original literally is,
"returned counsel and wisdom," meaning, that he returned an answer which
was replete with wisdom. It would seem probable that Arioch had
communicated to Daniel the decree of the king, and had stated to him
that he was involved in that decree, and must prepare to die.

Counsel and wisdom - That is, "wise counsel." He evinced great prudence
and discretion in what he said. He made such a suggestion to Arioch as,
if acted on, would stay the execution of the sentence against all the
wise men, and would secure the object which the king had in view. What
was the exact nature of this answer is not mentioned. It is probable,
however, that it was that he might be enabled to disclose the dream, and
that he made this so plausible to Arioch, that he was disposed to allow
him to make the trial. It is evident that Arioch would not have
consented to arrest the execution of the sentence, unless it had
appeared to him to be in the highest degree probable that he would be
able to relieve the anxiety of the king. Knowing that the "main" object
of the king was to obtain the interpretation of his dream, and seeing
that this object was not any the more likely to be secured by the
execution of this stern decree, and knowing the high favor with which
Daniel had been received at court [Dan
1:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#019), he seems to have been willing
to assume some measure of responsibility, and to allow Daniel to make
his own representation to the king.

To Arioch the captain of the king's guard - Margin, "chief of the
executioners, or slaughter-men, or chief marshal." Greek, ἀρχιμαγείρῳ
τοῦ βασιλέως archimageirō tou basileōs - chief cook of the king. The
Vulgate renders this," Then Daniel inquired respecting the law and the
sentence of Arioch, the commander of the royal army." The Chaldee word
rendered "guard" is טבחיא ṭabâchayâ'. It is derived from טבח ṭâbach, to
slaughter; to kill animals; and then to kill or slay men. The "noun,"
then, means a slaughterer or slayer; a cook; an executioner, or one who
kills men at the will of a sovereign, or by due sentence of law. There
can be no doubt that the word here refers to Arioch, as sent out to
execute this sentence; yet we are not to regard hint as a mere
executioner, or as we would a hangman, for undoubtedly the king would
entrust this sentence to one who was of respectable, if not of high
rank. It is probable that one of the principal officers of his
body-guard would be entrusted with the execution of such a sentence. In
[Sa1 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#013), the word is rendered
"cooks." It does not elsewhere occur. That he was not a "mere"
executioner is apparent from the title given him in the next verse,
where he is called "the king's captain."

Which was gone forth to slay ... - He had gone to execute the decree,
and its execution had already commenced.

[Daniel 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">dan 2:15</span></span>

He answered and said to Arioch the king's captain - The word "captain" -
a different word from what occurs in [Dan
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#014), שׁליטא shallı̂yṭa' - denotes one
who has rule or dominion; one who is powerful or mighty; and it would be
applied only to one who sustained a post of honor and responsibility.
See the use of the word שׁלט shālaṭ, as meaning "to rule," in [Neh
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#015); [Ecc
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#019); [Ecc
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#002); [Ecc
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#009); [Est
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#001); [Psa
119:133](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#133). The word here used is the
same which occurs in [Dan 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#010), where
it is rendered "ruler." It doubtless denotes here an officer of rank,
and designates one of more honorable employment than would be denoted by
the word "executioner." It should be said on these verses [Dan
2:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#014), however, that the office of
executioner in the East was by no means regarded as a dishonorable
office. It was entrusted to those high in rank, and even nobles
considered it an honor, and often boasted of it as such, that among
their ancestors there were those who had in this way been entrusted with
executing the commands of their sovereign. Hanway and AbdulKerim both
say that this office conferred honor and rank. Tournefort says, that in
Georgia "the executioners are very rich, and men of standing undertake
this employment; far different from what occurs in other parts of the
world, in that country this gives to a family a title of honor. They
boast that among their ancestors there were many who were executioners;
and this they base on the sentiment, that nothing is more desirable than
justice, and that nothing can be more honorable than to be engaged in
administering the laws." See Rosenmuller, Morgenland, 1079.

Why is the decree so hasty from the king? - Implying that all the effort
had not been made which it was possible to make to solve the mystery.
The idea is, that a decree of such a nature, involving so many in ruin,
ought not to have proceeded from the king without having taken all
possible precautions, and having made all possible efforts to find those
who might be able to disclose what the king desired. It was to Daniel a
just matter of surprise that, after the favor and honor with which he
had been received at court [Dan
1:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#019), and the confidence which had
been reposed in him, a command like this should have been issued. so
comprehensive as to embrace him and his friends, when they had done
nothing to deserve the displeasure of the king.

Then Arioch made the thing known to Daniel - The statement respecting
the dream; the trouble of the king; the consultation of the magicians;
their inability to explain the dream, and the positive command to put
all the pretenders to wisdom to death. It is clear that Daniel had not
before been informed of these things.

[Daniel 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">dan 2:16</span></span>

Then Daniel went in ... - Either by himself, or through the medium of
some friend. Perhaps all that is meant is not that he actually went into
the presence of the monarch, but that he went into the palace, and
through the interposition of some high officer of court who had access
to the sovereign, desired of him that he would give him time, and that
he would make it known. It would rather appear, from [Dan
2:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#024), that the first direct
audience which he had with the king was after the thing was made known
to him in a night vision, and it would scarcely accord with established
Oriental usages that he should go immediately and unceremoniously into
the royal presence. A petition, presented through some one who had
access to the king, would meet all the circumstances of the case.

That he would give him time - He did not specify "why" he desired time,
though the reason why he did it is plain enough. He wished to lay the
matter before God, and to engage his friends in earnest prayer that the
dream and the interpretation might be made known to him. This request
was granted to him. It may seem remarkable, as no time was allowed to
the Chaldeans that they might make inquiry [Dan
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#008), that such a favor should have
been granted to Daniel, especially after the execution of the sentence
had been commenced; but we are to remember

\(1\) that the king would recollect the favor which he had already shown
Daniel on good grounds, and the fact that he regarded him as endowed
with great wisdom, [Dan 1:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#019).

\(2\) Daniel did not ask, as the Chaldeans did, that the king should
tell the dream before he undertook to explain it, but he proposed
evidently to unfold the whole matter.

\(3\) It could not but occur to the king that Daniel had not yet been
consulted, and that it was but reasonable that he should have a fair
trial now, since it appeared that he was involved in the general
sentence.

\(4\) The anxiety of the king to understand the dream was so great that
he was willing to grasp at "any" hope in order that his perplexities
might be relieved; and

\(5\) It is not improper to suppose that there may have been a Divine
influence on the mind of this monarch, making' him willing to do so
simple an act of justice as this, in order that it might be seen and
acknowledged that the hand of God was in the whole matter.

[Daniel 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 2:17</span></span>

Then Daniel went to his house - It is quite evident that he had obtained
the object of his request, though this is not expressly mentioned. The
king was undoubtedly, for the reasons above stated, willing that he
should have a fair opportunity to try his skill in disclosing the
mysterious secret.

And made the thing known to Hananiah ... - Made the whole matter known -
the perplexity respecting the dream; the failure of the Chaldeans to
interpret it; the decree; and his own petition to the king. They had a
common interest in knowing it, as their lives were all endangered.

[Daniel 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">dan 2:18</span></span>

That they would desire mercies of the God of heaven concerning this
secret - That they would implore of God that he would show his mercy to
them in revealing this secret, that their lives might be spared. In the
margin, as in the Chaldee, this is "from before the God of heaven." All
depended now on God. It was clear that human skill was exhausted, and
that no reliance could be placed on any ability which man possessed. The
art of the Chaldeans had failed, and Daniel, as well by this failure as
by the promptings of his own feelings, must now have perceived that the
only hope was in God, and that his favor in the case was to be obtained
only by prayer. As his three friends were equally interested in the
issue, and as it was an early principle of religion, and one found in
all dispensations (compare [Mat
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#019)), that "united" prayer has
special power with God, it was natural and proper to call on his friends
to join with him in asking this favor from Him who alone could grant it.
It was the natural and the last resource of piety, furnishing an example
of what all may do, and should do, in times of perplexity and danger.

That Daniel and his fellows should not perish - Margin, "or, they should
not destroy Daniel." The leading in the margin is most in accordance
with the Chaldee, though the sense is substantially the same. The word
"fellows" is the same which is before rendered "companions."

With the rest of the wise men of Babylon - It seems to have been certain
that the decree would be executed on the Chaldeans, soothsayers, etc.
And, indeed, there was no reason "why" the decree should not be
executed. They had confessed their inability to comply with the king's
command, and whatever Daniel could now do could not be construed in
their favor as furnishing any reason why the decree should not be
executed on them. It was presumed, therefore, that the law, severe as it
seemed to be, would be carried into effect on them, and we may suppose
that this was probably done. The only hope of their escaping from the
common lot was in the belief that the God whom they served would now
interpose in their behalf.

[Daniel 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 2:19</span></span>

Then was the secret revealed ... - To wit, the dream and the
interpretation. The thing which had been "hidden" was disclosed. We may
suppose that this occurred after a suitable time had been given to
prayer.

In a night vision - A representation made to him at night, but whether
when he was asleep or awake does not appear. Compare the notes at [Dan
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#017); [Isa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001); [Job
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#013); [Job
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#015).

Then Daniel blessed the God of heaven - Nothing would be more natural
than that he should burst forth in a song of grateful praise for
disclosing a secret by means of which his life, and the lives of his
companions, would be preserved, and by which such signal honor would
redound to God himself, as alone able to reveal coming events.

[Daniel 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">dan 2:20</span></span>

Daniel answered and said - The word "answer," in the Scriptures, often
occurs substantially in the sense of "speak" or "say." It does not
always denote a reply to something that has been said by another, as it
does with us, but is often used when a speech is commenced, as if one
were replying to something that "might" be said in the case, or as
meaning that the circumstances in the case gave rise to the remark. Here
the meaning is, that Daniel responded, as it were, to the goodness which
God had manifested, and gave utterance to his feelings in appropriate
expressions of praise.

Blessed be the name of God forever and ever - That is, blessed be God -
the "name," in the Scriptures, being often used to denote the person
himself. It is common in the Bible to utter ascriptions of praise to God
in view of important revelations, or in view of great mercies. Compare
the song of Moses after the passage of the Red Sea, Exo. 15; the song of
Deborah after the overthrow of Sisera, Judg. 5; [Isa
12:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001).

For wisdom, and might are his - Both these were manifested in a
remarkable manner in the circumstances of this case, and therefore these
were the beginnings of the song of praise: "wisdom," as now imparted to
Daniel, enabling him to disclose this secret, when all human skill had
failed; and "might," as about to be evinced in the changes of empire
indicated by the dream and the interpretation. Compare [Jer
32:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#019), "Great in counsel, and mighty
in work."

[Daniel 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">dan 2:21</span></span>

And he changeth the times and the seasons - The object of this is to
assert the general control of God in reference to all changes which
occur. The assertion is made, undoubtedly, in view of the revolutions in
empire which Daniel now saw, from the signification of the dream, were
to take place under the Divine hand. Foreseeing now these vast changes
denoted by different parts of the image [Dan
2:36-45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#036), stretching into far-distant
times, Daniel was led to ascribe to God the control over "all" the
revolutions which occur on earth. There is no essential difference
between the words "times" and "seasons." The words in Chaldee denote
stated or appointed seasons; and the idea of times "appointed, set,
determined," enters into both. Times and seasons are not under the
control of chance, but are bounded by established laws; and yet God, who
appointed these laws, has power to change them, and all the changes
which occur under those laws are produced by his agency. Thus the
changes which occur in regard to day and night, spring and summer,
autumn and winter, clouds and sunshine, health and sickness, childhood
and youth, manhood and age, are under his control. Such changes, being
in accordance with certain laws, may be regarded as "appointed," or
"set," and yet the laws and the revolutions consequent on them are all
under his control. So in regard to the revolutions of empire. By the
arrangements of his providence he secures such revolutions as he shall
see it to be best should occur, and in all of them his high hand should
be regarded. The words "seasons" and "times" are of frequent occurrence
in Daniel, and are sometimes used in a peculiar sense (see the notes at
[Dan 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#012), [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025)), but they seem here to be
employed in their usual and general signification, to denote that "all"
the revolutions which occur on earth are under his control.

He removeth kings, and setteth up kings - He has absolute control over
all the sovereigns of the earth, to place on the throne whom he will,
and to remove them when he pleases. This was doubtless suggested to
Daniel, and was made the foundation of this portion of his hymn of
praise, from what he was permitted to see in the disclosures made to him
in the interpretation of the dream. He then saw (compare [Dan
2:37-45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#037)) that there would be most
important revolutions of kingdoms under the hand of God, and being
deeply impressed with these great prospective changes, he makes this
general statement, that it was the prerogative of God to do this at
pleasure. Nebuchadnezzar was brought to feel this, and to recognize it,
when he said [Dan 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#017), "The Most High
ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will;" "he
doeth according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the
inhabitants of the earth: none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What
doest thou?"

[Dan 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#032), [Dan
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#035). This claim is often asserted for
God in the Scriptures as a proof of his supremacy and greatness. "For
promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the
south: but God is the judge; he putteth down one, and setteth up
another," [Psa 75:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#006). Compare [Sa1
2:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#007). Thus he claimed absolute
control over Sennacherib to employ him at his pleasure in executing his
purposes of punishment on the Hebrew nation [Isa
10:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005), and thus over Cyrus to execute
his purposes on Babylon, and to restore his people to their land, [Isa
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001), following See also [Isa
46:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#010). In this manner, all the
kings of the earth may be regarded as under his control; and if the
Divine plan were fully understood it would be found that each one has
received his appointment under the Divine direction, to accomplish some
important part in carrying forward the Divine plans to their
fulfillment. A history of human affairs, showing the exact purpose of
God in regard to each ruler who has occupied a throne, and the exact
object which God designed to accomplish by placing "him" on the throne
at the time when he did, would be a far more important and valuable
history than any which has been written. Of many such rulers, like
Cyrus, Sennacherib, Pilate, Henry VIII, Edward VI, and the Elector of
Saxony, we can see the reason why they lived and reigned when they did;
and doubtless God has had some important end to accomplish in the
development of his great plans in the case of every one who has ever
occupied a throne.

He giveth wisdom unto the wise ... - He is the source of all true wisdom
and knowledge. This is often claimed for God in the Scriptures. Compare
[Pro 2:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#006) :

"For the Lord giveth wisdom;

Out of his mouth cometh knowledge and understanding.

He layeth up sound wisdom for the righteous;

He is a buckler to them that walk uprightly."

See also [Kg1 3:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#009); [Exo
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#003). God claims to be the source of
all wisdom and knowledge. He originally formed each human intellect, and
made it what it is; he opens before it the paths of knowledge; he gives
to it clearness of perception; he preserves its powers so that they do
not become deranged; he has power to make suggestions, to direct the
laws of association, to fix the mind on important thoughts, and to open
before it new and interesting views of truth. And as it would be found,
if the history could be written, that God has placed each monarch on the
throne with a distinct reference to some important purpose in the
development of his great plans, so probably it would be seen that each
important work of genius which has been written; each invention in the
arts; and each discovery in science has been, for a similar purpose,
under his control. He has created the great intellect just at the time
when it was needful that such a discovery or invention should be made,
and having prepared the world for it by the course of events, the
discovery or invention has occurred just at the time when, on the whole,
it was most desirable that it should.

[Daniel 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">dan 2:22</span></span>

He revealeth the deep and secret things - Things which are too profound
for man to fathom by his own power, and which are concealed or hidden
until he makes them known. What is said here is an advance on what was
affirmed in the previous verse, and relates to another kind of
knowledge. "That" related to such knowledge as was not properly beyond
the grasp of the human intellect when unaided in any supernatural
manner, and affirmed that even then all discoveries and inventions are
to be traced to God; "this" refers to a species of knowledge which lies
beyond any natural compass of the human powers, and in which a
supernatural influence is needed - such things as the Chaldeans and
astrologers claimed the power of disclosing. The assertion here is, that
when the highest human wisdom showed itself insufficient for the
exigency, God was able to disclose those deep truths which it was
desirable for man to understand. Applied generally, this refers to the
truths made known by revelation - truths which man could never have
discovered by his unaided powers.

He knoweth what is in the darkness - What appears to man to be involved
in darkness, and on which no light seems to shine. This may refer not
only to what is concealed from man in the literal darkness of night, but
to all that is mysterious; all that lies beyond the range of human
inquiry; all that pertains to unseen worlds. An immensely large portion
of the universe lies wholly beyond the range of human investigation at
present, and is, of course, dark to man.

And the light dwelleth with him - The word rendered "dwelleth" (שׁרא
sherēl) means, properly, to loose, to unbind, to solve, as e. g., hard
questions, [Dan 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#016); and is then
applied to travelers who unbind the loads of their beasts to put up for
the night, and then it comes to mean to put up for the night, to lodge,
to dwell. Hence, the meaning is, that the light abides with God; it is
there as in its appropriate dwelling-place; he is in the midst of it:
all is light about him; light when it is sent out goes from him; when it
is gathered together, its appropriate place is with him. Compare [Job
38:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#019) :

"Where is the way where light dwelleth?

And as for darkness, where is the place thereof?

That thou shouldest take it to the bound thereof,

And that thou shouldest know the paths to the house thereof?"

See the note at that passage. Compare also [Ti1
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016) : "Dwelling in the light which no
man can approach unto." [Jo1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005) :
"God is light, and in him is no darkness at all."

[Daniel 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">dan 2:23</span></span>

I thank thee, and praise thee, O thou God of my fathers - By his
"fathers" here, Daniel refers doubtless to the Jewish people in general,
and not to his own particular ancestors. The meaning of the phrase "God
of my fathers" is, that he had been their protector; had regarded them
as his people; had conferred on them great favors. The particular ground
of thanksgiving here is, that the same God who had so often revealed
himself to the Hebrew people by the prophets in their own land, had now
condescended to do the same thing to one of their nation, though a
captive in a strange country. The favor thus bestowed had an increased
value, from the fact that it showed that the Hebrew people were not
forgotten, though far from the land of their birth, and that, though in
captivity, they might still hope for the benign interposition of God.

Who hast given me wisdom and might - The word "wisdom" here undoubtedly
refers to the ability which had now been given him to declare the nature
and purport of the dream, imparting to him a degree of wisdom far
superior to those pretenders to whom the matter had been at first
submitted. The word "might" (Chaldee, strength - גבוּרתא gebûrethâ')
does not probably differ materially from "wisdom." It means "ability" to
interpret the dream - implying that it was a task beyond natural human
ability.

For thou hast now made known unto us the king's matter - That is, it had
been made known to him and his friends. He joins himself with them, for,
although it was particularly made known to him, yet, as they had united
with him in prayer that the secret might be disclosed, and as they
shared common dangers, he regarded it as in fact made known to them all.

[Daniel 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">dan 2:24</span></span>

Therefore Daniel went in, unto Arioch - In view of the fact that the
matter was now disclosed to him, he proposed to lay it before the king.
This of course, he did not do directly, but through Arioch, who was
entrusted with the execution of the decree to slay the wise men of
Babylon. That officer would naturally have access to the king, and it
was proper that a proposal to arrest the execution of the sentence
should be made through his instrumentality. The Chaldee דנה כל־קבל
kôl-qebēl denâh is, properly, "on this whole account " - or, "on this
whole account because" - in accordance with the usually full and
pleonastic mode of writing particles, Similar to the German
"alldieweil," or the compound English "forasmuch as." The meaning is,
that in view of the whole matter, he sought to lay the case before the
king.

Destroy not the wise men of Babylon - That is, "Stay the execution of
the sentence on them. Though they have failed to furnish the
interpretation demanded, yet, as it can now be given, there is no
occasion for the exercise of this severity." The ground of the sentence
was that they could not interpret the dream. As the execution of the
sentence involved Daniel and his friends, and as the reason why it was
passed at all would now cease by his being able to furnish the required
explanation, Daniel felt that it was a matter of mere justice that the
execution of the sentence should cease altogether.

Bring me in before the king - It would seem from this that Daniel did
not regard himself as having free access to the king, and he would not
unceremoniously intrude himself into his presence. This verse confirms
the interpretation given of [Dan 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#016),
and makes it in the highest degree probable that this was the first
occasion on which he was personally before the king in reference to this
matter.

[Daniel 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">dan 2:25</span></span>

Then Arioch brought in Daniel before the king in haste - The Chaldee
word used here implies "in tumultuous haste," as of one who was
violently excited, or in a state of trepidation, from בהל bâhal - "to
tremble, to be in trepidation." The trepidation in this case may have
arisen from one or both of two causes:

\(1\) exultation, or joy, that the great secret was discovered; or

\(2\) joy that the effusion of blood might be stayed, and that there
might be now no necessity to continue the execution of the sentence
against the wise men.

I have found a man - Margin, as in Chaldee, "That I have found a man It
is not to be supposed that Arioch had known anything of the application
which Daniel had made to the king to delay the execution of the sentence
[Dan 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#016), and, for anything that
appears, he had suspended that execution on his own responsibility.
Ignorant as he was, therefore, of any such arrangement, and viewing only
his own agency in the matter, it was natural for him to go in and
announce this as something entirely new to the king, and without
suggesting that the execution of the sentence had been at all delayed.
It was a most remarkable circumstance, and one which looks like a Divine
interposition, that he should have been disposed to delay the execution
of the sentence at all, so that Daniel could have an opportunity of
showing whether he could not divulge the secret. All the circumstances
of the case seem to imply that Arioch was not a man of a cruel
disposition, but was disposed, as far as possible, to prevent the
effusion of blood.

Of the captives of Judah - Margin, as in Chaldee, "of the children of
the captivity." The word "Judah" here probably refers to the "country"
rather than to the "people," and means that he was among those who had
been brought from the land of Judah.

That will make known unto the king the interpretation - It is clear,
from the whole narrative, that Arioch had great confidence in Daniel.
All the "evidence" which he could halve that he would be able to make
this known, must have been from the fact that Daniel "professed" to be
able to do it; but such was his confidence in him that he had no doubt
that he would be able to do it.

[Daniel 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">dan 2:26</span></span>

The king answered, and said to Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar - See
the notes at [Dan 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#007). The "king" may
have addressed him by this name, and probably did during this interview.
This was the name, it would seem, by which he was known in Babylon - a
name which implied honor and respectability, as being conferred on one
whom it was supposed the principal Babylonian divinity favored.

Art thou able to make known unto me the dream? - One of the first points
in the difficulty was to recal "the dream itself," and hence, this was
the first inquiry which the king presented. If he could not recal that,
of course the matter was at an end, and the law would be suffered to
take its course.

[Daniel 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">dan 2:27</span></span>

Daniel answered in the presence of the king, and said, The secret which
the king hath demanded, cannot the wise men ... show unto the king -
Daniel regarded it as a settled and indisputable point that the solution
could not be hoped for from the Chaldean sages. The highest talent which
the realm could furnish had been applied to, and had failed. It was
clear, therefore, that there was no hope that the difficulty would be
removed by human skill. Besides this, Daniel would seem also to intimate
that the thing, from the necessity of the case, was beyond the compass
of the human powers. Alike in reference to the question whether a
forgotten dream could be recalled, and to the actual "signification" of
a dream so remarkable as this, the whole matter was beyond the ability
of man.

The wise men, the astrologers ... - On these words, see the notes at
[Dan 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#020). All these words occur in
that verse, except גזרין gâzerı̂yn - rendered "soothsayers." This is
derived from גזר gezar - "to cut, to cut off;" and then "to decide, to
determine;" and it is thus applied to those who decide or determine the
fates or destiny of men; that is, those who "by casting nativities from
the place of the stars at one's birth, and by various arts of computing
and divining, foretold the fortunes and destinies of individuals." See
Gesenius, "Com. z. Isa." 2:349-356, Section 4, Von den Chaldern und
deren Astrologie. On p. 555, he has given a figure, showing how the
heavens were "cut up," or "divided," by astrologers in the practice of
their art. Compare the phrase numeri Babylonii, in Hor. "Carm." I. xi.
2. The Greek is γαζαρηνῶν gazarēnōn - the Chaldee word in Greek letters.
This is one of the words - not very few in number - which the authors of
the Greek version did not attempt to translate. Such words, however, are
not useless, as they serve to throw light on the question how the Hebrew
and Chaldee were pronounced before the vowel points were affixed to
those languages.

[Daniel 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">dan 2:28</span></span>

But there is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets - One of the
principal objects contemplated in all that occurred respecting this
dream and its interpretation was, to direct the mind of the monarch to
the true God, and to secure the acknowledgment of his supremacy. Hence,
it was so ordered that those who were most eminent for wisdom, and who
were regarded as the favorites of heaven, were constrained to confess
their entire inability to explain the mystery. The way was thus prepared
to show that he who "could" do this must be the true God, and must be
worthy of adoration and praise. Thus prepared, the mind of the monarch
was now directed by this pious Hebrew youth, though a captive, to a
truth so momentous and important. His whole training, his modesty and
his piety, all were combined to lead him to attribute whatever skill he
might evince in so difficult a matter to the true God alone: and we can
scarcely conceive of a more sublime object of contemplation than this
young man, in the most magnificent court of the world, directing the
thoughts of the most mighty monarch that then occupied a throne, to the
existence and the perfections of the true God.

And maketh known to the king Nebuchadnezzar - Margin, "hath made." The
translation in the text is more correct, for it was not true that he had
as yet actually made these things known to the king. He had furnished
intimations of what was to occur, but he had not yet been permitted to
understand their signification.

What shall be in the latter days - Greek ἐπ ̓ ἐσχάτων τῶν ἡμερῶν ep'
eschatōn tōn hēmerōn - "in the last days." Vulgate, in novissimis
temporibus - "in the last times." Chaldee, יומיא באחרית be'achărı̂yth
yômayâ' - "in the after days;" or, as Faber expresses it, "in the
afterhood of days." The phrase means what we should express by saying,
"hereafter - in future times - in time to come." This phrase often has
special reference to the times of the Messiah, as the last dispensation
of things on the earth, or as that under which the affairs of the world
will be wound up. Compare the notes at [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002). It does not appear, however, to
be used in that sense here, but it denotes merely "future" times. The
phrase "the latter days," therefore, does not exactly convey the sense
of the original. It is "future" days rather than "latter" days.

Thy dream, and the visions of thy head upon thy bed - The phrase
"visions of thy head" means conceptions or notions formed by the brain.
It would seem from this, that, even in the time of Daniel, the brain was
regarded as, in some sense, the organ of thinking, or that "thought" had
its seat in the head. We are not to suppose that by the use of these
different expressions Daniel meant to describe two things, or to
intimate that Nebuchadnezzar had had visions which were distinct. What
he saw might be described as a dream or a vision; it, in fact, had the
nature of both.

Are these - "These which I now proceed to describe."

[Daniel 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">dan 2:29</span></span>

As for thee, O king, thy thoughts came into thy mind upon thy bed -
Margin, "up;" that is, thy thoughts ascended. The Chaldee is, "thy
thoughts ascended" - סלקוּ selı̂qû. So the Greek: "Thy thoughts ascended
(ἀνέβησαν anebēsan) upon thy couch." There is, evidently, some allusion
to the thoughts "ascending," or "going up;" and perhaps the idea is,
that they were employed on important subjects - an idea which we now
express by saying that one's thoughts are "elevated," as contrasted with
those which are "low" and "grovelling."

What should come to pass hereafter - It would seem most probable from
this, that the thoughts of Nebuchadnezzar were occupied with this
subject in his waking moments on his bed, and that the dream was grafted
on this train of thought when he fell asleep. Nothing is more probable
than that his thoughts might be thus occupied. The question respecting
his successor; the changes which might occur; the possibility of
revolutions in other kingdoms, or in the provinces of his own vast
empire, all were topics on which his mind would probably be employed. As
God designed, too, to fix his thoughts particularly on that general
subjects the changes which were to occur in his empire - such an
occasion, when his attention was greatly engrossed with the subject,
would be very suitable to impart the knowledge which he did by this
vision. Daniel refers to this, probably, because it would do much to
confirm the monarch in the belief of his inspiration, if he referred to
the train of thought which had preceded the dream; as it is not
improbable that the king would remember his "waking" thoughts on the
subject, though his "dream" was forgotten.

[Daniel 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">dan 2:30</span></span>

But as for me - So far as I am concerned in this matter, or whatever
skill or wisdom I may evince in the interpretation, it is not to be
traced to myself. The previous verse commences with the expression "as
for thee;" and in this verse, by the phrase "as for me," Daniel puts
himself in strong contrast with the king. The way in which this was done
was not such as to flatter the vanity of the king, and cannot be
regarded as the art of the courtier, and yet it was such as would be
universally adopted to conciliate his favor, and to give him an elevated
idea of the modesty and piety of the youthful Daniel. In the previous
verse he says, that, as to what pertained to the king, God had greatly
honored him by giving him important intimations of what was yet to
occur. Occupying the position which he did, it might be supposed that it
would not be wholly unnatural that he should be thus favored, and Daniel
does not say, as in his own case, that it was not on account of anything
in the character and rank of the king that this had been communicated to
him. But when he comes to speak of himself - a youth; a captive; a
stranger in Babylon; a native of another land - nothing was more natural
or proper than that he should state distinctly that it was not on
account of anything in him that this was done.

This secret is not revealed to me for any wisdom that I have more than
any living - That is, "it is not "by" any wisdom which I have above
others, nor is it "on account of" any previous wisdom which I have
possessed or manifested." There is an absolute and total disclaimer of
the idea that it was in any sense, or in any way, on account of his own
superiority in wisdom. All the knowledge which he had in the case was to
be traced entirely to God.

But for their sakes that shall make known the interpretation to the king
- Margin, "or, the intent that the interpretation may be made known."
The margin is the more correct rendering, and should have been admitted
into the text. The literal translation is, "but (להן lâhēn) on account
of the thing that they might make known the interpretation to the king."
The word rendered "make known" is indeed in the plural, but it is
evidently used in an impersonal sense, meaning that the interpretation
would be made known. "It was to the intent that they might make it
known;" that is, that somebody might do it, or that it might be done.
Would not modesty and delicacy lead to the choice of such an expression
here, inclining Daniel to avoid, as far as possible, all mention of
himself? The main thought is, that the grand object to be secured was
not to glorify Daniel, or any other human being, but to communicate to
this pagan monarch important truths respecting coming events, and
through him to the world.

And that thou mightest know the thoughts of thy heart - In reference to
this matter; that is, that he might be able to recal the thoughts which
passed through his mind in the dream. This [Dan
2:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#027) is the introduction to the
important disclosure which Daniel was about to make to the king. This
entire disclaimer of the honor of having originated the interpretation
by his own wisdom, and the ascribing of it to God, are worthy here of
special attention. It is probable that the magicians were accustomed to
ascribe to their own skill and sagacity the ability to interpret dreams
and the other prognostics of the future, and to claim special honor on
that account. In opposition to this, Daniel utterly disclaims any such
wisdom himself, and attributes the skill which he has entirely to God.
This is a beautiful illustration of the nature of modesty and piety. It
places before us a young man, having now the prospect of being elevated
to great honors; under every temptation to arrogate the possession of
extraordinary wisdom to himself; suddenly exalted above all the sages of
the most splendid court on earth, disclaiming all merit, and declaring
in the most solemn manner that whatever profound wisdom there might be
in the communication which he was about to make, it was not in the
slightest degree to be traced to himself. See the remarks at the end of
the chapter, (6.)

[Daniel 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">dan 2:31</span></span>

Thou, O king, sawest - Margin, "wast seeing." The margin is in
accordance with the Chaldee. The language is properly what denotes a
prolonged or attentive observation. He was in an attitude favorable to
vision, or was looking with intensity, and there appeared before him
this remarkable image. Compare [Dan
7:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001), [Dan
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#004), [Dan
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#006). It was not a thing which appeared
for a moment, and then vanished, but which remained so long that he
could contemplate it with accuracy.

And, behold, a great image - Chaldee, "one image that was grand" - שׂגיא
חד צלם tselēm chad s'agı̂y'. So the Vulgate - statua una grandis. So the
Greek - εἰκὼν μία eikōn mia. The object seems to be to fix the attention
on the fact that there was but "one" image, though composed of so
different materials, and of materials that seemed to be so little fitted
to be worked together into the same statue. The idea, by its being
represented as "one," is, that it was, in some respects, "the same
kingdom" that he saw symbolized: that is, that it would extend over the
same countries, and could be, in some sense, regarded as a prolongation
of the same empire. There was so much of "identity," though different in
many respects, that it could be represented as "one." The word rendered
"image" (צלם tselem) denotes properly "a shade," or "shadow," and then
anything that "shadows forth," or that represents anything.

It is applied to man [Gen 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027) as
shadowing forth, or representing God; that is, there was something in
man when he was created which had so far a resemblance to God that he
might be regarded as an "image" of him. The word is often used to denote
idols - as supposed to be a "representation" of the gods, either in
their forms, or as shadowing forth their character as majestic, stern,
mild, severe, merciful, etc. [Num
33:52](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#052); [Sa1
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#005); [Kg2
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#018); [Ch2
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#017); [Eze
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#020); [Eze
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#017); [Eze
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#014); [Amo
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#026). This image is not represented as
an idol to be worshipped, nor in the use of the word is it to be
supposed that there is an allusion, as Prof. Bush supposes, to the fact
that these kingdoms would be idolatrous, but the word is used in its
proper and primitive sense, to denote something which would "represent,"
or "shadow forth," the kingdoms which would exist. The exact "size" of
the image is not mentioned. It is only suggested that it was great - a
proper characteristic to represent the "greatness" of the kingdoms to
which it referred.

This great image - The word here rendered "great" (רב rab) is different
from that used in the previous clause, though it is not easy to
determine the exact difference between the words. Both denote that the
image was of gigantic dimensions. It is well remarked by Prof. Bush,
that "the monuments of antiquity sufficiently evince that the humor
prevailed throughout the East, and still more in Egypt, of constructing
enormous statues, which were usually dedicated to some of their deities,
and connected with their worship. The object, therefore, now presented
in the monarch's dream was not, probably, entirely new to his thoughts."

Whose brightness was excellent - "Whose brightness "excelled," or was
unusual and remarkable." The word rendered brightness (זיו zı̂yv) is
found only in Daniel. It is rendered "brightness" in [Dan
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#031); [Dan
4:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#036), and in the margin in [Dan
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#006), [Dan
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#009); and "countenance" in [Dan
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#006) (text), and in [Dan
2:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#009); [Dan
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#028). From the places where it is
found, particularly [Dan 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#036), it is
clear that it is used to denote a certain beauty, or majesty, shining
forth in the countenance, which was fitted to impress the beholder with
awe. The term here is to be understood not merely of the face of the
image, but of its entire aspect, as having something in it signally
splendid and imposing. We have only to conceive of a colossal statue
whose head was burnished gold, and a large part of whose frame was
polished silver, to see the force of this language.

Stood before thee - It stood over against him in full view. He had an
opportunity of surveying it clearly and distinctly.

And the form thereof was terrible - Vast, imposing, grand, fearful. The
sudden appearance of such an object as this could not but fill the mind
with terror. The design for which this representation was made to
Nebuchadnezzar is clearly unfolded in the explanation which Daniel
gives. It may be remarked here, in general, that such an appearance of a
gigantic image was well adapted to represent successive kingdoms, and
that the representation was in accordance with the spirit of ancient
times. "In ancient coins and medals," says the editor of the "Pictorial
Bible," "nothing is more common than to see cities and nations
represented by human figures, male or female. According to the ideas
which suggested such symbols, a vast image in the human figure was,
therefore, a very fit emblem of sovereign power and dominion; while the
materials of which it was composed did most significantly typify the
character of the various empires, the succession of which was foreshown
by this vision. This last idea, of expressing the condition of things by
metallic symbols, was prevalent before the time of Daniel. Hesiod, who
lived about two centuries before Daniel, characterizes the succession of
ages (four) by the very same metals - gold, silver, brass, and iron."

[Daniel 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">dan 2:32</span></span>

This image's head was of fine gold - Chaldee, "good gold" - טב דהב dehab
ṭâb - that is, fine, pure, unalloyed. The whole head of the figure,
colossal as it was, appeared to be composed wholly of this. Had the
"whole" image been made of gold, it would not have been so striking -
for it was not uncommon to construct vast statues of this metal. Compare
[Dan 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#001). But the remarkable
peculiarity of this image was, that it was composed of different
materials, some of which were seldom or never used in such a structure,
and all of which had a peculiar significancy. On the significancy of
this part of the figure, and the resemblance between this head of gold
and Nebuchadnezzar himself, see the notes at [Dan
2:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#037).

His breast and his arms of silver - The word rendered "breast" (חדין
chădı̂y) is in the plural number, in accordance with common usage in the
Hebrew, by which several members of the human body are often expressed
in the plural; as פנים pânı̂ym - "faces," etc. There is a foundation for
such a usage in nature, in the two-fold form of many of the portions of
the human body. The portion of the body which is here represented is
obviously the upper portion of the front part - what is prominently
visible when we look at the human frame. Next to the head it is the most
important part, as it embraces most of the vital organs. Some degree of
inferiority, as well as the idea of succession, would be naturally
represented by this. "The inferior value of silver as compared with gold
will naturally suggest some degree of decline or degeneracy in the
character of the subject represented by the metal; and so in other
members, as we proceed downward, as the material becomes continually
baser, we naturally infer that the subject deteriorates, in some sense,
in the like manner." - Professor Bush, in loc. On the kingdom
represented by this, and the propriety of this representation, see the
notes at [Dan 2:39](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#039).

His belly and his thighs of brass - Margin, "sides." It is not necessary
to enter minutely into an examination of the words here used. The word
"belly" denotes, unquestionably, the regions of the abdomen as
externally visible. The word rendered "thighs" in the text is rendered
"sides" in the margin. It is, like the word "breast" in the previous
verse, in the plural number and for the same reason. The Hebrew word
(ירך yârêk) is commonly rendered "thigh" in the Scriptures ([Gen
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#002), [Gen
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#009); [Gen
32:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#025) (26), 31, 32(32, 33), et al.),
though it is also frequently rendered "side," [Exo
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#027); [Exo
40:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#022), [Exo
40:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#024); [Lev
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#011); [Num
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#029), et al. According to Gesenius, it
denotes "the thick and double fleshy member which commences at the
bottom of the spine, and extends to the lower legs." It is that part on
which the sword was formerly worn, [Exo
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#027); [Jdg
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#016), [Jdg
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#021); [Psa
45:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003) (4). It is also that part which
was smitten, as an expression of mourning or of indignation, [Jer
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#019); [Eze
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#012) (17). Compare Hom. Iliad xii.
162, xv. 397; Odyssey xiii. 198; Cic. 150: "Orat." 80; "Quinc." xi. 3.
It is not improperly here rendered "thighs," and the portion of the
figure that was of brass was that between the breast and the lower legs,
or extended from the breast to the knees. The word is elsewhere employed
to denote the shaft or main trunk of the golden candlestick of the
tabernacle, [Exo 25:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031); [Exo
37:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#017); [Num
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#004).

Of brass - An inferior metal, and denoting a kingdom of inferior power
or excellence. On the kingdom represented by this, see the notes at [Dan
2:39](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#039).

[Daniel 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">dan 2:33</span></span>

His legs of iron - The portion of the lower limbs from the knees to the
ankles. This is undoubtedly the usual meaning of the English word
"legs," and it as clearly appears to be the sense of the original word
here. Iron was regarded as inferior to either of the other metals
specified, and yet was well adapted to denote a kingdom of a particular
kind - less noble in some respects, and yet hardy, powerful, and adapted
to tread down the world by conquest. On the application of this, see the
notes at [Dan 2:40](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#040).

His feet part of iron and part of clay - As to his feet; or in respect
to his feet, they were partly of iron and partly of clay - a mixture
denoting great strength, united with what is fragile and weak. The word
rendered "clay" in this place (חסף chăsaph) is found nowhere else except
in this chapter, and is always rendered "clay," [Dan
2:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#033), [Dan
2:41](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#041) (twice), 42, 43 (twice), 45. In
some instances [Dan 2:41](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#041), [Dan
2:43](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#043), the epithet "miry" is applied to
it. This would seem to imply that it was not "burnt or baked clay," or
"earthenware," as Professor Bush supposes, but clay in its natural
state. The idea would seem to be, that the framework, so to speak, was
iron, with clay worked in, or filling up the interstices, so as to
furnish an image of strength combined with what is weak. That it would
be well adapted represent a kingdom that had many elements of permanency
in it, yet that was combined with things that made it weak - a mixture
of what was powerful with what was liable to be crushed; capable of
putting forth great efforts, and of sustaining great shocks, and yet
having such elements of feebleness and decay as to make it liable to be
overthrown. For the application of this, see the notes at [Dan
2:41-43](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#041).

[Daniel 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">dan 2:34</span></span>

Thou sawest - Chaldee, "Thou wast seeing;" that is, thou didst continue
to behold, implying that the vision was of somewhat long continuance. It
did not appear and then suddenly vanish, but it remained so long that he
had an opportunity of careful observation.

Till that a stone was cut out without hands - That is, from a mountain
or hill, [Dan 2:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#045). This idea is
expressed in the Latin and the Greek version. The vision appears to have
been that of a colossal image "standing on a plain" in the vicinity of a
mountain, standing firm, until, by some unseen agency, and in an
unaccountable manner, a stone became detached from the mountain, and was
made to impinge against it. The margin here is, "which was not in his
hands." The more correct rendering of the Chaldee, however, is that in
the text, literally, "a stone was cut out which was not by hands" -
בידין bı̂ydayı̂n: or perhaps still more accurately, "a stone was cut out
which was not in hands," so that the fact that it was not in or by
"hands" refers rather to its not being projected by hands than to the
manner of its being detached from the mountain. The essential idea is,
that the agency of hands did not appear at all in the case. The stone
seemed to be self-moved. It became detached from the mountain, and, as
if instinct with life, struck the image and demolished it. The word
rendered "stone" ( אבן 'eben) determines nothing as to the "size" of the
stone, but the whole statement would seem to imply that it was not of
large dimensions. It struck upon "the feet" of the image, and it
"became" itself a great mountain [Dan
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035) - all which would seem to imply
that it was at first not large. What increased the astonishment of the
monarch was, that a stone of such dimensions should have been adequate
to overthrow so gigantic a statue, and to grind it to powder. The points
on which it was clearly intended to fix the attention of the monarch,
and which made the vision so significant and remarkable, were these:

\(a\) the colossal size and firmness of the image;

\(b\) the fact that a stone, not of large size, should be seen to be
selfdetached from the mountain, and to move against the image;

\(c\) the fact that it should completely demolish and pulverize the
colossal figure; and

\(d\) the fact that then this stone of inconsiderable size should be
itself mysteriously augmented until it filled the world.

It should be added, that the vision appears not to have been that of a
stone detached from the side of a hill, and rolling down the mountain by
the force of gravitation, but that of a stone detached, and then moving
off toward the image as if it had been thrown from a hand, though the
hand was unseen. This would very strikingly and appropriately express
the idea of something, apparently small in its origin, that was impelled
by a cause that was unseen, and that bore with mighty force upon an
object of colossal magnitude, by an agency that could not be explained
by the causes that usually operate. For the application and pertinency
of this, see the notes at [Dan
2:44-45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044).

Which smote the image upon his feet - The word here used (מחא mechâ')
means, to "strike," to "smite," without reference to the question
whether it is a single blow, or whether the blow is often repeated. The
Hebrew word (מחא mâchâ') is uniformly used as refering to "the clapping
of the hands;" that is, smiting them together, [Psa
98:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#008); [Isa
55:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#012); [Eze
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#006). The Chaldee word is used only
here and in [Dan 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035), referring to
the smiting of the image, and in [Dan
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#035) (32), where it is rendered "stay"
- "none can stay his hand." The connection here, and the whole
statement, would seem to demand the sense of a continued or prolonged
smiting, or of repeated blows, rather than a single concussion. The
great image was not only thrown down, but there was a subsequent process
of "comminution," independent of what would have been produced by the
fall. A fall would only have broken it into large blocks or fragments;
but this continued smiting reduced it to powder. This would imply,
therefore, not only a single shock, or violent blow, but some cause
continuing to operate until what had been overthrown was effectually
destroyed, like a vast image reduced to impalpable powder. The "first
concussion" on the feet made it certain that the colossal frame would
fall; but there was a longer process necessary before the whole effect
should be accomplished. Compare the notes at [Dan
2:44-45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044).

And brake them to pieces - In [Dan
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035), the idea is, "they became like
the chaff of the summer threshing-floors." The meaning is not that the
image was broken to "fragments," but that it was "beaten fine" - reduced
to powder - so that it might be scattered by the wind. This is the sense
of the Chaldee word (דקק deqaq), and of the Hebrew word also (דקק
dâqaq). See [Exo 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#020) : "And he took
the calf which they had made, and burned it in the fire, and ground it
to powder." [Deu 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#021) : "and I took
your sin, the calf which ye had made, and burnt it with fire, and
stamped it, and ground it very small, even until it was as small as
dust." [Isa 41:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#015) : "thou shalt thresh
the mountains and "beat them small," and shalt make the hills as chaff."
[Kg2 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#015) : "he burnt the high place,
and "stamped" it "small" to powder." [Ch2
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#004) : "and they brake down the
altars, etc., and "made dust" of them, and strewed it upon the graves of
them that had sacrificed unto them." Compare [Exo
30:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#036); [Ch2
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#007); [Kg2
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#006). From these passages it is clear
that the general meaning of the word is that of reducing anything to
fine dust or powder, so that it may be easily blown about by the wind.

[Daniel 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">dan 2:35</span></span>

Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold broken
to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer
threshing-floor - The word rendered "together" (כצרה kachădâh) our
translators would seem to have understood as referring to "time;" to its
being done simultaneously. The more literal interpretation, however, is,
"as one;" that is, "they were beaten small as one," referring to
identity of condition. They were all reduced to one indiscriminate mass;
to such a mass that the original materials could no longer be
distinguished, and would all be blown away together. The literal meaning
of the word (חד chad used and חדה chădâh) is, "one," or "first." [Ezr
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008), "wrote a letter;" [Ezr
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#013), "in the first year of Cyrus;"
[Ezr 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#002), "a roll;" [Dan
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#009); "there is but one decree for
you;" [Dan 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#019), "heat the furnace one
seven times hotter," etc. United with the preposition (כ k) it means "as
one," like the Hebrew כאחד ke'echâd) - [Ecc
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#006); [Ch2
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#013); [Ezr
2:64](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#064); [Ezr
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#009); [Isa
65:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#025). The phrase "chaff of the summer
threshing-floors" refers to the mode of winnowing grain in the East.
This was done in the open air, usually on an elevated place, by throwing
the grain, when thrashed, into the air with a shovel, and the wind thus
drove away the chaff. Such chaff, therefore, naturally became an emblem
of anything that was light, and that would be easily dissipated. See the
notes at [Isa 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#024); [Mat
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012).

And the wind carried them away, that no place was found for them - They
were entirely dissipated like chaff. As that seems to have no longer any
place, but is carried we know not where, so the figure here would denote
an entire annihilation of the power to which it refers.

And the stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled
the whole earth - The vision which was before the mind of the king as
here represented was, that the stone which was cut out of the mountain
was at first small, and that while he contemplated it, it swelled to
larger dimensions, until it became an immense mountain - a mountain that
filled the whole land. It was this which, perhaps more than anything
else, excited his wonder, that a stone, at first of so small dimensions,
should of itself so increase as to surpass the size of the mountain from
which it was cut, until it occupied every place in view. Everything
about it was so remarkable and unusual, that it was no wonder that he
could not explain it. We have now gone over a description of the literal
vision as it appeared to the mind of the monarch. Had it been left here,
it is clear that it would have been of difficult interpretation, and
possibly the true explanation might never have been suggested. We have,
however, an exposition by Daniel, which leaves no doubt as to its
design, and which was intended to carry the mind forward into some of
the most important and remarkable events of history. A portion of his
statement has been fulfilled; a part remains still unaccomplished, and a
careful exposition of his account of the meaning of the vision will lead
our thoughts to some of the most important historical events which have
occurred in introducing the Christian dispensation, and to events still
more important in the statement of what is yet to come.

[Daniel 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">dan 2:36</span></span>

This is the dream; and we will tell the interpretation thereof before
the king - Daniel here speaks in his own name, and in the name of his
companions. Hence, he says, "we will tell the interpretation." It was in
answer to their united supplications [Dan
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#018), that this meaning of the vision
had been made known to him; and it would not only have been a violation
of the rules of modesty, but an unjust assumption, if Daniel had claimed
the whole credit of the revelation to himself. Though he was the only
one who addressed the king, yet he seems to have desired that it might
be understood that he was not alone in the honor which God had
conferred, and that he wished that his companions should be had in just
remembrance. Compare [Dan 2:49](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#049).

[Daniel 2:37](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">dan 2:37</span></span>

Thou, O King, art a king of kings - The phrase "king of kings" is a
Hebraism, to denote a supreme monarch, or one who has other kings under
him as tributary, [Ezr 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#012); [Eze
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#007). As such it is applied by way of
eminence to the Son of God, in [Rev
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#014); [Rev
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#016). As here used, it means that
Nebuchadnezzar ruled over tributary kings and princes, or that he was
the most eminent of the kings of the earth. The scepter which he swayed
was, in fact, extended over many nations that were once independent
kingdoms, and the title here conferred on him was not one that was
designed to flatter the monarch, but was a simple statement of what was
an undoubted truth. Daniel would not withhold any title that was in
accordance with reality, as he did not withhold any communication in
accordance with reality that was adapted to humble the monarch.

For the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom ... - At the same time
that Daniel gave him a title which might in itself have ministered to
the pride of the monarch, he is careful to remind him that he held this
title in virtue of no wisdom or power of his own. It was the true God
who had conferred on him the sovereignty of these extensive realms, and
it was one of the designs of this vision to show him that he held his
power at his will, and that at his pleasure he could cause it to pass
away. It was the forgetfulness of this, and the pride resulting from
that forgetfulness, which led to the melancholy calamity which befel
this haughty monarch, as recorded in Dan. 4.

[Daniel 2:38](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">dan 2:38</span></span>

And wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts of the field, and
the fowls of the heavens, hath he given into thy hand - This is
evidently general language, and is not to be pressed literally. It is
designed to say that he ruled over the whole world; that is, the world
as then known. This is common language applied in the Scriptures to the
Babylonian, Persian, Grecian, and Roman kingdoms. Thus in [Dan
2:39](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#039), the third of these kingdoms, the
Grecian, was to "bear rule over all the earth." Compare [Dan
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#005) : "And, as I was considering,
behold, an he-goat came from the west on the face of the whole earth."
So of the Roman empire, in [Dan 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#023) :
"The fourth beast shall devour the whole earth." The declaration that
his kingdom embraced the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air is
a strong expression, meaning that he reigned over the whole world. A
somewhat similar description of the extent of the empire of the king of
Babylon occurs in [Jer 27:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#004) : "And
command them to say unto their masters, Thus saith the Lord of hosts,
the God of Israel, Thus shall ye say unto your masters; I have made the
earth, the man and the beast that are upon the ground, by my great
power, and by my outstretched arm, and have given it unto whom it seemed
meet unto me. And now I have given all these lands into the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, my servant; and the beasts of the
field I have given him also to serve him. And all nations shall serve
him, and his son, and his son's son, until the very time of his land
come: and then many nations and great kings shall serve themselves of
him. And it shall come to pass, that the nation and kingdom which will
not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, and that will
not put their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, that nation
will I punish, saith the Lord, with the sword, and with the famine, and
with the pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand."

At the time referred to by Daniel, the scepter of Nebuchadnezzar a
extended over all these realms, and the world was, in fact, placed
substantially under one head. "All the ancient Eastern histories," says
Bishop Newton, "almost are lost; but there are some fragments even of
pagan historians yet preserved, which speak of this mighty conqueror and
his extended empire. Berosus, in Josephus (Contra Apion, c. i. Section
19), says that he held in subjection Egypt, Syria, Phoenicia, Arabia,
and by his exploits surpassed all the Chaldeans and Babylonians who
reigned before him. Strabo asserts that this king among the Chaldeans
was more celebrated than Hercules; that he proceeded as far as to the
pillars of Hercules, and led his army out of Spain into Thrace and
Pontus. But his empire, though of great extent, was not of long
duration, for it ended in his grandson Belshazzar, not seventy years
after the delivery of this prophecy, nor above twenty-three years after
the death of Nebuchadnezzar." - Newton on the "Prophecies," pp. 186,
187.

Thou art this head of gold - The head of gold seen in the image
represents thee as the sovereign of a vast empire. Compared with the
other monarchs who are to succeed thee, thou art like gold compared with
silver, and brass, and iron; or, compared with thy kingdom, theirs shall
be as silver, brass, and iron compared with gold. It was common, at an
early period, to speak of different ages of the world as resembling
different metals. Compare the notes at [Dan
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#031). In reference to the expression
before us, "Thou art this head of gold," it should be observed, that it
is not probably to be confined to the monarch himself, but is rather
spoken of him as the head of the empire; as representing the state; as
an impersonation of that dynasty. The meaning is, that the Babylonian
empire, as it existed under him, in its relation to the kingdoms which
should succeed, was like the head of gold seen in the image as compared
with the inferior metals that made up the remaining portions of the
image. Daniel, as an interpreter, did not state in what the resemblance
consisted, nor in what respects his empire could be likened to gold as
compared with those which should follow. In the scanty details which we
now have of the life of that monarch, and of the events of his reign, it
may not be possible to see as clearly as would be desirable in what that
resemblance consisted, or the full propriety of the appellation given to
him. So far as may now be seen, the resemblance appears to have been in
the following things:

\(I\) In respect to the empire itself of which he was the sovereign, as
standing at the head of the others - the first in the line. This was not
indeed the first kingdom, but the design here was not to give an account
of all the empires on earth, but to take the world "as it was then," and
to trace the successive changes which would occur preparatory to the
establishment of the kingdom which should finally spread over the earth.
Viewed in reference to this design, it was undoubtedly proper to
designate the empire of Babylon "as the head." It not only stood before
them in the order of time, but in such a relation that the others might
be regarded as in some sort its successors; that is, "they would succeed
it in swaying a general scepter over the world." In this respect they
would resemble also the Babylonian. At the time here referred to, the
dominion over which Nebuchadnezzar swayed his scepter was at the head of
the nations; was the central power of the Pagan world; was the only
empire that could claim to be universal. For a long period the kingdom
of Babylon had been dependent on that of Assyria; and while Nineveh was
the capital of the Assyrian empire, Babylon was the head of a kingdom,
in general subordinate to that of Assyria, until Nabopolassar, the
immediate predecessor of Nebuchadnezzar, rendered the kingdom of Babylon
independent of the Assyrians, and transferred the seat of empire to
Babylon. This was about the year 626 before the Christian era. See
"Universal History," vol. iii. pp. 412-415. Nebuchadnezzar, receiving
this mighty kingdom, had carried his own arms to distant lands; had
conquered India, Tyre, and Egypt; and, as would appear, all Northern
Africa, as far as the pillars of Hercules, and, with quite unimportant
exceptions, all the known world was subject to him.

\(II\) The appellation "head of gold" may have been given him on account
of the splendor of his capital, and the magnificence of his court. In
[Isa 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#004), Babylon is called "the
golden city." See the note at that place. In [Isa
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#019), it is called "the glory of
kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees' excellency." In [Isa
47:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#005), it is called "the lady of
kingdoms." In [Jer 51:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#013), it is spoken
of as "abundant in treasures," and in [Jer
51:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#041), as "the praise of the whole
earth." So in profane writers, Babylon has similar appellations. Thus,
in Aesch. Per. 51, mention is made of Βαβυλὼν η ̓ πολύχρυσος Babulōn hē
poluchrusos - "Babylon abounding in gold." The conquests of
Nebuchadnezzar enabled him to bring to his capital the spoils of
nations, and to enrich his capital above any other city on the earth.
Accordingly, he gave himself to the work of adorning a city that should
be worthy to be the head of universal empire, and succeeded in making it
so splendid as to be regarded as one of the wonders of the world. His
great work in adorning and strengthening his capital consisted, first,
of the building of the immense walls of the city; second, of the tower
of Belus; and third, of the hanging gardens. For a full description of
these, see Prideaux's "Connections," vol. i. p. 232, following.

\(III\) The appellation may have been given him by comparison with the
kingdoms which were to succeed him. In some respects - in extent and
power - some one or more of them, as the Roman, might surpass his; but
the appellation which was appropriate to them was not gold, but they
would be best denoted by the inferior metals. Thus the Medo-Persian
kingdom was less splendid than that of Babylon, and would be better
represented by silver; the Macedonian, though more distinguished by its
conquests, was less magnificent, and would be better represented by
brass; and the Roman, though ultimately still more extensive in its
conquests, and still more mighty in power, was less remarkable for
splendor than strength, and would be better represented by iron. In
magnificence, if not in power, the Babylonian surpassed them all; and
hence, the propriety of the appellation, "head of gold."

\(IV\) It is possible that in this appellation there then may have been
some reference to the character of the monarch himself. In [Jer
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#006), he is spoken of as the "servant
of God," and it is clear that it was designed that a splendid mission
was to be accomplished by him as under the Divine control, and in the
preparation of the world for the coming of the Messiah. Though he was
proud and haughty as a monarch, yet his own personal character would
compare favorably with that of many who succeeded him in these advancing
kingdoms. Though his conquests were numerous, yet his career as a
conqueror was not marked with cruelty, like that of many other warriors.
He was not a mere conqueror. He loved also the arts of peace. He sought
to embellish his capital, and to make it in outward magnificence and in
the talent which he concentrated there, truly the capital of the world.
Even Jerusalem he did not utterly destroy; but having secured a conquest
over it, and removed from it what he desired should embellish his own
capital, he still intended that it should be the subordinate head of an
important province of his dominions, and placed on the throne one who
was closely allied to the king who reigned there when he took the city.

But the appellation here, and the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, are to be
contemplated chiefly, like the kingdoms that succeeded, in their
relation to redemption. It is in this aspect that the study of history
becomes most interesting to a mind that regards all events as embraced
in the eternal counsels of God, and it is undoubtedly with reference to
this that the history of these kingdoms becomes in any way introduced
into the inspired writings. All history may be contemplated under two
aspects: in its secular bearing; and in its relation to the redemption
of the world. In the former aspect, it has great and important uses. As
furnishing lessons to statesmen; as showing the progress of society; as
illustrating the effects of vice and immorality, and the evils of
anarchy, ambition, and war; as recording and preserving the inventions
in the arts, and as showing what are the best methods of civil
government, and what conduces most to the happiness of a people, its
value cannot well be overestimated.

But it is in its relations to the work of redeeming man that it acquires
its chief value, and hence, the sacred volume is so much occupied with
the histories of early nations. The rise and fall of every nation; the
conquests and defeats which have occurred in past times, may all have
had, and perhaps may yet be seen to have had, an important connection
with the redemption of man - as being designed to put the world in a
proper position for the coming of the Prince of Peace, or in some way to
prepare the way for the final triumph of the gospel. This view gives a
new and important aspect to history. It becomes an object in which all
on earth who love the race and desire its redemption, and all in heaven,
feel a deep concern. Every monarch; every warrior; every statesman;
every man who, by his eloquence, bravery, or virtue, has contributed
anything to the progress of the race, or who has in any way played an
important part in the progress of the world's affairs, becomes a being
on whom we can look with intense emotion; and in reference to every man
of this character, it would be an interesting inquiry what he has done
that has contributed to prepare the way for the introduction of the
Mediatorial scheme, or to facilitate its progress through the world. In
reference to this point, the monarch whose character is now before us
seems to have been raised up, under an overruling Providence, to
accomplish the following things:

\(1\) To inflict "punishment" on the revolted people of God for their
numerous idolatries. See the book of Jeremiah, "passim." Hence, he led
his armies to the land of Palestine; he swept away the people, and bore
them into captivity; he burned the temple, destroyed the capital, and
laid the land waste.

\(2\) He was the instrument, in the hand of God, of effectually
purifying the Jewish nation from the sin of idolatry. It was for that
sin eminently that they were carried away; and never in this world have
the ends of punishment been better secured than in this instance. The
chastisement was effectual. The Jewish nation has never since sunk into
idolatry. If there have been individuals of that nation - of which,
however, there is no certain evidence - who have become idolaters, yet
as a people they have been preserved from it. More than two thousand
five hundred years have since passed away; they have been wanderers and
exiles in all lands; they have been persecuted, ridiculed, and oppressed
on account of their religion; they have been placed under every possible
inducement to conform to the religion around them, and yet, as professed
worshippers of Jehovah, the God of their fathers, they have maintained
their integrity, and neither promises nor threatenings, neither hopes
nor fears, neither life nor death, have been sufficient to constrain the
Hebrew people to bow the knee to an idol god.

\(3\) another object that seems to have been designed to be accomplished
by Nebuchadnezzar in relation to Redemption was to gather the nations
under one head preparatory to the coming of the Messiah. It will be seen
in the remarks which will be made on the relation of the Roman empire to
this work (see the notes at [Dan
2:40-43](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#040)), that there were important
reasons why this should be done. Preparatory to that, a succession of
such kingdoms each swayed the scepter over the whole world, and when the
Messiah came, the way was prepared for the easy and rapid propagation of
the new religion to the remotest parts of the earth.

[Daniel 2:39](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">dan 2:39</span></span>

And after thee - This must mean "subsequently" to the reign, but it does
not mean that the kingdom here referred to would "immediately" succeed
his own reign, for that would not be true. The Medo-Persian empire did
not come into the ascendency until many years after the death of
Nebuchadnezzar. This occurred during the reign of Belshazzar, a grandson
of Nebuchadnezzar, between whose reign and that of his grandfather there
had intervened the reigns of Evil-merodach and Neriglissar; besides, as
the remainder of the prophecy relating to the image refers to
"kingdoms," and not to individual monarchs, it is clear that this also
relates not primarily to Nebuchadnezzar as an individual, but as the
head of a kingdom. The meaning is, that a kingdom would succeed that
over which he reigned, so far inferior that it might be represented by
silver as compared with gold.

Shall arise another kingdom - Chaldee, "shall stand up (תקוּם teqûm)
another kingdom." This is language which would denote something
different from a succession in the same dynasty, for that would be a
mere "continuance of the same kingdom." The reference is evidently to a
change of empire; and the language implies that there would be some
revolution or conquest by which the existing kingdom would pass away,
and another would succeed. Still there would be so much of sameness in
respect to its occupying essentially the same territory, that it would
be symbolized in the same image that appeared to Nebuchadnezzar. The
kingdom here referred to was undoubtedly the Medo-Persian, established
by Cyrus in the conquest of Babylon, which continued through the reigns
of his successors until it was conquered by Alexander the Great. This
kingdom succeeded that of Assyria or Babylon, 538 years b.c., to the
overthrow of Darius Codomanus, 333 years b.c. It extended, of course,
through the reigns of the Persian kings, who acted so important a part
in the invasion of Greece, and whose defeats have given immortality to
the names of Leonidas, Aristides, Miltiades, and Themistocles, and made
the names of Salamis, Thermopylae, Marathon, and Leuctra so celebrated.
For a general account of Cyrus, and the founding of the Medo-Persian
empire, the reader is referred to the notes at [Isa
41:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#002).

Inferior to thee - And therefore represented by silver as compared with
gold. In what respects it would be inferior, Daniel does not specify,
and this can only be learned from "the facts" which occurred in relation
to that kingdom. All that is necessary to confirm the truth of the
prophetic description is, that it was to be so far inferior as to make
the appellation "silver" applicable to it in comparison with the kingdom
of Babylon, represented by "gold." The expression would denote that
there was a general decline or degeneracy in the character of the
monarchs, and the general condition of the empire. There have been
different opinions as to the inferiority of this kingdom to the
Babylonian. Calvin supposes that it refers to degeneracy. Geir supposes
that it relates to the duration of the kingdom - this continuing not
more than two hundred and forty years; while the other, including the
Assyrian, embraced a period of one thousand five hundred years. Polanus
supposes that the meaning is, that the Babylonian had more rest and
tranquility; while Junius, Willett, and others understand it of a milder
and more humane treatment of the Jews by the Babylonians than the
Persians. Perhaps, however, none of these opinions meet the
circumstances of the case, for they de not furnish as full an account of
the reasons of this inferiority as is desirable. In regard to this, it
may be observed,

\(a\) that it is not to be supposed that this kingdom was to be in "all
respects" inferior to the Babylonian, but only that it would have
certain characteristics which would make it more appropriate to describe
it as "silver" than as "gold." In certain other respects it might be far
superior, as the Roman, though in the same general line of succession,
was in extent and power superior to either, though there was still a
reason why that should be represented by "iron," rather than by gold, by
silver, or by brass.

\(b\) The inferiority did not relate to the power, the riches, or the
territorial extent of the Medo-Persian empire, for it embraced, so far
as appears, all that was comprehended in the Babylonian empire, and all
in addition which was added by the conquests of Cyrus. In his
proclamation to rebuild the temple [Ezr
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#002), Cyrus speaks of the extent of his
empire in language strongly resembling what is applied to the kingdom of
Nebuchadnezzar. "Thus saith Cyrus, king of Persia, The Lord God of
heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the earth." Thus also it is
said of AhaAhasuerus or Astyages, king of Media - a kingdom that
constituted a part of the Medo-Persian empire under Cyrus and his
successors, that he "reigned from India even unto Ethiopia, over an
hundred and twenty and seven provinces." To the kingdom of Babylon, as
he found it when he conquered it, Cyrus of course added the kingdoms of
Media and Persia, to the crowns of which he was the heir (see the notes
at [Isa 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#002)), and also the various
provinces which he had conquered before he came to the throne; that is,
Cappadocia, the kingdom of Lydia, and almost the whole of Asia Minor.

\(c\) Nor can it be supposed that the kingdom was inferior in regard to
"wealth," for, in addition to all the wealth that Cyrus found in
Babylon, he brought the spoils of his victories; the treasures in the
possession of the crowns of Persia and Media, and all the wealth of
Croesus, the rich king of Lydia, of which he had become possessor by
conquest. In considering the "inferiority" of this kingdom, which made
it proper that it should be represented by silver rather than by gold,
it is to be borne in mind that the representation should embrace "the
whole kingdom" in all the successive reigns, and not merely the kingdom
as it was under the administration of Cyrus. Thus regarded, it will
comprehend the succession of Persian monarchs until the time of the
invasion and conquest of the East by Alexander the Great. The reign of
Cyrus was indeed splendid; and if "he" alone, or if the kingdom during
his administration, were contemplated, it would be difficult to assign a
reason why an appellation should have been given to it implying any
inferiority to that of Nebuchadnezzar. The "inferiority" of the kingdom,
or what made it proper to represent it by silver rather than by gold, as
compared with the kingdom of Babylon, may have consisted in the
following particulars:

\(1\) In reference to the succession of kings who occupied the Persian
throne. It is true that the character of Cyrus is worthy of the highest
commendation, and that he was distinguished not only as a brave and
successful conqueror, but as a mild, able, and upright civil ruler.
Xenophon, who wished to draw the character of a model prince, made
choice of Cyrus as the example; and though he has not improbably
embellished his character by ascribing to him virtues drawn from his own
fancy in some degree, yet there can be no doubt that in the main his
description was drawn from the life. "The true reason," says Prideaux
("Connections," vol. i. p. 252, Ed. Charlestown, 1815), "why he chose
the life of Cyrus before all others for the purpose above mentioned"
(that of giving a description of what a worthy and just prince ought to
be) "seemeth to be no other but that he found the true history of that
excellent and gallant prince to be, above all others, the fittest for
those maxims of right policy and true princely virtue to correspond
with, which he grafted upon it." But he was succeeded by a madman,
Cambyses, and by a race of kings eminent among princes for folly and
crime. "The kings of Persia," says Prideaux, "were the worst race of men
that ever governed an empire."

\(2\) The kingdom was inferior in reference to the remarkable "defeats"
in the military campaigns which were undertaken. The Assyrian or
Babylonian empire was distinguished for the victories by which it
carried its arms around the then known world. The Medo-Persian empire,
after the reign of Cyrus, was almost as remarkable for the succession of
defeats which have made the period of the world during which the empire
continued, so well known in history. It is probable that no kingdom ever
undertook so many foolish projects in reference to the conquests of
other nations - projects so unwisely planned, and that resulted in so
signal failures. The successor of Cyrus, Cambyses, invaded Egypt, and
his conduct there in carrying on the war was such as to make him be
regarded as a madman. Enraged against the Ethiopians for an answer which
they gave him when, under pretence of friendship, he sent spies to
examine their country, he resolved to invade their territory.

Having come to Thebes, in Upper Egypt, he detached from his army fifty
thousand men to go against the Hammonians, with orders to destroy their
country, and to burn the temple of Jupiter Hammon that stood in it.
After marching a few days in the desert, they were overwhelmed in the
sands by a strong south wind, and all perished. Meantime Cambyses
marched with the rest of his army against the Ethiopians, though he
wanted all the means of subsistence for his army, until, having devoured
all their beasts of burden, they were constrained to designate every
tenth man of the army to be killed and eaten. In these deplorable
circumstances, Cambyses returned to Thebes, having lost a great part of
his army in this wild expedition. - Prideaux's "Con." i. 328. It was
also during the continuance of this kingdom, that the ill-starred
expeditions to Greece occurred, when Mardonius and Xerxes poured the
million of Asia on the countries of Greece, and met such signal
overthrows at Platea, Marathon, and Salamis. Such a series of disasters
never before had occurred to invading armies, or made those who repelled
invasion so illustrious. In this respect there was an evident propriety
in speaking of this as an inferior or degenerate kingdom.

\(3\) It was inferior in respect to the growing degeneracy and
effeminacy of character and morals. From the time of Xerxes (479 b.c.)
"symptoms of decay and corruption were manifest in the empire; the
national character gradually degenerated; the citizens were corrupted
and enfeebled by luxury; and confided more in mercenary troops than in
native valor and fidelity. The kings submitted to the control of their
wives, or the creatures whom they raised to posts of distinction; and
the satraps, from being civil functionaries, began to usurp military
authority." - Lyman, "Hist. Chart."

\(4\) The kingdom was inferior by the gradual weakening of its power
from internal causes. It was not only defeated in its attempts to invade
others, and weakened by the degeneracy of the court and people, but, as
a natural consequence, by the gradual lessening of the power of the
central government, and the growing independence of the provinces. From
the time of Darius Nothus (423 b.c.) - a weak, effeminate, and indolent
prince - "the satraps of the distant provinces paid only a nominal
obedience to the king. Many of them were, in fact, sovereigns over the
countries over which they presided, and carried on wars against each
other." - Lyman. It was from causes such as these that the power of the
kingdom became gradually weakened, and that the way was prepared for the
easy conquests of Alexander the Great. Their successive defeats, and
this gradual degeneracy and weakening of the kingdom, show the propriety
of the description given of the kingdom in the vision and the
interpretation - that it would be an "inferior kingdom," a kingdom
which, in comparison with that of Babylon, might be compared with silver
as compared with gold.

Still it sustained an important relation to the progress of events in
regard to the history of religion in the world, and had an important
bearing on the redemption of man. As this is the most important bearing
of history, and as it was doubtless with reference to this that the
mention of it is introduced into the sacred Scriptures, and as it is, in
fact, often alluded to by Isaiah, and in the books of Ezra, Nehemiah,
Esther, and some of the minor prophets, it may be proper, in the most
summary way, to alude to some of those things which pertain to the
bearing of this kingdom on the great events connected with redemption,
or to what was done during the continuance of this kingdom for the
promotion of the true religion. A full account may be found in
Prideaux's "Connections," part 1, books iii-vii. Compare Edwards'
"History of Redemption," Period I, part vi. The particular things which
occurred in connection with this kingdom bearing on the progress of
religion, and favorable to its advancement, were these:

\(a\) The overthrow of Babylon, so long the formidable enemy of the
ancient people of God.

\(b\) The restoration of the exiles to their own land under the auspices
of Cyrus, [Ezr 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001).

\(c\) The rebuilding of the temple under the same auspices, and with the
favor of the successors of Cyrus.

\(d\) The preparation of the world for the coming of the Messiah, in the
agitations that took place during the continuance of the Persian
monarchy; the invasion of Greece; the defeats there; the preparation by
these defeats for the coming of Him who was so long promised as the
"desire of all nations."

Compare [Hag 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#007) : "And I will shake
all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come; and I will fill
this house" (the temple erected under the auspices of Cyrus and his
successors) "with glory, saith the Lord of hosts." There was a
propriety, therefore, that this kingdom should receive a distinct notice
in the sacred Scriptures, for some of the most important events
connected with the history of true religion in the world occurred under
the auspices of Cyrus and his successors, and perhaps at no period has
there been more occasion to recognize the hand of God than in the
influences exerted on the minds of those pagan princes, disposing them
to be favorable to the long-oppressed children of God.

And another third kingdom of brass - See the notes at [Dan
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#032). The parts of the image which
were of brass were the belly and thighs, denoting inferiority not only
to the head, but to the part which immediately preceded it - the breast
and the arms of silver. It is not, indeed, specified, as in the former
case, that this kingdom would be inferior to the former, and it is only
from the position assigned to it in the image, and the inferior quality
of the metal by which it is represented, that it is implied that there
would be any inferiority. There can be no reasonable doubt that by this
third kingdom is denoted the empire founded by Alexander the Great - the
Macedonian empire. It is known to all that he overthrew the Persian
empire, and established a kingdom in the East, embracng substantially
the same territory which had been occupied by the Medo-Persian and the
Babylonian empire. While there can be no doubt that that kingdom is
referred to, there can be as little that the reference is not merely to
the empire during the reign of Alexander himself, but that it embraced
the whole empire as founded and arranged by him, until it was succeeded
by another universal empire - here denominated the fourth kingdom. The
reasons for supposing that the Macedonian empire is referred to here are
almost too obvious to require that they should be specified. They are
such as these:

\(1\) This kingdom actually succeeded that of Mede-Persia, covering the
same territory, and, like that, was then understood to be a universal
monarchy.

\(2\) The empire of Alexander is elsewhere more than once referred to by
Daniel in the same order, and in such a manner that the sense cannot be
mistaken. Thus, in [Dan 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#021) : "And
the rough goat is the king of Grecia: and the great horn that is between
his eyes is the first king. Now that being broken, whereas four stood up
for it, four kingdoms shall stand up out of the nation, but not in his
power." [Dan 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#020) : "and now," said
the man that appeared in vision to Daniel [Dan
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#005), "will I retram to fight with the
prince of Persia: and when I am gone forth, lo, the prince of Grecia
shall come." [Dan 11:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#002) : "and now
will I show thee the truth. Behold there shall stand up yet three kings
in Persia; and the fourth shall be far richer than they all, and by his
strength through his riches he shall stir up all against the realm of
Grecia. And a mighty king shall stand up, that shall rule with great
dominion, and do according to his will. And when he shall stand up, his
kingdom shall be broken, and shall be divided toward the four winds of
heaven; and not to his posterity, nor according to the kingdom that he
ruled: for his kingdom shall be plucked up, even for others beside
those." Since this kingdom is thus referred to elsewhere by Daniel in
the same order, and as destined to act an important part in the affairs
of the world, it is reasonable to suppose that there is a reference to
it here.

\(3\) It is a circumstance of some importance that the emblem here by
which this kingdom is represented, "brass," is one that is peculiarly
appropriate to the Greeks, and one that could not be applied to any
other naion with equal propriety. The Greeks were distinguished for
their "brazen armor," and the appellation, the "brazen-coated Greeks" -
χαλκοχιτώνες Ἀχαιοὶ chalkochitōnes Achaioi - is that by which they were
designated most commonly by the ancients. - Iliad i. 371; ii. 47;
Odyssey i. 286. In accordance with this, Josephus says ("Ant." b. x. c.
10, Section 4), τὴν δὲ ἐκεὶνων ἕτερος τις ἀπὸ δύσεως καθαιρήσει χαλκὸν
ἠμφιεσμένος tēn de ekeinōn heteros tis apo duseōs kathairēsei chalkon
ēmphiesmenos, - "their empire another shall come from the West, clothed
with brass, shall destroy." These considerations leave no doubt that the
kingdom here referred to was that Grecian or Macedonian, which, under
Alexander, obtained dominion over all the East.

Which shall bear rule over all the earth - In a sense similar to that of
the Assyrian, the Babylonian, and the Medo-Persian empire. This is the
common description of the empire of Alexander. He himself commanded that
he should be called "the king of all the world." "Accepto deinde
imperio, regem se terrarum omnium ac mundi appellari jussit" (Justin. l.
12, c. 16, Section 9) - "Having received the empire, he ordered himself
to be called the king of all lands and of the world." Diodorus Siculus
says that he received ambassadors from all countries; κατὰ δὲ τοῦτον τὸν
χρόνον ἐξ ἀπάσης σχεδόν τῆς οἰκουμένης ἦκον πρέσβεις, κ.τ.λ. kata de
touton ton chronon ex apasē; schedon tēs oikoumenēs ēkon presbeis, etc.
- "At which time, legates came to him from almost the whole habitable
world." - L. 17, c. 113. So Arrian (Expedi. Alex. l. 7, c. 15) remarks,
that "Alexander then appeared to himself, and to those around him, "to
be lord of all the earth and of the sea" - γῆς τε ἁπάσης καὶ θαλάσσης
κύριον gēs te hapasēs kai thalassēs kurion.

The author of the book of Maccabees gives a similar account of the
extent of this kingdom: "And it came to pass, after that Alexander, the
son of Philip the Macedonian, who first reigned in Greece, had
overthrown Darius, the king of the Persian and Medes, he fought many
battles, and took the strongholds of all, and slew the kings of the
earth; and he went through even to the ends of the earth; and took the
spoil of many nations; and the earth was quiet before him," 1 Macc.
1:1-3. The propriety of saying that this "kingdom bore rule over all the
earth" is, therefore, apparent. It embraced, of course, all that was
anciently included in the Assyrian and Babylonian empires; all that had
been added to that empire by the conquests of Cyrus, and also all that
Alexander had added to it by his hereditary dominions, and by his
conquests in other places. Nearly or quite all the known world, except
what was then subject to the Romans, then just a rising power, was under
the sway of Alexander. A question has been started whether this refers
merely to the kingdom of Alexander during his own life, or whether it
embraced also the succession of dynasties until the conquests of the
Romans. That the latter is the correct opinion seems clear from the
following considerations:

\(1\) It was true, as we have seen, of the two previous kingdoms
specified the Babylonian and the Medo-Persian - that they embraced, not
merely the kingdom under any one reigning monarch, but during its entire
continuance until it was overthrown by one that had also pretensions to
a universal empire - the former by the Medo-Persian, and the latter by
the Macedonian. It is to be presumed that the same principles of
interpretation are to be applied also to the Macedonian kingdom itself -
especially as that was also actually succeeded by one that in a still
higher sense laid claim to universal empire.

\(2\) This was, in fact, one kingdom. It is true that, on the death of
Alexander, the empire which he founded was divided among four of his
generals, and also that from that sprung the two reigns, the Seleucidae
in Syria, and of the Lagidae who reigned in Egypt; but, as Newton has
remarked, "their kingdom was no more a different kingdom from that of
Alexander, than the parts differ from the whole. It was the same
government still continued. Those who governed were still Macedonians.
All ancient authors spoke of the kingdom of Alexander and of his
successors as one and the same kingdom The thing is implied in the very
name by which they are usually called, the "successors of Alexander."
'Alexander being dead,' says Josephus (Ant. b. xi. ch. 8, Section 7),
'the empire was divided among his successors.' 'After the death of
Alexander,' says Justin (lib. xli. c. 4, Section 1), 'the kingdoms of
the East were divided among his successors;' and he still denominates
them Macedonians, and their empire the Macedonian." - Newton "on the
Prophecies," pp. 189, 190.

In regard to the point before adverted to in reference to the kingdoms
of Babylon and of Medo-Persia - the relation which they sustained to
religion, or the methods in which they were made to contribute to its
progress in the world, making it proper that they should be noticed in
the volume of inspiration, it may be remarked that the Macedonian
kingdom was also designed, undoubtedly, under an overruling Providence,
to contribute to the progress of the great work of human redemption, and
to prepare the way for the coming of the Messiah. A full statement of
what was done under this reign in respect to religion - the most
interesting aspect of history - may be seen in Edwards' "History of
Redemption," pp. 271-275, and in Prideaux's "Connections," vol. ii. p.
279, "seq." The kingdom here referred to - the Macedonian, represented
here by the portion of the image that was of brass, and in the vision of
the four beasts Dan. 7 by a leopard that had on its back the wings of a
fowl, and in [Dan 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#021), by the rough
goat - continued from the overthrow of Darius Codomanus by Alexander
(333 b.c.), to the conquest of Syria, and the East, by the Romans under
Pompey, about sixty-six years before the birth of the Saviour. The
principal events during this period affecting the interests of religion,
and preparing the way for the coming of the Messiah, were the following:

I. The extensive diffusion of the knowledge of the Greek language. The
army of Alexander was mainly composed of Greeks. The Greek language was,
of course, what was spoken by the court, and in the cities which he
founded; the despatches were in Greek; that language would be
extensively cultivated to gratify those in power; and the successors of
Alexander were those who used the Greek tongue. The consequence was,
that the Greek language was extensively spread over the countries which
were subdued by Alexander, and which were governed by his successors.
That language became the popular tongue; a sort of universal language
understood by the great mass of the people, in a manner not unlike the
French in Europe at the present day. The effect of this, in preparing
for the introduction of the gospel, was seen in two respects:

\(a\) In facilitating the "preaching" of the gospel. It is true that the
apostles had the gift of tongues, and that there was, notwithstanding
the prevalence of the Greek language, occasion for this. But there is no
evidence that this was conferred on "all" the early preachers of the
gospel, nor is it certain that those on whom it "was" conferred were
able to make use of it on all occasions. It is not improbable that, in
their ordinary labors, the apostles and others were left to rely on
their natural endowments, and to use the language to which they had been
most accustomed. As there was, therefore, a common language in most of
the countries in which the gospel would be proclaimed, it is evident
that the propagation of religion would be greatly facilitated by this,
and there can be no doubt that it was "one" of the designs of Providence
in permitting the Macedonian conquest thus to prepare the way for the
more easy and rapid diffusion of the new religion.

\(b\) In like manner, this conquest prepared the way "for the permanent
record" of the history of the Saviour's life, and the doctrines of
religion in the writings of the New Testament. It was evidently
desirable, on many accounts, that the records should be made in one
language rather than in many, and of all the languages then spoken on
the earth, the "Greek" was the best adapted to such a purpose. It was
not only the most polished and cultivated, but it was the most copious;
and it was the best fitted to express abstract ideas, and accurate
distinctions. Probably with all the improvements since made in the
copious Arabic language, and in the languages of modern times, there
never has been one that was so well fitted for the purposes of a Divine
revelation as the Greek. It may have been one design of Providence, in
the extensive and accurate cultivation of that language in Greece
itself, as well as in its diffusion over the world, that there should be
at the time of the introduction of the Christian revelation a medium of
permanent record that should be as free from imperfection as language
could be; a medium also in which there should be so much permanent and
valuable literature that, even after it should cease to be a spoken
language, it would be cultivated by the whole literary world, thus
furnishing the means of an accurate knowledge of the meaning of the
sacred writings.

II\. The translation of the Old Testament into the same language was
another important event, which took place during the continuance of this
kingdom, which greatly facilitated the introduction and spread of
Christianity. The Hebrew language was understood by comparatively few.
It ceased to be spoken in its purity after the time of the captivity. In
that language the Scriptures of the Old Testament would have been but
little diffused in the world. By their being translated, however, into
Greek, they became extensively known, and furnished a ready and an
intelligible ground of appeal to the preachers of the new religion when
they referred to the prophecies of the Old Testament, and the recorded
predictions of the Messiah. For a full account of the history of this
version, the reader may consult Prideaux's "Connections," vol. iii. p.
53, following. It was made according to Archbishop Usher, about 277 b.c.
The probability is, that it was made at different periods, and by
different hands, as it is executed with very various degrees of ability.
See Introduction to Isaiah, Section viii. I. (1), for a more extended
account of this version and its value. There can be no doubt that it
contributed much to the diffusion of the knowledge of the Holy
Scriptures, and was an important instrument in preparing the world for
the reception of the revelation that should be made by the Messiah.

III\. Events of great importance occurred dating the continuance of this
kingdom in preserving the Jewish people in times of persecution, and
saving their city and temple from ruin. and their nation from
extinction.

\(a\) The destruction of Jerusalem and the temple was threatened by
Alexander himself. After the siege and capture of Tyre, he became
enraged at the Jews for refusing to furnish supplies for his army during
the siege, under the plea that they were bound to show allegiance to
Darius, and he marched to Jerusalem with an intention to take and
destroy it. In order to appease him, it is said that Jaddua, the high
priest, went out to meet him in his pontifical robes, at the head of a
procession of priests, and accompanied by the people in white garments.
Alexander was so impressed with the scene that, to the surprise of all,
he spared the city and temple; and on being asked by Parmenio the reason
of this clemency, said that he had seen this person in vision, who had
directed him to lay aside all anxiety about his contemplated expedition
to Asia, and that he had promised that God would give him the empire of
the Persians. According to the story, Jaddua showed him the prophecies
of Daniel, and confirmed him by those prophecies in the confident
expectation of conquering the East; and in view of this, Alexander
offered sacrifices in the temple, and granted to the Hebrews the freedom
of their country, and the exercise of their laws and religion. See
Prideaux, vol. ii. p. 302, following; Josephus, "Ant." b. xi. ch. 8.
Whatever of fable there may be in this account, it is certain that this
city and temple were not destroyed by Alexander, but that in his ravages
in the East, he was led, by some cause, to deal with the capital of the
Hebrew nation in a masher different from what he did with others.

\(b\) A remarkable preservation of the Jewish people, of a somewhat
similar character, and evincing the protection of God, occurred during
the great persecution under Antiochus Epiphanes, one of the successors
of Alexander, in the time of the Maccabees. See Prideaux, vol. iii. p.
230, and 2 Macc. 5:11-27. In the times of that celebrated persecution,
multitudes of the Jews were slain by Antiochus himself; the city was
taken, and the temple defiled. Three years after it was taken by
Antiochus (168 b.c.), Apollonius was directed by him to march against
the city to vent his wrath on the Jews; and when the people were
assembled in their synagogues for worship, he let loose his forces on
them, with a command to slay all the men, and to take all the women and
children captives to be sold as slaves. After this, he plundered the
city, demolished the houses, and pulled down the walls, and then with
the ruins of the demolished city built a strong fortress on the top of
an eminence in the city of David, in a place which overlooked the
temple, and placed a strong garrison within. From this place attacks
were made on all who went up to the temple to worship; and the temple
was defiled with all manner of pollutions, until it was deserted, and
the daily sacrifices ceased. From these calamities and persecutions, the
city and the Jewish nation were delivered by the valor of Judas
Maccabeus, in the manner detailed in the first book of Maccabees.

[Daniel 2:40](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">dan 2:40</span></span>

And the fourth kingdom - Represented in the image by the legs of iron,
and the feet "part of iron, and part of clay," [Dan
2:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#033). The first question which arises
here is, what kingdom is referred to by this? In regard to this, there
have been two leading opinions: one, that it refers to the Roman empire;
the other, that it refers to the kingdoms or dynasties that immediately
succeeded the reign of Alexander the Great; embracing the kingdoms of
the Seleucidae and Lagidae, Syria, and Egypt - in the language of Prof.
Stuart, who adopts this opinion, "that the legs and feet were symbols of
that intermingled and confused empire which sprung up under the Grecian
chiefs who finally succeeded him," (Alexander the Great). - "Com. on
Daniel," p. 173. For the reasoning by which this opinion is supported,
see Prof. Stuart, pp. 173-193. The common opinion has been, that the
reference is to the Roman empire, and in support of this opinion the
following conditions may be suggested:

\(1\) The obvious design of the image was to symbolize the succession of
great monarchies, which would precede the setting up of the kingdom of
the Redeemer, and which would have an important agency in preparing the
world for that. The Roman empire was in itself too important, and
performed too important an agency in preparing the world for that, to be
omitted in such an enumeration.

\(2\) The kingdom here referred to was to be in existence at the time
symbolized by the cutting of the stone out of the mountain, for, during
the continuance of that kingdom, or under it, "the God of heaven was to
set up a kingdom which should never be destroyed," [Dan
2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044). But the kingdoms of the
Seleucidae and the Lagidae - the "intermingled and confused empires that
sprang up" after Alexander the Great - had ceased before that time,
being superseded by the Roman.

\(3\) unless the Roman power be represented, the symmetry of the image
is destroyed, for it would make what was, in fact, one kingdom
represented by two different metals - brass and iron. We have seen above
that the Babylonian empire was represented appropriately by gold; the
Medo-Persian by silver; and the Macedonian by brass. We have seen also,
that in fact the empire founded by Alexander, and continued through his
successors in Syria and Egypt, was in fact one kingdom, so spoken of by
the ancients, and being in fact a "Greek" dynasty. If the appellation of
"brass" belonged to that kingdom as a Greek kingdom, there is an obvious
incongruity, and a departure from the method of interpreting the other
portions of the image, in applying the term "iron" to any portion of
that kingdom.

\(4\) By the application of the term "iron," it is evidently implied
that the kingdom thus referred to would be distinguished for "strength"
- strength greater than its predecessors - as iron surpasses brass, and
silver, and gold, in that quality. But this was not true of the confused
reigns that immediately followed Alexander. They were unitedly weaker
than the Babylonian and the Medo-Persian, and weaker than the empire of
Alexander. out of which they arose. Compare [Dan
8:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#021). It was true, however, of the
Roman power, that it was so much superior to all its predecessors in
power, that it might well be represented by iron in comparison with
brass, silver, and gold.

\(5\) The fourth monarchy represented in Nebuchadnezzars dream is
evidently the same which is represented by the fourth beast in [Dan
7:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007), [Dan
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#023), [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025). But it will appear, from the
exposition of that chapter, that the reference there is to the Roman
empire. See the note at these passages. There can be no well-founded
objection to this view on the ground that this kingdom was not properly
a "succession" of the kingdom of Alexander, and did not occupy precisely
the same territory. The same was true of each of the other kingdoms -
the Medo-Persian and Macedonian. Yet while they were not, in the usual
sense of the term, in the "successions," they did, in fact, follow one
after the other; and with such accessions as were derived from conquest,
and from the hereditary dominions of the conquerors, they did occupy the
same territory. The design seems to have been to give a representation
of a series of great monarchies, which would be, in an important sense,
universal monarchies, and which should follow each other before the
advent of the Saviour. The Roman, in addition to what it possessed in
the West, actually occupied in the East substantially the same territory
as the Babylonian, the Medo-Persian, and the Macedonian, and, like them,
it had all the claims which any ancient sovereignty had to the title of
a universal monarchy; indeed no kingdom has ever existed to which this
title could with more justice be applied.

Shall be strong as iron - It is scarcely necessary to observe that this
description is applicable to the Roman power. In nothing was it more
remarkable than its "strength;" for that irresistible power before which
all other nations were perfectly weak. This characteristic of the Roman
power is thus noticed by Mr. Gibbon: "The arms of the Republic,
sometimes vanquished in battle, always victorious in war, advanced with
rapid steps to the Euphrates, the Danube, the Rhine, and the ocean; and
the images of gold, or silver, or brass, that might serve to represent
the nations and their kings, were successively broken by the "iron"
monarchy of Rome." - "Dec. and Fall," p. 642, Lond. ed. 1830, as quoted
by Prof. Bush.

Forasmuch as iron breaketh in pieces and subdueth all things - Iron is
the metal which is used, and always has been used, for the purpose here
suggested. In the form of hammers, sledges, and cannon-balls, and, in
general, in reference to the accomplishment of any purpose, by beating
or battering, this has been found to be the most valuable of the metals.
It is heavy, is capable of being easily wrought into desired shapes; is
abundant; is susceptible of being made hard so as not to be itself
bruised, and has therefore, all the properties which could be desired
for purposes like this.

And as iron that breaketh all these - That is, all these things; to wit,
everything. Nothing is able to stand before it; there is nothing which
it cannot reduce to powder. There is some repetition here, but it is for
the sake of emphasis.

Shall it break in pieces and bruise - Nothing could better characterize
the Roman power than this. Everything was crushed before it. The nations
which they conquered ceased to be kingdoms, and were reduced to
provinces, and as kingdoms they were blotted out from the list of
nations. This has been well described by Mr. Irving: "The Roman empire
did beat down the constitution and establishment of all other kingdoms;
abolishing their independence, and bringing them into the most entire
subjection; humbling the pride, subjecting the will, using the property,
and trampling upon the power and dignity of all other states. For by
this was the Roman dominion distinguished from all the rest, that it was
the work of almost as many centuries as those were of years; the fruit
of a thousand battles in which million of men were slain. It made room
for itself, as doth a battering-ram, by continual successive blows; and
it ceased not to beat and bruise all nations, so long as they continued
to offer any resistance." - "Discourse on Daniel's Visions," p. 180.

[Daniel 2:41](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">dan 2:41</span></span>

And whereas thou sawest the feet and toes, part of potters' clay and
part of iron - [Dan 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#033). The Chaldee
is, "of them clay of the potter, and of them iron;" that is, part was
composed of one material and part of the other. The sense is, not that
the feet were composed entirely of one, and the toes of the other, but
that they were intermingled. There was no homogeneousness of material;
nothing in one that would coalesce with the other, or that could be
permanently united to it, as two metals might be fused or welded
together and form one solid compound. Iron and clay cannot be welded;
and the idea here clearly is, that in the empire here referred to there
would be two main elements which could never be made to blend.

The kingdom shall be divided - That is, divided as the iron and clay
were in the image. It does not necessarily mean that there would be an
open rupture - an actual separation into two parts; but that there would
be "such a diversity in the internal constitution" that, while there
would be the element of great power, there would be also an element of
weakness; there would be something which could never be blended with the
element of strength, so as to produce one harmonious and homogeneous
whole.

But there shall be in it of the strength of the iron, forasmuch as thou
sawest the iron mixed with miry clay - The principal idea in this part
of the description is, that there would be great "power;" that whatever
elements of weakness there might be, yet the "power" of the empire would
be apparent. No one can fail to perceive how this applies to the Roman
empire; a mighty power which, through all its long history, was
distinguished for the vigour with which it carried forward its plans,
and pressed on to universal dominion. As to the element of "weakness"
symbolized too by the clay, it may not be possible to determine, with
absolute certainty, what is referred to. Any internal source of
weakness; anything in the constitution of the state, whether originally
existing and constituting heterogeneous material, or whether springing
up in the empire itself, or whether arising from the intermingling of
foreign elements that never amalgamated themselves with the state, any
one of these suppositions would meet all that is fairly implied in this
language.

From [Dan 2:43](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#043), "they shall mingle
themselves with the seed of men," it would seem, however, that the
reference is to some "foreign" admixture - like the intermingling of
nations of other languages, laws, and customs, which were never truly
amalgamated with the original materials, and which constantly tended to
weaken and divide the kingdom. It is to be remarked, in the exposition
of the passage, that in the previous three kingdoms there was
comparative homogeneousness. In the fourth kingdom, there was to be
something of a peculiar character in this respect by which it should be
distinguished from the others. As a matter of fact, the other three
kingdoms were comparatively homogeneous in their character. The
predominant feature was "Oriental;" and though there were different
nations and people intermingled in the Babylonian, the Medo-Persian, and
the Macedonian kingdoms, yet there was the same general prevailing
character in each; there was not such an intermingling of foreign
nations as to produce disturbing elements, or to mar the symmetry and
strength of the whole. It was not thus with Rome. In that empire there
was the intermingling of all nations and tongues, and though the
essential element of the empire remained always - "the Roman" - yet
there was an intermingling of other influences under the same general
government, which could be appropriately compared with clay united with
iron, and which ultimately contributed to its fall (see the notes at
[Dan 2:43](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#043)).

[Daniel 2:42](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">dan 2:42</span></span>

And as the toes of the feet were part of iron and part of clay, so the
kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken - Margin, "brittle."
The margin is the more correct rendering of the Chaldee word (תבירה
tebı̂yrâh). It means "frail, fragile" - easily broken, but not
necessarily that it was actually broken. That did not occur until the
stone cut out of the mountain impinged on it. It has been commonly
supposed (comp. Newton "on the Prophecies"), that the ten toes on the
feet refer to the ten kingdoms into which the Roman empire was
ultimately broken up, corresponding with the ten horns seen in the
vision of Daniel, in [Dan 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007). In
regard to the fact that the Roman empire was ultimately broken up into
ten such kingdoms, see the extended notes at [Dan
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024). The thing which struck the
monarch in the vision, and Daniel in the interpretation, as remarkable,
was that the feet and toes "were composed partly of iron and partly of
clay."

In the upper portion of the image there had been uniformity in the
different parts, and had been no intermingling of metals. Here a new
feature was seen - not only that a new metal was employed, but that
there was intermingled with that, in the same portion of the image, a
different substance, and one that had no affinity with the iron, and
that could never be made to blend with it. In the latter part of this
verse, the original word for "partly" is not the same in each clause. In
the former it is מן־קצת min-qetsâth - properly "from the end," sc., of
the kingdom. Compare [Dan 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#013), "At
the end of the days;" [Dan 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#015), "At
the end of ten days;" and [Dan 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#005),
[Dan 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#018). The word "might" be
employed to denote the "end" or "extremity" of anything, e. g., in
respect to "time," and some have supposed that there is a reference here
to the later periods of the Roman empire. See Poole's "Synopsis."

But the word is also used to denote "the sum," or "the whole number;"
and then the phrase is equivalent to "a part - as" e. g., in the phrase
האלהים בית כלי מקצת miqetsât kelēy bēyth hâ'elohı̂ym - from the sum of
the vessels of the house of God" [Dan
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#002); that is, a portion of the whole
number, or a part. Compare [Neh 7:70](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#070),
"from the sum of the heads of the fathers;" that is, a part of them. In
the latter part of the clause it is מנת mı̂nnâh - "from it;" that is, a
part of it; partly. The entire phrase means that one part of the whole
would be strong, and one part would be fragile. The reference is not to
the "time" when this would occur, but to the "fact" that it would be so.
The idea in this verse does not vary materially from that in the former,
except that in that, the prominent thought is, that there would be
"strength" in the kingdom: in this, the idea is, that while there would
be strength in the kingdom, there would be also the elements of
weakness.

[Daniel 2:43](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">dan 2:43</span></span>

And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle
themselves with the seed of men - Various explanations have been given
of this verse, and it certainly is not of easy interpretation. The
phrase "seed of men," would properly denote something different from the
original stock that was represented by iron; some foreign admixture that
would be so unlike that, and that would so little amalgamate with it, as
to be properly represented by clay as compared with iron. Prof. Stuart
interprets this of matrimonial alliances, and supposes that the idea
expressed is, that, "while the object of such alliances was union, or at
least a design to bring about a peaceable state of things, that object
was, in a peculiar manner, defeated." The word rendered "men" (אנשׁא
'ănâshâ') is employed in Hebrew and in Chaldee to denote men of an
inferior class - the lower orders, the common herd - in
contradistinction from the more elevated and noble classes, represented
by the word אישׁ 'ı̂ysh. See [Isa 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#009);
[Isa 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#015); [Pro
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#004).

The word here used also (from אנשׁ 'ânash) - to be sick, ill at ease,
incurable), would properly denote feebleness or inferiority, and would
be aptly represented by clay as contrasted with iron. The expression
"seed of men," as here used, would therefore denote some intermingling
of an inferior race with the original stock; some union or alliance
under the one sovereignty, which would greatly weaken it as a whole,
though the original strength still was great. The language would
represent a race of mighty and powerful men, constituting the stamina -
the bone and the sinew of the empire - mixed up with another race or
other races, with whom, though they were associated in the government,
they could never be blended; could never assimilate. This foreign
admixture in the empire would be a constant source of weakness, and
would constantly tend to division and faction, for such elements could
never harmonize.

It is further to be remarked, that this would exist to a degree which
would not be found in either of the three previous kingdoms. In fact, in
these kingdoms there was no such intermingling with foreign nations as
to destroy the homogeneousness of the empire. They were, in the main,
Orientals; with the language, the manners, the customs, the habits of
Orientals; and in respect to energy and power - the point here under
consideration - there was no marked distinction between the subjected
provinces and the original materials of the monarchy. By the act of
subjection, they became substantially one people, and readily blended
together. This remark will certainly apply to the two first of these
monarchies - the Babylonian and the Medo-Persian; and though with less
force to the Macedonian, yet it was not true of that, that it became so
intermingled with foreign people as to constitute heterogeneous elements
as it was of the Roman. In that monarchy, the element of "strength" was
"infused" by Alexander and his Greeks; all the elements of weakness were
in the original materials of the empire.

In the Roman, the element of strength - "the iron" - was in the original
material of the empire; the weak, the heterogeneous element - "the clay"
- was what was introduced from the foreign nations. This consideration
may perhaps do something to show that the opinion of Grotius, Prof.
Stuart, and others, that this fourth monarchy was what immediately
succeeded Alexander is not well founded. The only question then is,
whether, in the constitution of the Roman empire, at the time when it
became the successor of the other three as a universal monarchy, there
was such an intermingling of a foreign element, as to be properly
represented by clay as contrasted with the original and stronger
material "iron." I say, "at the time when it became the successor of the
other three as a universal monarchy," because the only point of view in
which Daniel contemplated it was that. He looked at this, as he did at
the others, as already such a universal dominion, and not at what it was
before, or at the steps by which it rose to power.

Now, on looking at the Roman empire at that period, and during the time
when it occupied the position of the universal monarchy, and during
which the "stone cut out of the mountain" grew and filled the world,
there is no difficulty in finding such an intermingling with other
nations - "the seed of men" - as to be properly described by "iron and
clay" in the same image that could never be blended, The allusion is,
probably, to that intermingling with other nations which so remarkably
characterized the Roman empire, and which arose partly from its
conquests, and partly from the inroads of other people in the latter
days of the empire, and in reference to both of which there was no
proper amalgamation, leaving the original vigour of the empire
substantially in its strength, but introducing other elements which
never amalgamated with it, and which were like clay intermingled with
iron.

\(1\) from their conquests. Tacitus says, "Dominandi cupido cunctis
affectibus flagrantior est" - the lust of ruling is more ardent than all
other desires; and this was eminently true of the Romans. They aspired
at the dominion of the world; and, in their strides at universal
conquest, they brought nations under their subjection, and admitted them
to the rights of citizenship, which had no affinity with the original
material which composed the Roman power, and which never really
amalgamated with it, anymore than clay does with iron.

\(2\) This was true, also, in respect to the hordes that poured into the
empire from other countries, and particularly from the Scandinavian
regions, in the latter periods of the empire, and with which the Romans
were compelled to form alliances, while, at the same time, they could
not amalgamate with them. "In the reign of the emperor Caracalla," says
Mr. Gibbon, "an innumerable swarm of Suevi appeared on the banks of the
Mein, and in the neighborhood of the Roman provinces, in quest of food,
or plunder, or glory. The hasty army of volunteers gradually coalesced
into a great and permanent nation, and as it was composed of so many
different tribes, assumed the name of Allemanni, or "allmen," to denote
their various lineage, and their common bravery." No reader of the Roman
history can be ignorant of the invasions of the Goths, the Huns, and the
Vandals, or of the effects of these invasions on the empire.

No one can be ignorant of the manner in which they became intermingled
with the ancient Roman people, or of the attempts to form alliances with
them, by intermarriages and otherwish, which were always like attempts
to unite iron and clay. "Placidia, daughter of Theodosius the Great, was
given in marriage to Adolphus, king of the Goths; the two daughters of
Stilicho, the Vandal, were successively married to Honorius; and
Genseric, another Vandal, gave Eudocia, a captive imperial princess, to
his son to wife." The effects of the intermingling of foreign people on
the character and destiny of the empire cannot be stated perhaps in a
more graphic manner than is done by Mr. Gibbon, in the summary review of
the Roman History, with which he concludes his seventh chapter, and at
the same time there could scarcely be a more clear or cxpressive
commentary on this prophecy of Daniel. "During the four first ages,"
says he, "the Romans, in the laborious school of poverty, had acquired
the virtues of war and government: by the vigorous exertion of those
virtues, and by the assistance of fortune, they had obtained, in the
course of the three succeeding centuries, an absolute empire over many
countries of Europe, Asia, and Africa. The last three hundred years had
been consumed in apparent prosperity and internal decline. The nation of
soldiers, magistrates, and legislators, who composed the thirty-five
tribes of the Roman people, was dissolved into the common mass of
mankind, and confounded with the million of servile provincials who had
received the name without adopting the spirit of Romans. A mercenary
army, levied among the subjects and barbarians of the frontier, was the
only order of men who preserved and abused their independence.

By their tumultuary election, a Syrian, a Goth, or an Arab was exalted
to the throne of Rome, and invested with despotic power over the
conquests and over the country of the Scipios. The limits of the Roman
empire still extended from the Western Ocean to the Tigris, and from
Mount Atlas to the Rhine and the Danube. To the undiscerning eye of the
common, Philip appeared a monarch no less powerful than Hadrian or
Augustus had formerly been. The form was still the same, but the
animating health and rigor were fled. The industry of the people was
discouraged and exhausted by a long series of oppression. The discipline
of the legions, which alone, after the extinction of every other virtue,
had propped the greatness of the state, was corrupted by the ambition,
or relaxed by the weakness of the emperors. The strength of the
frontiers, which had always consisted in arms rather than in
fortifications, was insensibly undermined, and the fairest provinces
were left exposed to the rapaciousness or ambition of the barbarians,
who soon discovered the decline of the Roman empire." - Vol. i. pp. 110,
111; Harper's Edit. (N. Y.) 1829.

Compare the notes at [Rev 6:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001). The
agency of the Roman empire was so important in preparing the world for
the advent of the Son of God, and in reference to the establishment of
his kingdom, that there was an obvious proriety that it should be made a
distinct subject of prophecy. We have seen that each of the other three
kingdoms had an important influence in preparing the world for the
introduction of Christianity, and was designed to accomplish an
important part in the "History of Redemption." The agency of the Roman
empire was more direct and important than any one or all of these, for

\(a\) that was the empire which had the supremacy when the Son of God
appeared;

\(b\) that kingdom had performed a more direct and important work in
preparing the world for his coming;

\(c\) it was under authority derived from that sovereignty that the Son
of God was put to death; and

\(d\) it was by that, that the ancient dispensation was brought to an
end; and

\(e\) it was under that, that the new religion was spread through the
world. It may be of use, therefore, in an exposition of this prophecy,
to refer, with some particularity, to the things that were accomplished
by this "fourth kingdom" in furthering the work of redemption, or in
introducing and establishing the kingdom that was to be "set up, and
which was never to be destroyed." That agency related to the following
points:

\(1\) The establishment of a universal dominion; the fact that the world
was brought under one scepter greatly favorcd the propagation of the
Christian religion. We have seen, under the previous dynasties - the
Babylonian, Persian, and macedonian - that such an universal empire was
important in earlier ages to "prepare" the world for the advent of the
Messiah. This was still more important when he was about actually to
appear, and his religion was to be spread over the world. It greatly
favored the diffusion of the new system that there was one empire; that
the means of communication from one part of the world to another had
been so extended by the Romans; and that one who was entitled to the
privileges of citizenship could claim protection in nearly every part of
the world.

\(2\) The prevalence of universal peace. The world had become subject to
the Roman power, and conquest was at an end. The world at last, after so
long agitations and strifes, was at peace. The distant provinces quietly
submitted to the Roman control; the civil dissensions which had reigned
so long at the capital were hushed; Augustus, having triumphed over all
his rivals, quietly occupied the imperial throne, and, as a symbol of
the universal peace, the temple of Janus was closed. Rarely in their
history had that temple been closed before; and yet there was an obvious
propriety that when the "Prince of Peace" should come, the world should
be at rest, and that the clangor of arms should cease. It was a
beautiful emblem of the nature of his reign. A world that had been
always in conflict before rested on its arms; the tumult of battle had
died away; the banners of war were furled; the legions of Rome paused in
their career of conquest, and the world tranquilly waited for the coming
of the Son of God.

\(3\) The Roman power accomplished an important agency in the great
transaction which the Son of God came to perform in his making an
atonement for the sins of the world. It was so arranged, in the Divine
counsels, that he should be put to death, not by the hands of his own
kindred and countrymen, but by the hands of foreigners, and under their
authority. The necessity and the certainty of this was early predicted
by the Saviour [Mat 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#019); [Mar
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#033); [Luk
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#032), and it is clear that there were
important reasons why it should be thus done; and doubtless one design
of bringing Judea and the rest of the world under the Roman yoke was,
that it might be accomplished in this way. Among the "reasons" for this
may be suggested such as the following:

\(a\) The pagan world, as well as the Jewish community, thus had a part
in the great transaction. He died for the whole world - Jews and
Gentiles - and it was important that, that fact should be referred to in
the manner of his death, and that the two great divisions of the human
family should be united in the great transaction. It thus became not a
"Jewish" affair only; not an event in which Judea alone was interested,
but an affair of the world; a transaction in which the representatives
of the world took their part.

\(b\) It was thus made a matter of publicity. The account of the death
of the Saviour would thus, of course, be transmitted to the capital, and
would demand the attention of those who were in power. When the gospel
was preached at Rome, it would be proper to allege that it was a thing
in which Rome itself had had an important agency, from the fact that
under the Roman authority the Messiah had been put to death.

\(c\) The agency of the Romans, therefore, established the certainty of
the death of Jesus, and consequently the certainty of his having risen
from the dead. In order to demonstrate the latter, it was indispensable
that the former should be made certain, and that all questions in regard
to the reality of Iris death should be placed beyond a doubt. This was
done by the agency of Pilate, a Roman governor. His death was certified
to him, and he was satisfied of it. It became a matter of record; a
point about which there could be no dispute. Accordingly, in all the
questions that came up in reference to the religion of Christ, it was
never made a matter of doubt that he had been really put to death under
Pilate, the Roman governor, whatever question may have arisen about the
fact of his resurrection.

\(d\) Equally important was the agency of the Romans in establishing
establishing the "innocence" of the Saviour. After patient and repeated
trials before himself, Pilate was constrained to say that he was
innocent of the charges alleged against him, and that no fault could be
found in him. In proclaiming the gospel, it was of immense importance to
be able to affirm this throughout the world. It could never be alleged
against the gospel that its Author had violated the laws; that he
deserved to be put to death as a malefactor, for the records of the
Roman governor himself showed the contrary. The agency of the Romans,
therefore, in the great work of the atonement, though undesigned on
their part, was of inestimable importance in the establishment of the
Christian religion; and it may be presumed that it was for this, in part
at least, that the world was placed under their control, and that it was
so ordered that the Messiah suffered under authority derived from them.

\(4\) There was another important agency of the Romans in reference to
the religion that was to fill the earth. It was in destroying the city
of Jerusalem, and bringing to a final end the whole system of Hebrew
rites and ceremonies. The ancient sacrifices lost their efficacy really
when the atonement was made on the cross. Then there was no need of the
temple, and the altar, and the ancient priesthood. It was necessary that
the ancient rites should cease, and that, having now lost their
efficacy, there should be no possibility of perpetuating them.
Accordingly, within the space of about thirty years after the death of
the Saviour, when there had been time to perceive the bearing of the
atonement on their temple rites; when it was plain that they were no
longer efficacious, significant, or necessary, the Romans were suffered
to destroy the city, the altar, and the temple, and to bring the whole
system to a perpetual end. The place where the ancient worship had been
celebrated was tiaade a heap of ruins; the altar was overturned, never
to be built again; and the pomp and splendor of the ancient ritual
passed away forever. It was the design of God that that system should
come to a perpetual end; and hence, by his providence, it was so
arranged, that ruin should spread over the city where the Lord was
crucified, and that the Jewish people should never build an altar or a
temple there again. To this day it has never been in their power to
kindle the fire of sacrifice there, or to cause the smoke of incense to
ascend in a temple consecrated to the worship of the God of their
fathers. The agency of this fourth kingdom, therefore, was exceedingly
important in the introduction and establishment of that kingdom which
was to be perpetual, and which was to fill the earth, and hence, the
reference to it here, and the more extended reference in Dan. 7.

[Daniel 2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">dan 2:44</span></span>

And in the days of these kings - Margin, "their." The reading in the
text "these kings" - is the more correct. The Vulgate renders this, "in
the days of these kingdoms." The natural and obvious sense of the
passage is, that during the continuance of the kingdoms above-mentioned,
or before they should finally pass away, that is, before the last one
should become extinct, another kingdom would be established on the earth
which would be perpetual. Before the succession of universal monarchies
should have passed away, the new kingdom would be set up that would
never be destroyed. Such language is not uncommon. "Thus, if we were to
speak of anything taking place in the days of British kings, we should
not of course understand it as running through all their reigns, but
merely as occurring in some one of them." - Prof. Bush. So it is said in
[Rut 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001) : "It came to pass in the
days when the judges ruled, that there was a famine in the land;" that
is, the famine occurred sometime under that general administration, or
before it had passed away, evidently not meaning that there was a famine
in the reign of each one. So it is said of Jephthah, that he was buried
"in the cities of Gilead;" that is, some one of them. Josiah was buried
in, "the sepulchres of his fathers;" that is, in some one of them.

Shall the God of heaven - The God, who rules in heaven; the true God.
This is designed to show the Divine origin of this kingdom, and to
distinguish it from all others. Though the others here referred to were
under the Divine control, and were designed to act an important part in
preparing the world for this, yet they are not represented as deriving
their origin directly from heaven. They were founded in the usual manner
of earthly monarchies, but this was to have a heavenly origin. In
accordance with this, the kingdom which the Messiah came to establish is
often called, in the New Testament, "the kingdom of heaven," "the
kingdom of God," etc. Compare [Mic
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#007); [Luk
1:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032).

Set up a kingdom - "Shall cause to arise or stand up" - יקים yeqı̂ym. It
shall not owe its origin to the usual causes by which empires are
constituted on the earth by conquests; by human policy; by powerful
alliances; by transmitted hereditary possession - but shall exist
because God shall "appoint" and "constitute" it. There can be no
reasonable doubt as to what kingdom is here intended, and nearly all
expositors have supposed that it refers to the kingdom of the Messiah.
Grotius, indeed, who made the fourth kingdom refer to the Seleucidse and
Lagidse, was constrained by consistency to make this refer to the Roman
power; but in this interpretation he stands almost, if not entirely,
alone. Yet even he supposes it to refer not to "pagan" Rome only, but to
Rome as the perpetual seat of power - the permanent kingdom - the seat
of the church: "Imperium Romanum perpetuo mansurum, quod sedes erit
ecclesice." And although he maintains that he refers to Rome primarily,
yet he is constrained to acknowledge that what is here said is true in a
higher sense of the kingdom of Christ: Sensus sublimior, Christum finem
impositurum omnibus. imperiis terrestribus. But there can be no real
doubt as to what kingdom is intended. Its distinctly declared Divine
origin; the declaration that it shall never be destroyed; the assurance
that it would absorb all other kingdoms, and that it would stand
forever; and the entire accordance of these declarations with the
account of the kingdom of the Messiah in the New Testament, show beyond
a doubt that the kingdom of the Redeemer is intended.

Which shall never be destroyed - The others would pass away. The
Babylonian would be succeeded by the Medo-Persian, that by the
Macedonian, that by the Roman, and that in its turn by the one which the
God of heaven would set up. This would be perpetual. Nothing would have
power to overthrow it. It would live in the revolutions of all other
kingdoms, and would survive them all. Compare the notes at [Dan
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014); and the summary of the doctrines
taught here at the close of the notes at [Dan
2:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#045).

And the kingdom shall not be left to other people - Margin, "thereof.
Literally, "Its kingdom shall not be left to other people;" that is, the
ruling power appropriate to this kingdom or dominion shall never pass
away from its rightful possessor, and be transferred to other hands. In
respect to other kingdoms, it often happens that their sovereigns are
deposed, and that their power passes into the hands of usurpers. But
this can never occur in this kingdom. The government will never change
hands. The administration will be perpetual. No foreign power shall sway
the scepter of this kingdom. There "may be" an allusion here to the fact
that, in respect to each of the other kingdoms mentioned, the power over
the same territory "did" pass into the hands of other people. Thus, on
the same territory, the dominion passed from the hands of the Babylonian
princes to the hands of Cyrus the Persian, and then to the hands of
Alexander the Macedonian, and then to the hands of the Romans. But this
would never occur in regard to the kingdom which the God of heaven would
set up. In the region of empire appropriate to it, it would never change
hands; and this promise of perpetuity made this kingdom wholly unlike
all its predecessors.

But it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms - As
represented by the stone cut out of the mountains without hands,
impinging on the image. See the notes at [Dan
2:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034).

Two inquiries at once meet us here, of somewhat difficult solution. The
first is, How, if this is designed to apply to the kingdom of the
Messiah, can the description be true? The language here would seem to
imply some violent action; some positive crushing force; something like
what occurs in conquests when nations are subdued. Would it not appear
from this that the kingdom here represented was to make its way by
conquests in the same manner as the other kingdoms, rather than by a
silent and peaceful influence? Is this language, in fact, applicable to
the method in which the kingdom of Christ is to supplant all others? In
reply to these questions, it may be remarked,

\(1\) That the leading idea, as apparent in the prophecy, is not so much
that of "violence" as that the kingdoms referred to would be "uttterly
brought to an end;" that there would be, under this new kingdom,
ultimately an entire cessation of the others; or that they would be
removed or supplanted by this. This is represented [Dan
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035) by the fact that the materials
composing the other kingdoms are represented before this as becoming
like "the chaff of the summer threshing-floors;" and as "being carried
away, so that no place was found for them." The stone cut out of the
mountain, small at first, was mysteriously enlarged, so that it occupied
the place which they did, and ultimately filled the earth. A process of
gradual demolition, acting on them by constant attrition, removing
portions of them, and occupying their place until they should disappear,
and until there should be a complete substitution of the new kingdom in
their place, would seem to correspond with all that is essential in the
prophetic description, See the notes at [Dan
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034), on the expression, "which smote
the image upon his feet." But

\(2\) This language is in accordance with what is commonly used in the
predictions respecting the kingdom of the Messiah - language which is
descriptive of the existence of "power" in subduing the nations, and
bringing the opposing kingdoms of the world to an end. Thus in [Psa
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009), "Thou shalt break them with a rod
of iron: thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel." [Isa
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#012), "for the nation and kingdom that
will not serve thee shall perish; yea, those nations shall be utterly
wasted." So [Co1 15:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024), "When he
shall have put down all rule, and all authority and power. For he must
reign until he hath put all enemies under his feet." These expressions
denote that there will be an entire subjection of other kingdoms to that
of the Messiah, called in the New Testament "the kingdom of God." They
undoubtedly imply that there will be some kind of "force" employed - for
this great work cannot be accomplished without the existence of "power;"
but it may be remarked

\(a\) That it does not necessarily mean that there will be "physical"
force, or power like that by which kingdoms have been usually
overturned. The kingdom of the Redeemer is a kingdom of "principles,"
and those principles will subdue the nations, and bring them into
subjection.

\(b\) It does not necessarily mean that the effect here described will
be accomplished "at once." It may be by a gradual process, like a
continual beating on the image, reducing it ultimately to powder.

The other question which arises here is, How can it be said that the new
kingdom which was to be set up would "break in pieces and consume all
these kingdoms?" How could the destruction of the image in the Roman
period be in fact the destruction of the "three" previous kingdoms,
represented by gold, and silver, and brass? Would they not in fact have
passed away before the Roman power came into existence? And yet, is not
the representation in [Dan 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035), that
the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold were broken in
pieces together, and were all scattered like the chaff of the summer
threshing-floor? Is it supposed that these kingdoms would be all in
existence at the same time, and that the action of the symbolic "stone"
was to be alike on all of them? To these questions, we may answer,

\(1\) That the meaning is, undoubtedly, that three of these kingdoms
would have passed away at the time of the action of the "stone" referred
to. They were to be a "succession" of kingdoms, occupying, to a great
extent, the same territory, and not contemporary monarchies occupying
distinct territories.

\(2\) The action of the "stone" was in fact, in a most important sense,
to be on them all; that is, it was to be on what "constituted" these
successive kingdoms of gold, silver, brass, and iron. Each was in its
turn an universal monarchy. The same territory was substantially
occupied by them all. The Medo-Persian scepter extended over the region
under the Babylonian; the Macedonian over that; the Roman over that.
There were indeed "accessions" in each successive monarchy, but still
anything which affected the Roman empire affected what had "in fact"
been the Babylonian, the Medo-Persian, and the Macedonian. A demolition
of the image in the time of the Roman empire would be, therefore, in
fact, a demolition of the whole.

\(3\) This interpretation is necessary from the nature of the symbolic
representation. The eye of the monarch in the dream was directed to the
image as "a splendid whole." It was necessary to the object in view that
he should see it "all at a time," that he might have a distinct
conception of it. This purpose made it impossible to exhibit the
kingdoms "in succession," but they all stood up before him at once. No
one can doubt that there "might" have been a different representation,
and that the kingdoms might have been made to pass before him in their
order, but the representation would have been less grand and imposing.
But this design made it necessary that the image should be kept "entire"
before the mind until its demolition. It would have been unseemly to
have represented the head as removed, and then the shoulders and breast,
and then the belly and thighs, until nothing remained but the feet and
toes. It was necessary to keep up the representation of "the image of
colossal majesty and strength," until a new power should arise which
"would demolish it all." Nebuchadnezzar is not represented as seeing the
parts of the image successively appear or disappear. He does not at
first see the golden head rising above the earth, and then the other
parts in succession; nor the golden head disappearing, and then the
other parts, until nothing was left but the feet and the toes. Such a
representation would have destroyed the decorum and beauty of the whole
figure; and as it cannot be argued that because Nebuchadnezzar saw the
whole image at the outset standing in its complete form, that therefore,
all these kingdoms must have been simultaneously in existence, so it
cannot be argued because he saw the whole image standing when the stone
smote upon it, that therefore, all these kingdoms must have had an
existence then.

\(4\) It may be added, that the destruction of the last was in fact the
destruction of all the three predecessors. The whole power had become
embodied in that, and the demolition affected the whole series.

[Daniel 2:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">dan 2:45</span></span>

Forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone ... - On the meaning of the
language employed here, see the notes at [Dan
2:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034). The word "forasmuch" may be
taken either in connection with what precedes, or with what follows. In
the former method, there should be a period at the word "gold" in this
verse; and then the sense is, "In those days shall the God of heaven set
up a kingdom, etc., "forasmuch," or "because" thou sawest a stone,"
etc., that is, that was a certain indication of it. According to the
other method, the meaning is, "Forasmuch as thou sawest the stone cut
out and demolish the image, the great God has made known the certainty
of it;" that is, that is a certain indication that it will be done. The
Vulgate is, "According to what thou sawest, that the stone was cut out
without hands, and reduced the clay, etc., the great God has shown to
the king what will be hereafter." The difference in the interpretation
is not very material.

Cut out of the mountain - This is not inserted in the statement in [Dan
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034). It seems, however, to be implied
there, as there is mention of the stone as "cut out." The representation
is evidently that of a stone disengaged from its native bed, the side of
a mountain, without any human agency, and then rolling down the side of
it and impinging on the image.

The great God hath made known to the king what shall come to pass
hereafter - Margin, the same as the Chaldee, "after this." The meaning
is simply, in time to come; in some future period. Daniel claims none of
the merit of this discovery to himself. but ascribes it all to God.

And the dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure - That is,
it is no vain and airy phantom; no mere working of the imagination. The
dream was all that the monarch had supposed it to be - a representation
of coming events, and his solicitude in regard to it was well-founded.
Daniel speaks with the utmost assurance also as to its fulfillment. He
knew that he had been led to this interpretation by no skill of his own;
and his representation of it was such as to satisfy the monarch of its
correctness. Two circumstances probably made it appear certain to the
monarch, as we learn from the next verse it did: one, that Daniel had
recalled the dream to his own recollection, showing that he was under a
Divine guidance; and the other, the plausibility - the verisimilitude -
the evident truthfulness of the representation. It was such a manifest
"explanation" of the dream that Nebuchadnezzar, in the same manner as
Pharaoh had done before him when his dreams were explained by Joseph, at
once admitted the correctness of the representation.

Having now gone through with the "exposition" of this important passage
respecting the stone cut from the mountain, it seems proper to make a
few remarks in regard to the nature of the kingdom that would be set up,
as represented by the stone which demolished the image, and which so
marvelously increased as to fill the earth. That there is reference to
the kingdom of the Messiah cannot be reasonably doubted. The points
which are established in respect to that kingdom by the passage now
under consideration are the following:

I. Its superhuman origin. This is indicated in the representation of the
stone cut out of the mountain "without hands;" that is, clearly not by
human agency, or in the ordinary course of events. There was to be a
superhuman power exerted in detaching it from the mountain, as well as
in its future growth. What appeared so marvelous was, that it was cut
from its orginal resting place by some invisible power, and moved
forward to the consummation of its work without any human agency. That
this was designed to be significant of something there can be no
reasonable doubt, for the result is made to turn on this. I do not see
that any special significancy is to be attached to the idea of its being
cut from "a mountain," nor that it is required of us to attempt to
refine on that expression, and to ascertain whether the mountain means
the Roman kingdom, out of which the gospel church was taken, as many
suppose; or the Jewish nation, as Augustine supposed; or that "the
origin of Christ was sublime and superior to the whole world," as Calvin
supposes; or to the mountainous country of Judea in which the Messiah
was born, as many others have maintained; or to the tomb of Joseph, as a
rock from which the Messiah sprang to life and victory, as others have
imagined.

All this belongs to a system of interpretatation that is trifling in the
extreme. The representation of the mountain here is merely for the sake
of verisimilitude, like the circumstances in a parable. If a stone was
"cut out without hands," it would be natural to speak of it as cut from
the mountain or parent-rock to which it was attached. The eye is not
here directed to the "mountain" as having anything significant or
marvelous about it, but to the "stone" that so mysteriously left its
bed, and rolled onward toward the image. The point of interest and of
marvel, the mysterious thing that attracted the eye, was that there was
no human agency employed; that no hands were seen at work; that none of
the ordinary instrumentalities were seen by which great effects are
accomplished among men. Now this would properly represent the idea that
the kingdom of the Messiah would have a supernatural origin. Its
beginnings would be unlike what is usually seen among men. How
appropriately this applies to the kingdom of the Messiah, as having its
origin not in human power, need not here be stated. Nothing is more
apparent; nothing is more frequently dwelt on in the New Testament, than
that it had a heavenly origin. It did not owe its beginning to human
plans, counsels, or power.

II\. Its feebleness in its beginning, compared with its ultimate growth
and power. At first it was a stone comparatively small, and that seemed
utterly inadequate to the work of demolishing and pulverizing a colossal
statue of gold, silver, brass, and iron. Ultimately it grew to be itself
of mountain-size, and to fill the land. Now this representation would
undoubtedly convey the fair impression that this new power, represented
by the stone, would at first be comparatively small and feeble; that
there would be comparative weakness in its origin as contrasted with
what it would ultimately attain to; and that it would seem to be utterly
inadequate to the performance of what it finally accomplished. It is
hardly necessary to say that this corresponds entirely with the origin
of the Messiah's kingdom. Everywhere it is represented as of feeble
beginnings, and, as a system, to human view, entirely inadequate to so
great a work as that of bringing other kingdoms to an end, and subduing
it to itself. The complete fulfillment of the prophetic statement would
be found in such circumstances as the following:

\(1\) The humble origin of the head of this new power hlmself - the
Messiah - the King of Sion. He was, in fact, of a decayed and
dilapidated family; was ranked among the poor; was without powerful
friends or political connections; possessed no uncommon advantages of
learning, and was regarded with contempt and scorn by the great mass of
his countrymen. No one would have supposed that the religion originated
by one of so humble an origin would have power to change the destiny of
the kingdoms of the earth.

\(2\) The feebleness of the beginning of his kingdom. His few followers
- the little band of fishermen; the slow progress at first made; these
were circumstances strikingly in accordance with the representation in
Daniel.

\(3\) The absence in that band of all that seemed requisite to
accomplish so great a work. They had no arms, no wealth, no political
power. They had nothing of what has commonly been employed to overthrow
kingdoms, and the band of fishermen sent forth to this work seemed as
little adequate to the undertaking as the stone cut from the mountain
did to demolish the colossal image.

\(4\) All this feebleness in the beginning was wonderfully contrasted
with the ultimate results, like the stone, when cut from the mountain,
contrasted with its magnitude when it filled the earth. The Saviour
himself often referred to the contrast between the feeble origin of his
religion, and what it would grow to be. At first it was like a grain of
mustard-seed, smallest among seeds; then it grew to be a tree so large
that the fowls of the air lodged in the branches. At first it was like
leaven, hidden in meal; ultimately it would diffuse itself through the
mass, so that the whole would be leavened, [Mat
13:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031).

III\. It would supplant all other kingdoms. This was clearly indicated
by the fact that the "stone" demolished the image, reducing it to
powder, and filled the place which that occupied, and all the land. This
has been explained (see the notes at [Dan
2:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034)), as meaning that it would not
be by sudden violence, but by a continued process of comminution. There
would be such an action on the kingdoms of the earth represented by
gold, and silver, and brass, and iron, that they would disappear, and
the new power represented by the "stone" would finally take their place.
As this new power was to be humble in its origin, and feeble to human
view; as it had nothing which, to outward appearance, would seem
adequate to the result, the reference would seem to be to the
"principles" which would characterize it, and which, as elements of
power, would gradually but ultimately secure the changes represented by
the demolition of the colossal statue.

The only question then would be, whether the principles in the kingdom
of the Messiah had such originality and power as would gradually but
certainly change the modes of government that existed in the world, and
substitute another kind of reign; or, what is the influence which it
will exert on the nations, causing new methods of government, in
accordance with its principles, to prevail on the earth. Though
apparently feeble, without arms, or wealth, or civil alliances, it has
elements of "power" about it which will ultimately subdue all other
principles of government, ard take their place. Its work was indeed to
be a gradual work, and it is by no means accomplished, yet its effect
has been mighty already on the principles that rule among the nations
and will still be more mighty until "the laws of the kingdom of the
Messiah shall prevail in all the earth." This seems to be the idea which
it is designed to express by this prophetic image. If one were asked "in
what respects" it is to be anticipated that these changes will be
wrought, and "in what respects" we can discern the evidences of such
changes already, we might say in such points as the following:

\(1\) In regard to the methods in which governments are founded.
Governments were formerly mostly the result of civil or foreign wars.
Nearly all the governments of antiquity were originally founded in the
"power" of some military leader, and then held by power. Christianity
originated new views about wars and conquests; views that will
ultimately prevail. In nothing are the opinions of mankind destined more
entirely to be reversed than in regard to "war;" to its glory, its
achievements, and the fame of those who have been most celebrated for
bloody triumphs.

\(2\) In regard to the rights of the people. A mighty principle was
originated by Christianity in respect to the "rights" of men; the right
of conscience; the right to the avails of their own labor; the right to
life and liberty.

\(3\) In regard to oppression. The history of the world has been, to a
great extent, a history of oppression. But all this is to be changed by
the principles of the true religion; and when the period shall arrive
that there shall be no more occasion to use the word "oppression," as
descriptive of anything that shall have an actual existenee on earth,
this will be a different world. Then the time will have come,
appropriately designated by the demolition of the colossal statue -
symbolic of all governments of oppression, and the substitution in its
place of what was at first insignificant, but which had vital energy to
supplant all that went before it.

IV\. This kingdom will be perpetual. This is asserted in the unequivocal
statements that it "shall never be destroyed," and that "it shall not be
left to other people;" that is, shall never pass into other hands. There
could not be a more positive declaration that the kingdom here referred
to will continue through all coming time. Other kingdoms pass away, but
this will not; and amidst all the revolutions of other empires this will
remain. The lapse of eighteen hundred years since this kingdom was set
up, has done not a little to confirm the truth of this prediction. Many
other kingdoms during that time have disappeared from the earth, but
this remains in its full vigour, and with extending power. It has, at
this day, an extent of dominion which it never had before, and there are
clearer indications that it will spread over all the earth than ever
existed at any previous time. That this kingdom "will" be perpetual may
be argued from the following considerations:

\(1\) From the promises of God. These are absolute; and they are
attested by Him who has all power, and who can, with infinite ease,
accomplish all that he has spoken. So in [Dan
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014), "His dominion is an everlasting
dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall
not be destroyed." [Luk 1:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#033), "and he
shall reign over the house of Jacob forever: and of his kingdom there
shall be no end." [Psa 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006) (compare
the notes at [Heb 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008)), "Thy throne, O
God, is forever and ever." In [Heb
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008), it is, "But unto the Son he
saith, Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever." [Isa
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#007), "of the increase of his
government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David,
and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and
with justice, from henceforth, even forever."

\(2\) It may be argued, from the fact that the efforts which have been
made to destroy it have shown that this cannot be done by any human
power. Eighteen hundred years have now passed away - a period
sufficiently long to test the question whether it can be destroyed by
force and violence; by argument and ridicule. The experiment has been
fairly made, and if it were possible that it should be destroyed by
external force, it would have been done. It cannot be imagined that more
favorable circumstances for such a purpose will ever occur. The church
of Christ has met every form of opposition that we can conceive could be
made against it, and has survived them all. Particularly it has survived
the trial which has been made in the following respects:

\(a\) The Roman power, the whole might of the Roman arms, that had
subdued and crushed the world, was brought to bear upon the kingdom of
Christ to crush and destroy it, but wholly failed. It cannot be supposed
that a new power will ever arise that will be more formidable to
Christianity than the Roman was.

\(b\) The power of persecution. That has been tried in every way, and
has failed. The most ingenious forms of torture have been devised to
extinguish this religion, and have all failed. It has always been found
that persecution has only contributed ultimately to the triumph of the
cause which it was hoped to crush.

\(c\) The power of philosophy. The ancient philosophers opposed it, and
attempted to destroy it by argument. This was early done by Celsus and
Porphyry; but it soon became apparent that the ancient philosophy had
nothing that could extinguish the rising religion, and not a few of the
prominent philosophers themselves were converted, and became the
advocates of the faith.

\(d\) The power of science. Christianity had its origin in an age when
science had made comparatively little progress, and in a country where
it was almost unknown. The sciences since have made vast advances; and
each one in its turn has been appealed to by the enemies of religion, to
furnish an argument against Christianity. Astronomy, history, the
discoveries in Egypt, the asserted antiquity of the Hindoos, and
geology, have all been employed to overthrow the claims of the Christian
religion, and have all been compelled to abandon the field. See this
admirably demonstrated in Dr. Wiseman's "Lectures on the Connection
between Science and Revealed Religion."

\(e\) The power of ridicule. At one time it was held that "ridicule is
the test of truth," and this has been applied unsparingly to the
Christian religion. But the religion still lives, and it cannot be
supposed that there will be men endued with the power of sarcasm and wit
superior to those who, with these weapons, have made war on
Christianity, or that infidelity has any hope from that quarter. It may
be inferred, therefore, that there is no "external" source of corruption
and decay which will prevent its being perpetual. Other kingdoms usually
have; and after a few centuries at most the internal corruption - the
defect of the organization - developes itself, and the kingdom falls.
But nothing of this kind occurs in the kingdom of Christ. It has lived
now through eighteen hundred years, through periods of the world in
which there have been constant changes in the arts, in the sciences, in
manners, in philosophy, in forms of government. During that time many a
system of philosophy has been superseded, and many a kingdom has fallen,
but Christianity is as fresh and vigorous, as it meets each coming
generation, as it ever was; and the past has demonstrated that the
enemies of the gospel have no reason to hope that it will become weak by
age, and will fall by its own decrepitude.

V. A fifth characteristic of this kingdom is, that it will universally
prevail. This was symbolized by the stone that "became a great mountain,
and that filled the whole earth," [Dan
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035). It is also implied, in the
statement in [Dan 2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044), that it "shall
break in pieces, and consume all these kingdoms." They will cease, and
this will occupy their places. The "principles" of the kingdom of the
Messiah, whatever may be the external forms of government that shall
exist on the earth, will everywhere prevail. That this will occur may be
argued from the following considerations:

\(1\) The promises recorded in the Bible. Tlle passage before us is one.
Of the same nature are the following: [Psa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008), "Ask of me, and I shall give thee
the pagan for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth
for thy possession." [Mal 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011), "for
from the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same, my name
shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every place incense shall be
offered to my name, and a pure offering." [Isa
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009), "the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea." Compare [Hab
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#014); [Isa
45:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#022), and Isa. 60.

\(2\) The world in its progress "loses" nothing that is of value. Truth
is eternal, and when once discovered, society will not let it go. It
seizes upon great elements in human nature, and the world will not let
it die. Thus it is with discoveries in science, inventions in the arts,
and principles in morals. There is no evidence that anything that was
known to the ancients which was of permanent value to mankind has been
lost; and the few things that "were" lost have been succeeded by that
which is better. All that was truly valuable in their science, their
philosophy, their arts, their jurisprudence, their literature, we
possess still, and the world will always retMn it. And what can ever
obliterate from the memory oi man the printing-press, the steamengine,
the cotton-gin, the telescope, the blow-pipe, the magnetic telegraph?
Society accumulates from age to age all that is truly valuable in
inventions, morals, and the arts, and travels with them down to the
period when the world shall have reached the highest point of
perfectability. This remark is true also of Christianity - the kingdom
of Christ. There are "principles" in regard to the happiness and rights
of man in that system which cannot be "detached" from society, but which
go into its permanent structure, and which "the world will not let die."

\(3\) Society is thus making constant "advances." A position gained in
human progress is never ultimately lost. "The principles thus
accumulated and incorporated into society become permanent. Each age
adds something in this respect to the treasures accumulated by all
preceding ages, and each one is, in some respects, an advance on its
predecessors, and makes the final triumph of the principles of truth,
and liberty, and pure religion more sure."

\(4\) Christianity, or the kingdom of Christ, is "aggressive." It makes
a steady war on the evil customs, habits, and laws of the world. It is
in accordance with its nature to diffuse itself. Nothing can prevent its
propagation; and, according to the laws of society, nothing is so
certain philosophically in regard to the future, as the final prevalence
of the religion of the Redeemer. It may meet with temporary and
formidable obstructions. It may be retarded, or extinguished, in certain
places. But its general course is onward - like the current of the
mighty river toward the ocean. The only thing certain in the future is,
that the Christian religion will yet spread all over the world; and
there is enough in this to gratify the highest wishes of philanthropy,
and enough to stimulate to the highest effort to secure so desirable an
end.

[Daniel 2:46](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">dan 2:46</span></span>

Then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face - This was the common
method of signifying profound respect among the Orientals. Compare [Gen
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#003); [Gen
50:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#018); [Lev
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024); [Num
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#005); [Jos
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#014); [Jdg
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#020); [Rev
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#016).

And worshipped Daniel - The word rendered "worshipped" here (סגד segid),
in the Chaldee portions of the Bible is uniformly rendered "worship,"
[Dan 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#026); [Dan
3:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#005), [Dan
3:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#010), [Dan
3:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#014), [Dan
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#018), [Dan
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#028). It occurs nowhere else, and in
every instance, except in the one before us, is employed with reference
to the homage paid to an idol, all the other cases occurring in the
third chapter respecting the image that was set up by Nebuchadnezzar.
The corresponding Hebrew word (סגד sâgad) occurs only in [Isa
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#015), [Isa
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#017), [Isa
44:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#019); [Isa
46:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#006); and is, in every instance,
rendered "fall down," also with reference to idols. The proper idea,
therefore, of the word here is, that the monarch meant to render
"religious" homage to Daniel, or such adoration as was usually paid to
idols. This is confirmed by witat is immediately added, that he
commanded that an oblation should be made to him. It is not, however,
necessary to suppose that Daniel "received" or "approved" this religious
homage of the king, or that he left the impression on his mind that he
was "willing" to be honored as a god. The prostration of the king before
him, of course, he could not prevent. The views and feelings which the
monarch had in doing it he could not prevent. The command to present an
"oblation and sweet odors to him" he could not prevent. But it is not a
fair inference that Daniel approved this, or that he did anything to
countenance it, or even that he did not, in a proper manner, rebuke it:
for

\(1\) We are not to suppose that all that was said was recorded, and no
one can prove that Daniel did not express his disapprobation of this
religious honor shown to him.

\(2\) Daniel had in fact, expressed his views, in the clearest manner,
on this very point before the monarch. He had, again and again,
disclaimed all power to be able to reveal such secrets. He had directed
his mind to the true God, as he who alone could disclose coming events,
[Dan 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#028), [Dan
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#030), [Dan
2:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#045). He had taken all possible
precaution to prevent any such result, by declaring, in the most
emphatic terms [Dan 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#030), that this
secret was not revealed to him "on account of any wisdom which he had
more than any living." If now, after all this precaution, and these
disclaimers, the king should prostrate himself before him, and, for the
moment, feel that he was in the presence of a God, Daniel was not
responsible for it, and it should not be inferred that he encouraged or
approved it.

\(3\) It would seem, from the narrative itself, more than probable that
Daniel did refuse the homage, and direct the thoughts of the monarch to
the true God. In the very next verse it is said, "The king answered unto
Daniel, and said, Of a truth it is, that your God is a God of gods, and
a Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets." "Answered" what? Perhaps
something that was said by Daniel. At all events, it is clear from this
that whatever were the momentary expressions of wonder, gratitude, and
adoration, on the part of the king, his thoughts soon passed to the
proper object of worship - the true God. "And commanded, etc." The fact
that this was "commanded" does not prove that it was done. The command
was probably given under the excitement of his admiration and wonder.
But it does not follow that Daniel received it, or that the command was
not recalled on reflection, or that the oblation and odors may not have
been presented to the true God.

That they should offer an oblation - That is, his attendants, or perhaps
the priests to whom pertained the duty of making offerings to the gods.
The word rendered "oblation" (מנחה minchāh) does not refer to a,
"bloody" sacrifice, but means a gift or present of any kind. It is
applied in the Scriptures to denote

\(1\) "a gift," or "present," [Gen
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#013), [Gen
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#018), [Gen
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#020) ([Gen
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#014), [Gen
32:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#019), [Gen
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#021)); [Gen
43:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#011), [Gen
43:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#015), [Gen
43:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#025);

\(2\) "a tribute," such as was exacted from a subject nation, under the
notion of a present, [Sa2 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002), [Sa2
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#006); [Kg1
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#021) [Kg1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#001),

\(3\) "an offering" or sacrifice to God, especially a bloodless
offering, in opposition to (זבח zebach) - a bloody sacrifice, [Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001), [Lev
2:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#004); [Lev
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#014) (7); [Lev
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#009); [Psa
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006) (7); [Jer
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#026).

See the word fully explained in the notes at [Isa
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013). There can be no doubt that
Nebuchadnezzar meant that such an offering should be presented as was
usually made in idol worship.

And sweet odors - incense was commonly used in worship (see the notes at
[Isa 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013)), and it is not improbable
that in the worship of the gods it was accompanied with other fragrant
odors. Sweet odors, or "savors," expressed by the same word which is
used here, were a part of the prescribed worship in the Hebrew ritual,
[Lev 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#009), [Lev
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#013), [Lev
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#017); [Lev
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#002), [Lev
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#009); [Lev
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#005); [Lev
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#021) (14); [Num
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#007).

[Daniel 2:47](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">dan 2:47</span></span>

The king answered unto Daniel - Answered either what he had said in the
interpretation of the dream, or "possibly" something that he had said in
regard to the impropriety of offering this homage to him. Compare the
notes at [Dan 2:46](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#046). It is certain
that, for some cause. whatever might have been the homage which he was
disposed to render to Daniel, his thoughts were soon turned from him to
the true God, and to an acknowledgment of him as superior to all other
beings. He seems, at least, instantly to have reflected on what Daniel
had himself said [Dan 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#030), and to
have remembered that religious homage was due, not to Daniel, but to the
God who had communicated the secret to him.

Of a truth it is - It is truly so. This had been shown by the manner in
which this secret was disclosed.

That your God is a God of gods - Is superior to all other gods; is
supreme over all. Compare [Rev 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#014);
[Ti1 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#015). The idea is, that whatever
subordinate beings there may be, He is supreme.

And a Lord of kings - Supreme over kings. They are all inferior to him,
and subject to his control.

And a revealer of secrets - One of the attributes of divinity. See the
notes at [Dan 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#028).

Seeing thou couldest reveal this secret - A secret which the wisest men
of the realm had sought in vain to disclose. The fact that a professed
servant of God had been able to do this showed that God was himself
supreme, and worthy of adoration. We have here, then, an instance in
which a proud and haughty pagan monarch was brought to an acknowledgment
of the true God, and was constrained to render him homage. This was a
result which it was evidently intended to reach in the whole
transaction; in the dream itself; in the fact that the wise men of
Babylon could not interpret it; and in the fact that an acknowledged
servant of the Most High had been enabled to make the disclosure. The
instance is instructive, as showing to what extent a mind clearly not
under the influence of any genuine piety - for subsequent events showed
that no "permanent" effects were produced on him, and that he was still
an idolater Dan. 3, and a most proud and haughty man Dan. 4 - may be
brought to acknowledge God. See the remarks at the end of the Dan. 7.

[Daniel 2:48](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">dan 2:48</span></span>

There the king made Daniel a great man - That is, he gave him an
honorable appointment; he so honored him that he was regarded as a great
man. He was really made great by the grace of God, and the extraordinary
favor which God had bestowed upon him, but the estimate which the king
had of his greatness was shown by the tokens of the royal favor. "And
gave him many great gifts." This is a common way of showing esteem in
the East. The estimate in which one holds another is evinced by the
variety and richness of the presents conferred on him. Hence, all
persons of distinction expect gifts of those who approach them as
expressive of their regard for them, and of the esteem in which they are
held. Compare [Dan 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#006).

And made him ruler over the whole province of Babylon - Chaldee, השׁלטה
hasheleṭēh - caused him to preside over, or to rule over, from the verb
שׁלט shelaṭ, "to rule," and commonly applied to one who rules as a
prince, or in an elevated office. From this word the terms "sultan" and
"sultana" are derived.

And chief of the governors over all the wise men of Babylon - This would
seem to be an appointment which did not pertain to him as governor of
the province of Babylon, or as presiding in the capital, but was a
separate appointment, and, therefore, an additional mark of favor. The
phrase "chief of the governors" would seem to imply that the magi of
Babylon were disposed in certain orders or classes, each of which had
its appropriate head, like the head of a college or university. Daniel
was placed over the whole as the president, principal, or chancellor. It
had been the policy of Nebuchadnezzar to assemble at the capital the
principal talent and learning of the realm. Compare the notes at [Dan
1:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#018); [Dan
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002). Daniel thus, in both these
stations of honor at an early period of life, though recently an unknown
stranger, and a captive; was exalted to the highest honors which could
be conferred on a subject, and raised to posts of distinction which
would usually be regarded as the highest rewards which could be obtained
by a long life of devotedness to the welfare of the country.

[Daniel 2:49](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">dan 2:49</span></span>

Then Daniel requested of the king ... - In his own remarkable
prosperity, and in the extraordinary honors conferred on him, he did not
forget the companions of his humbler days. They were his countrymen;
they had been captives with him; they had been selected with a view to
stand with him before the king [Dan
1:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003); they had shared with him in his
rules of abstinence [Dan 1:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#011); they
had all passed an honorable examination before the king [Dan
1:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#018); they had united with him in
supplication to God that he would disclose the meaning of the vision
[Dan 2:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#017); and now it was proper
that they should be remembered by him who had been so signally honored.

Over the affairs of the province of Babylon - In what particular
departments of business they were employed is not mentioned; but it
would seem that all that especially pertained to this province was
entrusted to them. Daniel had the general superintendence, but the
subordinate duties growing out of the office were entrusted to them. The
fact that the king granted the request shows the influence that Daniel
had at the court. The reasons which influenced the king in granting the
request may have been, not only the favor with which he regarded Daniel,
but the fact that the duties of the office conferred on him now were
such as to require assistance, and the remembrance of the virtues ot
these youths when they stood before him.

But Daniel sat in the gate of the king - The post of chief honor and
dignity as a counselor of the king. The "gate" of a city in the East,
being a chief place of concourse, was the place where courts were held,
and public business was usually transacted. See the notes at [Job
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#007). To say, therefore, that he "sat
in the gate of the king," is merely to say that he occupied a place with
the chief counselors and dignitaries of the realm. The phrase "Sublime
Porte," that is, "the Sublime Gate," is still employed at Constantinople
to denote the government of the sultan, for, in the earlier days of
Ottoman rule, the reigning sovereign, as is still the case in some parts
of the East, held courts of justice and levees at the entrance of his
residence. See "Harper's Magazine," vol. iv. p. 333. The office of
Daniel was, perhaps, not far different from that of the grand vizier of
the Turkish government. See Murray's "Ency. Geog." vol. ii. p. 202.

Remarks

Among the lessons of practical value suggested by this chapter, we may
notice the following:

\(1\) We have an instance [Dan 2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001)
of the methods which were resorted to in early periods of the world to
ascertain what the future would be. This great monarch relied on a dream
which greatly disturbed him, and on the power which he supposed was
entrusted to men to interpret dreams. In common with the prevailing
spirit of his times, and of all ancient times (notes, [Dan
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001)), he believed that dreams might be
regarded as prognostics of future events; that they were under Divine
direction; and that all that was necessary to make them safe guides in
reference to what is to occur, was that they should be properly
interpreted. In common, too, with all the people of ancient times, and
with most of modern times, the king here referred to had an earnest
desire to look into the future. There has been no desire in the human
bosom stronger than this. We are so made that we wish to lift the
mysterious veil which shrouds the future; to penetrate the deep darkness
which rests on the unseen world.

Our great interests are there. The past is fixed, and cannot now affect
us, except by the consequences of what we have done, and by teaching us
lessons of value derived from our own observation, and that of others.
But the future is not yet fixed. Man, so anxious to know what this is to
be, finds himself in respect to it peculiarly unendowed. In relation to
the past, he is endowed with the faculty of "memory," but with nothing
corresponding to this pertaining to "the future." He can treasure up
what has occurred, but he cannot in like manner make the future pass
before his mind, that he may become wise by knowing what will take place
in far distant times. There can be no doubt that God could have endowed
the mind with one faculty as well as the other - for he has it himself -
but there were obvious reasons why it should not be done. Destitute,
then, as man was of this power, one great object of human inquiry has
been to see whether the deficiency could be supplied, and whether
something might not be found which would be to the future substantially
what the memory is to the past. The efforts and results on this subject
- one of which we have in the chapter before us - constitute one of the
most instructive chapters of the history of our race, and show how
effectually God has bounded the limits of human investigation in this
respect. Among those methods of attempting to penetrate the future, and
of laying open its deep mysteries, may be noticed the following:

\(a\) Astrology. It was supposed that the stars might exert an influence
over the fates of men, and that by observing their positions,
conjunctions, and oppositions, it might be ascertained what would be the
destiny of individuals and nations. The belief of this has manifested
itself more or less in every age; and in such instances as in the word
"lunacy," and in the common apprehensions about the influence of the
moon on health and on vegetation, may be still seen traces of that
belief. Even Lord Bacon held that "astrology was a science not to be
"rejected," but reformed;" and in the early periods of the world it was
a "fair" subject of investigation whether the heavenly bodies actually
exerted such an influence, and whether, if it were so, it was possible
to ascertain the laws by which this was done. This was the so-called
science of astrology.

\(b\) Necromancy. The belief of this also prevailed in nearly all
ancient nations, and we find frequent reference to it in the Scriptures.
This consisted in the belief that the dead must be acquainted with the
world where they now dwell, so dark to the living, and that it might be
possible to make a covenant or compact with them, by which they would be
induced to disclose what they knew. It was extensively, if not
universally, believed that they re-appeared to men, and that it was not
an uncommon occurrence for them to leave their abodes, and to visit the
earth again. It was, therefore, not an unnatural and not an unfair
subject of inquiry, whether they would not disclose to the more favored
among mortals what they knew of the secrets of the invisible world, and
what they knew of events which were to come. Compare the notes at [Isa
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#019).

\(c\) The arts of divination. These were founded mainly on the
investigations of science. It was at first a fair question whether,
amidst the wonders which science was unfolding to the view, it might not
contribute to lift the veil from the future, and reveal what was yet to
come. It took long to ascertain what were the legitimate aims of
science, and what might be hoped for from it. Hence, it was directed to
the inquiry whether some substance might not be found which would
transmute all things to gold; whether some elixir might not be
discovered which would arrest all disease, and give immortality to man;
and whether science would not disclose some means by which the future
could be penetrated, and the mysteries of the invisible world be laid
open to the view. It required centuries of investigation, a thousand
failures, and the results of long and patient thought, to ascertain what
were the true objects of science, and to convince the world that it was
not its legitimate purpose to reveal the future to man.

\(d\) Pagan oracles. It was an early inquiry whether God would not, in
some way, lift the veil from the future and disclose its secrets to man.
The belief that this would be done seems to be natural to the mind of
man; and in all ages, and in all countries, he has supposed that; the
future would be thus disclosed. Hence, among the pagan, certain persons
claimed to be divinely inspired; hence, such shrines as that at Delphi
became celebrated; hence, ambiguous responses were uttered, so expressed
as to support the credit of the oracle, whatever might be the result;
hence, men were appointed to observe the flights of birds, to inspect
the entrails of animals offered in sacrifice, to interpret any unusual
phenomena in the clouds, to mark the direction of meteors, and, in
general, to examine any unusual appearances in the heavens or the earth,
which would seem to furnish any clew by which the future might be known.
Much of all this undoubtedly became mere imposture, and justified the
remark of Cicero, that he wondered that one augur could meet another
without laughing; but there can be no doubt that by many these inquiries
were honestly pursued, and that at first all this seemed to be a
legitimate subject of inquiry. What forbade man to pursue it? And who
could tell but that in some such ways the secrets of the mysterious
future could be found out? It demanded long and patient inquiry and
observation to show that this could not be so, and that whatever might
be indicated by any of these things, it was never designed that they
should be the means by which man could be made acquainted with the
mysteries of the invisible world.

\(e\) Dreams. We have seen (notes, [Dan
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001)) that it was an early article of
belief that through the medium of dreams the Divine will might be made
known, and the secrets of the future disclosed. The "theory" on this
subject seems to have been, that during sleep the ordinary laws of the
mind are suspended; that the soul is abstracted from the visible world;
that the thoughts which it has then must be originated by higher beings;
and that in this state it has converse with an invisible world, and may
be permitted to see much of what is yet to occur. Compare Intro. to
Isaiah, Section VII. (2).

\(f\) Visions. Men supposed that there might be representations made to
certain favored persons respecting the future, their senses being closed
to surrounding objects, and that while in an ecstasy, or trance, the
mind might have a view of future events. Such were the visions of
Balaam; such, in a remarkable manner, were the visions of the true
prophets; and so deeply was the conviction that this "might" occur
engrafted in the human mind, that the belief of it seems to have had a
place among the pagan nations. Compare Introduction to Isaiah, Section
7. (4).

Such were some of the ways by which it was supposed that the future
might be penetrated by man, and its secrets disclosed. By allowing man
to make trial of these methods, and to pursue them through a period of
several thousand years, until he himself saw that they were fruitless,
God was preparing the race to feel the necessity of direct
communications from himself, and to welcome the true reve lations which
he would make respecting things to come.

\(2\) We have in the chapter before us [Dan
2:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#004) an instance of "the
acknowledged failure" of a class of the wisest of men, whose lives were
devoted to this employment, in their attempts to disclose the future.
This is a fair illustration of all the attempts of the pagan, and it was
doubtless permitted in order that it might be seen that all such
attempts must fail. The magicians, astrologers, and Chaldeans were
foiled in a case which fairly came within the province of their art, and
when pretenders to this kind of knowledge ought to have been able to
solve the difficulties of the monarch. Regarding this as a fair
illustration of all the attempts of the pagan to penetrate the future,
and to discover the great truths which it is desirable for man to know,
there are three observations which may be made in regard to it:

I. The trial has been a fair one.

\(a\) There was "time" enough allowed for it. It was about four thousand
years from the creation of man to the time when the canon of Scripture
was completed, and promulgated to the whole world, and it could not be
said that man required a longer time to test the question whether he
needed a revelation.

\(b\) The trial was a fair one, because it was one which men were at
liberty to pursue to any extent, and which was conducted under the best
advantages. It was confined to no country or favored class of men. In
all lands, and with every advantage of climate, government, and laws,
man has been engaged in the great inquiry; and if it be remembered what
immense "numbers" of minds have been employed in these investigations,
it cannot be pretended that the utmost desirable freedom has not been
allowed to man to test the question whether "by searching he can find
out God," and disclose the future.

\(c\) The same thing is true in respect to the "talent" which has been
employed in this investigation. It is not too much to say, that the
"highest" talent that the world has produced has been engaged in these
inquiries, and that the rejecters of revelation cannot hope that higher
powers can be brought to bear on it, or that the unaided human intellect
can hope to accomplish more in this respect than has been done. The
profoundest minds in Egypt and Chaldea were engaged in inquiries of this
sort. The very highest talent which Greece produced in its best days was
employed on questions of religion; in attempts to find out God, to
ascertain the relations of man to him, and to determine what man was to
be hereafter. What was true, also, of the ancient pagan, and of the
modern pagan, that the best talent has been employed on these questions,
is true also of the rejecters of revelation in Christian lands. Men of
high powers of intellect have refused to acknowledge the Bible as a
revelation, and have chosen to fall back on the unaided resources of
their own minds. Aided with all that science and learning can do, they
have inquired after a system of religion that would commend itself to
man as true, and as adapted to his wants; and it cannot be pretended
that man in this respect has not had a fair opportunity to show what the
human powers can do.

\(d\) The trial has been a fair one in regard to the field of
investigation. Astrology, necromancy, abstruse natural science, oracles,
dreams, visions, the observation of the course of events - all these
have been open before man, and in one and all of them he has been
allowed to pursue his investigations at pleasure.

II\. There has been an entire "failure" in the attempt. The Chaldeans
failed in Babylon, as the magicians had done in Egypt, to explain what
was regarded as a prognostic of the future, and in both cases it was
necessary to call in the aid of one who had a direct communication from
heaven. The same has been the case in "all" attempts to explain the
future, and to disclose what man was so desirous of knowing about the
invisible world.

\(a\) All reliance on astrology, necromancy, oracles, dreams, and the
revelations of the abstruser sciences, has failed. Astrology has ceased
to be a science, and the stars are studied for other purposes than to
disclose future events; necromancy has ceased to be a science - for no
one now hopes to be able to make a compact with the dead, in virtue of
which they will disclose the secrets of the invisible world; no one now
would consult a pagan oracle with the hope of receiving a response to
his inquiries that might be relied on: the abstruser sciences are
pursued for other purposes; and no one would repose on dreams to furnish
a system of truth which would meet the wants of man.

\(b\) The same thing has been true in regard to the various "systems of
religion" on which men have relied. "It is true of the systems of the
pagan." They have been tried in the most ample manner, and have shown
that they do not meet the wants of man. The experiment has been fairly
made, and the system is becoming worse and worse. It is not adapted to
elevate man in the scale of being in regard to the present life; it does
not remove the evils which press now upon the race; it does not disclose
a certain way by which a sinner may be prepared for the life to come.
"It is true in regard to an atonement for sin." The attempt has been
made now for nearly six thousand years, to find some way in which an
efficacious sacrifice may be made for sin. Blood has been poured on
thousands of altars; animals have been offered, and thousands of human
beings have been devoted to the gods, but still there has been no
evidence that these bloody offerings have been accepted, or that they
have availed to expiate transgression. The experiment has failed. There
is no new sacrifice that can be offered now, and it is hopeless for man
to attempt to make expiation for his own sins. "The same thing is true
of the systems of religion, proposed by infidelity." They are all
failures. One system after another is abandoned, and no one is such as
the race needs. The best talent that infidelity can hope to produce has
been exhausted in this undertaking, for how can it hope to produce men
better fitted to propose a system of religion to mankind than
Shaftesbury, or Hobbes, or Tindal, or Herbert, or Voltaire, or Hume?
Yet, after all that has been done by infidelity in modern times, an
intelligent man would prefer trusting his eternal interests to such a
system as Socrates would propose, to one proposed by Hume; he would feel
safer under the guidance of Cicero or Seneca than under the direction of
Voltaire or Gibbon.

III\. The "reasons why God has permitted this trial to be made, in such
a manner, and with such results, are obvious. In the cases which
occurred in the time of Pharaoh in Egypt, and of Nebuchadnezzar in
Babylon, the reason evidently was, that when there was an acknowledged
failure of the power of the magicians, God might himself, through Joseph
and Daniel, get honor to his own name. So the reasons why he has
permitted this trial to be made on a large scale, and has suffered it
everywhere to fail, are probably these two:

\(1\) to show to man, in such a way as to admit of no doubt, his need of
revelation; and

\(2\) to induce him to prize the volume of revealed truth.

We should value it the more, and adhere to it the more firmly, in view
of the experiment which has been made in all lands. If that revelation
be rejected, man has no resource; he is wholly unable to penetrate the
future; he can devise no way of making atonement for sin; he can
originate no system that shall alleviate the sorrows under which we
groan, or disclose the prospect of happiness beyond the tomb. For if the
Bible is taken away, on what shall we fall back to guide us? - on
astrology; on necromancy; on pagan oracles and sacrifices; on dreams; on
the ravings of priestesses at pagan shrines, or the speculations of
infidelity in Christian lands? All these have been tried in vain. The
Bible is the only guide on which man can rely to conduct him to heaven:
if that fails, all fails, and man is in the midst of impenetrable night.

\(3\) We may learn from this chapter [Dan
2:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#012), that in the perplexities and
trials which arise in life, a good man may appeal to God for guidance
and help. So Daniel felt, when all human power had failed in complying
with the demands of a stern and arbitrary monarch. and when he and his
friends, though innocent, were about to be involved in the sweeping
sentence which had been issued against the wise men of Babylon. Then it
was clear that nothing could save them but Divine interposition; nothing
could avert the stroke but such a heavenly influence as would disclose
the secret, and thus avert the wrath of the king. In this emergency
Daniel felt that he "might" call upon God, and to this service he
summoned also his three friends, who were equally interested with him in
the issue. In view of this we may observe:

I. That "all" good men are liable to meet with similar perplexities and
embarrassments; to be placed in circumstances where nothing but the
interposition of God can help them. This is true in such respects as the
following:

\(a\) In reference to the knowledge of the truth. The mind is often
perplexed on the subject of religion: reason fails to disclose those
truths which it is desirable to know; darkness and obscurity seem to
envelope the whole subject; the soul, oppressed with a sense of
conscious guilt, seeks to find some way of peace; the heart, entangled
in the meshes of unbelief, struggles and pants to be free, and there is
no human help - nothing this side the eternal throne on which reliance
can be placed to impart the light which is needed.

\(b\) In reference to duty. The mind is often perplexed to know what
should be done. Though desirous of doing what is right, yet there may be
so many conflicting views; there may be such doubt as to what is best
and right, that none but God can direct in such an emergency.

\(c\) In cases of peril. Daniel and his friends were in danger; and men
are often now in such danger that they feel that none but God can save
them. On a bed of pain, in a stranded vessel, in a burning house, men
often feel that human help is powerless, and that aid can be found in
none but God. Thus the church, in the dark days of persecution, has
often been so encompassed with dangers, that it could not but feel that
none but God could avert the impending destruction.

\(d\) In times when religion declines, and when iniquity abounds. Then
the church often is led to feel that there is need of the aid of God,
and that none but he can rouse it from its deathlike slumbers, and put
back the swelling waves of iniquity.

II\. In such circumstances it is the privilege of a good man to appeal
to God, with the hope that he will interpose.

\(1\) This was felt by Daniel, and it is an undoubted truth, as revealed
in the Bible, that in such circumstances, if we will look to God, we may
hope for his guidance and help. Compare [Kg2
19:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#014); [Job
16:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#019); [Psa
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#009); [Psa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001), following; [Psa
55:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#022); [Jam
1:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005). But

\(2\) what kind of interposition and direction may "we" hope for in such
perplexities? I answer:

\(a\) We may expect the Divine direction by a careful study of the
principles laid down in the Scriptures. The Bible indeed does not, for
it could not, mention the names of individuals, or specify every case
which would occur in which Divine direction would be needed, but it lays
down great principles of truth, applicable to all the circumstances
which will ever arise. In this respect there is a wonderful richness and
fulness in the Word of God. There is many a rich vein of truth which
seems never to have been worked until we are placed in some new and
untried situation. When one is thrown into perplexing circumstances;
when he is called to pass through trials; when he meets some powerful
form of temptation, he is surprised to find how much there is in the
Bible adapted to such circumstances that he never saw there before. It
seems to be a new book, written to meet just such cases; nor in such
circumstances does he ever consult its pages in vain.

\(b\) We may expect direction by his providence. The sparrow falls not
to the ground without his direction, and all events are under his
control, and as these events occur they may be regarded as so many
indications of his will. One of the most interesting and profitable
employments in a man's life is to study the indications of Providence in
regard to himself, and to endeavor to learn, from what is daily
occurring to him, what is the will of God in regard to him. A careful
and prayerful observer of the intimations of the Divine will is not in
serious danger of error.

\(c\) God guides those who are in perplexity by his Spirit. There is a
secret and silent influence on the mind of him who is desirous of being
led in the way of duty, suggesting what is true, delivering the mind
from prejudice, overcoming opposition to the truth, disposing the heart
to charity, peace, and love, prompting to the performance of duty, and
gradually elevating the soul to God. If a man would pray when he feels
an inward prompting to pray; would read the Bible when some inward voice
seems to call him to do it; would do good when the inward monitor urges
him to do it; would fix the eye and the heart on heaven when something
within seems to lead him toward the skies, he would not be in much
danger of error. Such are "spring-times of piety in the soul" - times
when the soul may make rapid progress in the knowledge of the truth, and
it is not enthusiasm to say that such states of mind are produced by an
influence from above.

\(4\) In view of this chapter [Dan
2:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#017), we may observe that it is a
privilege to have praying friends - friends on whom we can call to unite
with us in prayer in the time of trouble. So Daniel found it when he
called on his friends to pray; so Esther found it when her whole people
were in danger, and when all depended on her successful application to
the sovereign [Est 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#016), and so the
friends of God have found it in all ages. If prayer is heard at all,
there are special reasons why it should prevail when many are united in
the request. Compare [Mat 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#019).
Hence, the propriety of worship in the family; hence, the fitness of
prayermeetings; and hence, the appropriateness of prayer offered in the
great congregation.

\(5\) God should be praised and acknowledged as having supremacy over
all things, [Dan 2:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#020). Particularly
he should be acknowledged

\(a\) in the changes that occur on earth; in the changes from childhood
to youth, and from youth to manhood, and to old age; in the beautiful
changes of the seasons, and in all the variety which the seasons bring
with them; in the changes from sickness to health, from poverty to
affluence, from oppression and slavery to freedom, from an humble to an
exalted condition; in all the revolutions of empire, and the changes of
dynasties.

\(b\) He should be acknowledged in his supremacy over the kings and
rulers of the earth. Every monarch reigns by his permission, and every
one is designed to accomplish some great purpose in the development of
his plans. If a full and correct history of the world could be written,
it would be found that God had some object to accomplish by the
instrumentality of everyone whom he has called to a throne, and that as
we can now see a distinct design to be accomplished by the reign of
Pharaoh, Sennacherib, Cyrus, and Augustus, so we could find some
distinct design in reference to every one who has ever reigned.

\(c\) He should be recognized as the source of all knowledge.
Particularly

\(1\) he originally endowed every mind, and gave it the capacity which
it has for acquiring knowledge;

\(2\) he preserves the faculties of the mind, and gives them their just
balance;

\(3\) he makes the intellect clear and bright, and when it applies
itself to the investigation of truth he only can preserve it unclouded;

\(4\) he makes, under the operation of the regular laws of intellect,
important suggestions to the mind - those pregnant hints containing so
much "the seeds of things" on which all true progress in knowledge
depends - those bright thoughts, those happy conceptions, which come
into the soul, and which result in such happy inventions, and such
advances in science, art, literature, and law; and

\(5\) he should be regarded as the original source of those "inventions"
which contribute so much to the progress of the race. At the proper
time, and the best time, when some new and wonderful discovery is to
burst upon the world, he raises up the individual who is to make it, and
the discovery takes its place as one of the fixed points of progress,
and society, with that as a treasure never to be lost, moves forward on
a higher elevation, with greatly accelerated progress. So it was with
the invention of alphabetical writing; the art of printing; the
application of steam to purposes of manufacture and navigation; the
telescope, and the telegraph; and, in general, in respect to all those
great inventions which have contributed to the progress of society. If
the whole truth were known, it would be seen that the hand of God was in
these things as really as in the "revelation of the deep and secret
things to Daniel."

\(6\) We may learn from this chapter, as was remarked in the notes at
[Dan 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#030), that for all our
attainments in knowledge and wisdom we should ascribe the praise to God
alone. In illustration of this we may remark:

I. That there is a strong native tendency in man to ascribe the honor of
such attainments to himself. It is one of the most difficult of all
things to induce man to attribute the praise of whatever excellence he
may have. or whatever attainments he may make, to his Creator. This
exists universally in regard to talent, rank, and scientific
attainments; and it is even hard for a heart that is endowed with true
religion to free itself altogether from self-glorying, as if it were all
to be traced to ourselves.

II\. Yet in our case, as in the case of Daniel, all the honor should be
ascribed to God. For

\(1\) it is to him we owe all our original endowments of mind and of
body, whatever they may be. In this respect we are as he chose to make
us. We have no natural endowment - whether of beauty, strength, genius,
aptness for learning, or advantages for distinction in science which he
did not confer on us, and which he could not as easily have withheld
from us as he did from those less favored. And why should we be proud of
these things? Shall the oak of Bashan be proud of its far-spreading
arms, or its strength? Shall the cedar of Lebanon be proud of its
height, and its vastness, and its beauty? Shall the rose be proud of its
beauty or its sweetness, or shall the magnolia boast of its fragrance?

\(2\) God has conferred on us all the means of education which we have
enjoyed, and all to which the development ot our natural powers can be
traced. He has preserved our reason; he has furnished us instructors; he
has provided the books which we have read; he has continued to us the
possession of the health which we have enjoyed. At any moment he could
have driven reason from the throne; he could have deprived us of health;
he could have summoned us away.

\(3\) It is equally owing to him that we have been favored with any
success in the prosecution of our calling in life. Let the merchant who
has accumulated great property, apparently by his own industry, suppose
that all Divine agency and influence in his case had been withheld, and
whatever labor he may have expended, or with whatever skill he may be
endowed, he could have met with no such success. Let him reflect how
much he owes to favoring gales on the ocean; to the seasons producing
abundant harvests, and to what seems almost to be "chance" or "fortune,"
and he will see at once that whatever success he may have been favored
with is to be traced, in an eminent sense, to God. The same thing is
true of all the other successful departments of human effort.

\(4\) This is equally true of all the knowledge which we have of the way
of salvation, and all our hopes of eternal life. It is a great principle
of religion that we have nothing which we have not received, and that if
we have received it, we should not glory as if we had not received it,
for it is God who makes us to differ (see [Co1
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)). It is God who originally gave us
the volume of revealed truth - making us differ from the whole pagan
world. It is God who awakened us to see our guilt and danger, making us
to differ from the gay and careless world around us. It is God alone who
has pardoned our sins, making us to differ from the multitude who are
unpardoned in the world. It is God who has given us every hope that we
cherish that is well-founded, and all the peace and joy which we have
had in com munion with himself. For these things, therefore, we should
give all the praise to God; and in our case, as in that of Daniel, it is
one of the evidences of our piety when we are disposed to do so.

\(7\) We have in this chapter [Dan
2:46-47](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#046) an instructive instance of the
extent to which an irreligious man may go in showing respect for God. It
can. not be supposed that Nebuchadnezzar was a truly pious man. His
characteristics and actions, both before and after this, were those of a
pagan, and there is no evidence that he was truly converted to God. Yet
he evinced the highest respect for one who was a servant and prophet of
the Most High [Dan 2:46](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#046), and even for
God himself [Dan 2:47](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#047). This was
evinced in a still more remarkable manner at a subsequent period Dan. 4
In this he showed how far it is possible for one to go who has no real
piety, and as such cases are not uncommon, it may not be improper to
consider them for a moment.

I. This respect for God extends to the following things:

\(1\) An admiration of him, as great, and wise, and powerful. The
evidences of his power and wisdom are traced in his works. The mind may
be impressed with what is wise, or overpowered with what is vast,
without there being any real religion, and all this admiration may
terminate on God, and be expressed in language of respect for him, or
for his ministers.

\(2\) This admiration of God may be extended to whatever is "beautiful"
in religion. The beauty'of the works of nature, of the sky, of a
landscape, of the ocean, of the setting sun, of the changing clouds, of
the flowers of the field, may lead the thoughts up to God, and produce a
certain admiration of a Being who has clothed the world with so much
loveliness. There is a religion of sentiment as well as of principle; a
religion that terminates on the "beautiful" as well as a religion that
terminates on the "holy." The Greeks, natural admirers of beauty,
carried this kind of religion to the highest possible degree, for their
religion was, in all its forms, characterized by the love of the
beautiful. So also there is much that is beautiful in Christianity, as
well as in the works of God, and it is possible to be charmed with that
without ever having felt any compunction for sin. or any love for pure
religion itself. It is possible for one who has a natural admiration for
what is lovely in character, to see a high degree of moral beauty in the
character of the Redeemer, for one whose heart is easily moved by
sympathy to be affected in view of the sufferings of the injured
Saviour. The same eyes that would weep over a welltold tale, or over a
tragic representation on the stage, or over a scene of real distress,
might weep over the wrongs and woes of Him who was crucified, and yet
there might be nothing more than the religion of sentiment - the
religion springing from mere natural feeling.

\(3\) There is much "poetic" religion in the world. It is possible for
the imagination to form such a view of the Divine character that it
shall seem to be lovely, while perhaps there may be scarcely a feature
of that character that shall be correct. Not a little of the religion of
the world is of this description - where such a God is conceived of as
the mind chooses, and the affections are fixed on that imaginary being,
while there is not a particle of love to the true God in the soul. So
there is a poetic view of man, of his character, of his destiny, while
the real character of the heart has never been seen. So there is a
poetic view of heaven - strongly resembling the views which the ancients
had of the Elysian fields. But heaven as a place of holiness has never
been thought of, and would not be loved. Men look forward to a place
where the refined and the intelligent; the amiable and the lovely; the
accomplished and the upright; where poets, orators, warriors, and
philosophers will be assembled together. This is the kind of religion
which is often manifested in eulogies, and epitaphs, and in
conversation, where those who never had any better religion, and never
pretended to any serious piety, are represented as having gone to heaven
when they die. There are few who, under the influence of such a
religion, are not looking forward to some kind of a heaven; and few
persons die, whatever may be their character, unless they are openly and
grossly abandoned, for whom the hope is not expressed that they have
gone safe to a better world. If we may credit epitaphs, and obituary
notices, and funeral eulogiums, and biographies, there are few poets,
warriors, statesmen, or philosophers, about whose happiness in the
future world we should have any apprehension.

II\. But in all this there may be no real religion. There is no evidence
that there was any in the case of Nebuchadnezzar, and as little is there
in the instances now referred to. Such persons may have a kind of
reverence for God as great, and powerful, and wise; they may have even a
kind of pleasure in looking on the evidence of his existence and
perfections in his works; they may have a glow of pleasurable emotion in
the mere "poetry" of religion; they may be restrained from doing many
things by their consciences; they may erect temples, and build altars,
and contribute to the support of religion, and even be zealous for
religion. as they understand it, and still have no just views of God,
and no true piety whatever.

\(1\) The mind that is truly religious is not insensible to all this,
and may have as exalted notions of God as a great and glorious being,
and be as much impressed with the beauty evinced in his works as in the
cases supposed. True religion does not destroy the sense of the sublime
and beautiful, but rather cultivates this in a higher degree. But

\(2\) There is much besides this that enters into true religion, and
without which all these things are vain.

\(a\) True religion always arises from just views of God as he is; not
from him as an imaginary being.

\(b\) True religion must regard God as having "moral" attributes; as
benevolent, and just, and true, and holy, and not merely as powerful and
great.

\(c\) In all these things referred to, there is not. necessarily any
moral excellence on the part of those who thus admire God and his works.
The mere admiration of power implies in us no moral excellence. The
admiration of the wisdom which made the worlds and keeps them in their
place; of the beauties of poetry, or of a flower, or landscape, though
made by God, implies no moral excellence in us, and, therefore, no true
religion. There is no more religion in admiring "God" as an architect or
painter, than there is in admiring Sir Christopher Wren, or Michael
Angelo; and the mere admiration of the works of God as such, implies no
more moral excellence in us than it does to admire Paul's or Peter's. In
religion, the heart does not merely admire the beautiful and the grand;
it loves what is pure, and just, and good, and holy. It delights in God
as a holy being rather than as a powerful being; it finds pleasure in
his moral character, and not merely in his greatness.

\(8\) We may learn from this chapter [Dan
2:49](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#049), that when we are favored with
prosperity and honor we should not neglect, or be ashamed of, the
companions of our earlier days, and the partakers of our fortune when we
were poor and unknown. Joseph, when exalted to the premiership of Egypt,
was not ashamed of his aged father, but, though he had been an humble
shepherd, presented him, with the deepest feelings of respect toward an
aged parent, to Pharaoh; nor was he ashamed of his brethren, though they
had done him so much wrong. Daniel, when in a similar manner advanced to
the most honorable post which one could reach, in the most magnificent
monarchy of the world, was not ashamed of the youthful friends with whom
he had shared the humble and severe lot of bondage. So we, if we are
made rich; if we are raised to honor; if we become distinguished for
learning or talent; if our names are known abroad, or we are entrusted
with a high and honorable office, should not forget the friends and
companions of our earlier years.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 3](dan003)

</div>
