<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan008)  [Next](dan010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 9:0</span></span>

Analysis of the Chapter

This chapter is properly divided into three parts, or comprises three
things:

I. The inquiry of Daniel into the time that the desolations of Jerusalem
were to continue, and his determination to seek the Lord, to pray that
his purpose in regard to the restoration of the city and temple might be
speedily accomplished, [Dan 9:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#001).
Daniel says [Dan 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#001), that this
occurred in the first year of Darius of the seed of the Medes. He was
engaged in the study of the books of Jeremiah. He learned from these
books that seventy years were to elapse during which the temple, the
city, and the land were to be desolate. By a calculation as to the time
when this commenced, he was enabled to ascertain the period when it
would close, and he found that that period was near, and that, according
to the prediction, it might be expected that the time of the restoration
was at hand. His mind was, of course, filled with the deepest
solicitude. It would seem not improbable that he did not perceive any
preparation for this, or any tendency to it, and it could not but be
that he would be filled with anxiety in regard to it.

He does not appear to have entertained any doubt that the predictions
would be fulfilled, and the fact that they were so clear and so positive
was a strong reason why he should pray, and was the reason why he prayed
so earnestly at this time. The prayer which he offered is an
illustration of the truth that men will pray more earnestly when they
have reason to suppose that God intends to impart a blessing, and that
an assurance that an event is to occur is one of the strongest
encouragements and incitements to prayer. So men will pray with more
faith when they see that God is blessing the means of restoration to
health, or when they see indications of an abundant harvest; so they
will pray with the more fervour for God to bless his Word when they see
evidences of a revival of religion, or that the time has come when God
is about to display his power in the conversion of sinners; and so
undoubtedly they will pray with the more earnestness as the proofs shall
be multiplied that God is about to fulfill all his ancient predictions
in the conversion of the whole world to himself. A belief that God
intends to do a thing is never any hinderance to real prayer; a belief
that he is in fact about to do it does more than anything else can do to
arouse the soul to call with earnestness on his name.

II\. The prayer of Daniel, Dan. 9:4-19. This prayer is remarkable for
its simplicity, its fervour, its appropriateness, its earnestness. It is
a frank confession that the Hebrew people, in whose name it was offered,
had deserved all the calamities which had come upon them, accompanied
with earnest intercession that God would now hear this prayer, and
remove the judgments from the people, and accomplish his purpose of
mercy toward the city and temple. The long captivity of nearly seventy
years; the utter desolation of the city and temple during that time; the
numberless privations and evils to which during that period they had
been exposed, had demonstrated the greatness of the sins for which these
calamities had come upon the nation, and Daniel now, in the name, and
uttering the sentiments, of the captive people, confessed their guilt,
and the justness of the Divine dealings with them. Never has there been
an instance in which punishment has had more of its designed and
appropriate effect than in prompting to the sentiments which are uttered
in this prayer: and the prayer, therefore, is just the expression of
what we "should" feel when the hand of the Lord has been long and
severely laid upon us on account of our sins. The burden of the prayer
is confession; the object which he who offers it seeks is, that God
would cause the severity of his judgments to cease, and the city and
temple to be restored. The particular points in the prayer will be more
appropriately elucidated in the exposition of this part of the chapter.

III\. The answer to the prayer, [Dan
9:20-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#020). The principal difficulty in
the exposition of the chapter is in this portion; and indeed there is
perhaps no part of the prophecies of the Old Testament that is, on some
accounts, more difficult of exposition, as there is, in some respects,
none more clear, and none more important. It is remarkable, among other
things, as not being a direct answer to the prayer, and as seeming to
have no bearing on the subject of the petition - that the city of
Jerusalem might be rebuilt, and the temple restored; but it directs the
mind onward to another and more important event - the coming of the
Messiah, and the final closing of sacrifice and oblation, and a more
entire and enduring destruction of the temple and city, after it should
have been rebuilt, than had yet occurred. To give this information, an
angel - the same one whom Daniel had seen before - was sent forth from
heaven, and came near to him and touched him, and said that he was
commissioned to impart to him skill and understanding, [Dan
9:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#020). "The speediness of his coming
indicates a joyful messenger. The substance of that message is as
follows: As a compensation for the seventy years in which the people,
the city, and the temple had been entirely prostrate, seventy weeks of
years, seven times seventy years of a renewed existence would be secured
to them by the Lord; and the end of this period, far from bringing the
mercies of God to a close, would for the first time bestow them on the
theocracy in their complete and full measure." - Hengstenberg,
"Christology," it. 293. The "points" of information which the angel
gives in regard to the future condition of the city are these:

\(a\) That the whole period determined in respect to the holy city, to
finish transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make
reconciliation for the people, and to bring in everlasting
righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the
Most Holy, was seventy weeks - evidently seventy prophetic weeks, that
is, regarding each day as a year, four hundred and ninety years, [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024). The time when this period would
"commence" - the "terminus a quo" - is not indeed distinctly specified,
but the fair interpretation is, from that time when the vision appeared
to Daniel, the first year of Darius, [Dan
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#001). The literal meaning of the phrase
"seventy weeks," according to Prof. Stuart ("Hints on the Interpretation
of Prophecy," p. 82), is seventy sevens, that is, seventy sevens of
years, or four hundred and ninety years. "Daniel," says he, "had been
meditating on the accomplishment of the seventy years of exile for the
Jews, which Jeremiah had predicted. At the close of the fervent
supplication for the people which he makes, in connection with his
meditation, Gabriel appears, and announces to him that'" seventy sevens"
are appointed for his people,' as it respects the time then future, in
which very serious and very important events are to take place. Daniel
had been meditating on the close of the seventy years of Hebrew exile,
and the angel now discloses to him a new period of seventy times seven,
in which still more important events are to take place."

\(b\) This period of seventy sevens, or four hundred and ninety years,
is divided by the angel into smaller portions, each of them determining
some important event in the future. He says, therefore [Dan
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025), that from the going forth of the
command to rebuild the temple, until the time when the Messiah should
appear, the whole period might be divided into two portions - one of
"seven sevens," or forty-nine years, and the other of "threescore and
two sevens" - sixty-two sevens, or four hundred and thirty-four years,
making together four hundred and eighty-three years. This statement is
accompanied with the assurance that the "street would be built again,
and the wall, even in troublous times." Of these periods of seven weeks,
sixty-two weeks, and one week, the close of the first is distinguished
by the completion of the rebuilding of the city; that of the second by
the appearing of the Anointed One, or the Messiah, the Prince; that of
the third by the finished confirmation of the covenant with the many for
whom the saving blessings designated in [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024), as belonging to the end of the
whole period, are designed. The last period of one week is again divided
into two halves. While the confirmation of the covenant extends through
it, from beginning to end, the cessation of the sacrifice and
meat-offering, and the death of the Anointed One, on which this depends,
take place in the middle of it.

\(c\) The Messiah would appear after the seven weeks - reaching to the
time of completing the rebuilding of the city - and the sixty-two weeks
following that (that is, sixty-nine weeks altogether) would have been
finished. Throughout half of the other week, after his appearing, he
would labor to confirm the covenant with many, and then die a violent
death, by which the sacrifices would be made to cease, while the
confirmation of the covenant would continue even after his death.

\(d\) A people of a foreign prince would come and destroy the city and
the sanctuary. The end of all would be a "flood" - an overflowing
calamity, until the end of the desolations should be determined, [Dan
9:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026). This fearful desolation is
all that the prophet sees in the end, except that there is an obscure
intimation that there would be a termination of that. But the design of
the vision evidently did not reach thus far. It was to show the series
of events after the rebuilding of the city and temple up to the time
when the Messiah would come; when the great atonement would be made for
sin, and when the oblations and sacrifices of the temple would finally
cease; cease in fact and naturally, for the one great sacrifice,
superseding them all, would have been offered and because the people of
a foreign prince would come and sweep the temple and the altar away.

The design of the whole annunciation is, evidently, to produce
consolation in the mind of the prophet. He was engaged in profound
meditation on the present state, and the long-continued desolations of
the city and temple. He gave his mind to the study of the prophecies to
learn whether these desolations were not soon to end. He ascertained
beyond a doubt that the period drew near. He devoted himself to earnest
prayer that the desolation might not longer continue; that God, provoked
by the sins of the nation, would no longer execute his fearful
judgments, but would graciously interpose, and restore the city and
temple. He confessed ingenuously and humbly the sins of his people;
acknowledged that the judgments of God were just but pleaded earnestly,
in view of his former mercies to the same people, that he would now have
compassion, and fulfill his promises that the city and temple should be
restored.

An answer is not given "directly," and in the exact form in which it
might have been hoped for; but an answer is given, in which it is
"implied" that these blessings so earnestly sought would be bestowed,
and in which it is "promised" that there would be far greater blessings.
It is "assumed" in the answer [Dan
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025) that the city would be rebuilt,
and then the mind is directed onward to the assurance that it would
stand through seven times seventy years - seven times as long as it had
now been desolate, and that "then" what had been the object of the
desire of the people of God would be accomplished; that for which the
city and temple had been built would be fulfilled - the Messiah would
come, the great sacrifice for sin would be made, and all the typical
arrangements of the temple would come to an end. Thus, in fact, though
not in form, the communication of the angel was an answer to prayer, and
that occurred to Daniel which often occurs to those who pray - that the
direct prayer which is offered receives a gracious answer, and that;
there accompanies the answer numberless other mercies which are drawn
along in the train; or, in other words, that God gives us manymore
blessings than we ask of him.

[Daniel 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 9:1</span></span>

In the first year of Darius - See the notes at [Dan
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#031), and Introuction to Dan. 6
Section II. The king here referred to under this name was Cyaxares II,
who lived between Astyages and Cyrus, and in whom was the title of king.
He was the immediate successor of Belshazzar, and was the predecessor of
Cyrus, and was the first of the foreign princes that reigned over
Babylon. On the reasons why he is called in Daniel Darius, and not
Cyaxares, see the Introduction to Dan. 6, Section II. Of course, as he
preceded Cyrus, who gave the order to rebuild the temple [Ezr
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001), this occurred before the close of
the seventy years of the captivity.

The son of Ahasuerus - Or the son of Astyages. See Introduction to Dan.
6 Section II. It was no unusual thing for the kings of the East to have
several names, and one writer might refer to them under one name, and
another under another.

Of the seed of the Medes - Of the race of the Medes. See as above.

Which was made king over the realm of the Chaldeans - By conquest. He
succeeded Belshazzar, and was the immediate predecessor of Cyrus.
Cyaxares II ascended the throne of Media, according to the common
chronology, 561 b.c. Babylon was taken by Cyrus, acting under the
authority of Cyaxares, 538 b.c., and, of course, the reign of Cyaxares,
or Darius, over Babylon commenced at that point, and that would be
reckoned as the "first year" of his reign. He died 536 b.c., and Cyrus
succeeded him; and as the order to rebuild the temple was in the first
year of Cyrus, the time referred to in this chapter, when Daniel
represents himself as meditating on the close of the captivity, and
offering this prayer, cannot long have preceded that order. He had
ascertained that the period of the captivity was near its close, and he
naturally inquired in what way the restoration of the Jews to their own
land was to be effected, and by what means the temple was to be rebuilt.

[Daniel 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 9:2</span></span>

I Daniel understood by books - By the sacred books, and especially by
the writings of Jeremiah. It has been made a ground of objection to the
genuineness of Daniel that he mentions "books" in this place (ספרים
sephârı̂ym) as if there were at that time a collection of the sacred
books, or as if they had been enrolled together in a volume. The
objection is, that the writer speaks as if the canon of the Scriptures
was completed, or that he uses such language as the Hebrews did when the
canon of the Scriptures was finished, and thus betrays himself. See
Bertholdt, "Commentary" p. 78. Compare DeWette, "Einl." Section 13. This
objection has been examined by Hengstenberg, "Beitrag." pp. 32-35. It is
sufficient to reply to it, that there is every probability that the Jews
in Babylon would be in possession of the sacred books of their nation,
and that, though the canon of the Scriptures was not yet completed,
there would exist private collections of those writings. The word used
here by Daniel is just such as he would employ on the supposition that
he referred to a private collection of the writings of the prophets.
Compare Lengerke, in loc. See the Introduction, where the objection is
examined.

The number of the years, whereof the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah -
The number of the years in respect to which the word of the Lord came to
Jeremiah; that is, which he had revealed to Jeremiah. The "books"
referred to, therefore, were evidently a collection of the writings of
Jeremiah, or a collection which embraced his writings.

That he would accomplish seventy years in the desolations of Jerusalem -
That Jerusalem would so long lie waste. This was expressly declared by
Jeremiah [Jer 25:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#011) : "And this
whole land shall be a desolation and an astonishment; and these nations
shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years. And it shall come to
pass, when seventy years are accomplished, that I will punish the king
of Babylon, and that nation, saith the Lord, for their iniquity," etc.
So also [Jer 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#010) : "For thus saith
the Lord, That after seventy years be accomplished at Babylon, I will
visit you, and perform my good word toward you, in causing you to return
to this place." The time of the desolation and of the captivity,
therefore, was fixed and positive, and the only difficulty in
determining when it would "close," was in ascertaining the exact year
when it "commenced." There were several occurrences which might,
perhaps, be regarded as the beginning of the desolations and the
captivity - the "terminus a quo" - and, according as one or another of
them was fixed on, the close would be regarded as nearer or more remote.

Daniel, it seems, by close study, had satisfied his own mind on that
subject, and had been able to fix upon some period that was undoubtedly
the proper beginning, and hence, compute the time when it would close.
The result showed that his calculation was correct, for, at the time he
expected, the order was given by Cyrus to rebuild the city and temple.
When he instituted this inquiry, and engaged in this solemn act of
prayer, it would have been impossible to have conjectured in what way
this could be brought about. The reigning monarch was Cyaxares II, or,
as he is here called, Darius, and there was nothing in "his" character,
or in anything that he had done, that could have been a basis of
calculation that he would favor the return of the Jews and the
rebuilding of the city, and there was then no probability that Cyrus
would so soon come to the throne, and nothing in his character, as
known, that could be a ground of hope that he would voluntarily
interpose, and accomplish the Divine purposes and promises in regard to
the holy city. It was probably such circumstances as these which
produced the anxiety in the mind of Daniel, and which led him to offer
this fervent prayer; and his fervent supplications should lead us to
trust in God that he will accomplish his purposes, and should induce us
to pray with fervour and with faith when we see no way in which he will
do it. In all cases he can as easily devise a way in answer to prayer,
as he could remove Cyaxares from the throne, and incline the heart of
Cyrus to undertake the rebuilding of Jerusalem and the temple.

[Daniel 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 9:3</span></span>

And I set my face unto the Lord God - Probably the meaning is, that he
turned his face toward Jerusalem, the place where God had dwelt; the
place of his holy abode on earth. See the notes at [Dan
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#010). The language, however, would not
be inappropriate to denote prayer without such a supposition. We turn to
one whom we address, and so prayer may be described by "setting the face
toward God." The essential idea here is, that he engaged in a set and
formal prayer; he engaged in earnest devotion. He evidently set apart a
time for this, for he prepared himself by fasting, and by putting on
sackcloth and ashes.

To seek by prayer and supplications - To seek his favor; to pray that he
would accomplish his purposes. The words "prayer and supplications,"
which are often found united, would seem to denote "earnest" prayer, or
prayer when mercy was implored - the notion of "mercy" or "favor"
implored entering into the meaning of the Hebrew word rendered
"supplications."

With fasting - In view of the desolations of the city and temple; the
calamities that had come upon the people; their sins, etc.; and in order
also that the mind might be prepared for earnest and fervent prayer. The
occasion was one of great importance, and it was proper that the mind
should be prepared for it by fasting. It was the purpose of Daniel to
humble himself before God, and to recal the sins of the nation for which
they now suffered, and fasting was an appropriate means of doing that.

And sackcloth - Sackcloth was a coarse kind of cloth, usually made of
hair, and employed for the purpose of making sacks, bags, etc. As it was
dark, and coarse, and rough, it was regarded as a proper badge of
mourning and humiliation, and was worn as such usually by passing or
girding it around the loins. See the notes at [Isa
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#024); [Job
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#015).

And ashes - It was customary to cast ashes on the head in a time of
great grief and sorrow. The principles on which this was done seem to
have been,

\(a\) that the external appearance should correspond with the state of
the mind and the heart, and

\(b\) that such external circumstances would have a tendency to produce
a state of heart corresponding to them - or would produce true
humiliation and repentance for sin.

Compare the notes at [Job 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#008). The
practical truth taught in this verse, in connection with the preceding,
is, that the fact that a thing is certainly predicted, and that God
means to accomplish it, is an encouragement to prayer, and will lead to
prayer. We could have no encouragement to pray except in the purposes
and promises of God, for we have no power ourselves to accomplish the
things for which we pray, and all must depend on his will. When that
will is known it is the very thing to encourage us in our approaches to
him, and is all the assurance that we need to induce us to pray.

[Daniel 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 9:4</span></span>

And I prayed unto the Lord my God - Evidently a set and formal prayer.
It would seem probable that; he offered this prayer, and then re corded
the substance of it afterward. We have no reason to suppose that we have
the whole of it, but we have doubtless its principal topics.

And made my confession - Not as an individual, or not of his own sins
only, but a confession in behalf of the people, and in their name. There
is no reason to suppose that what he here says did "not" express their
feelings. They had been long in captivity - far away from their desolate
city and temple. They could not but be sensible that these calamities
had come upon them on account of their sins; and they could not but feel
that the calamities could not be expected to be removed but by
confession of their sins, and by acknowledging the justice of the Divine
dealings toward them. When we have been afflicted - when we are called
to pass through severe trials - and when, borne down by trial, we go to
God, and pray that the evil may be removed, the first thing that is
demanded is, that we should confess our sins, and acknowledge the
justice of God in the judgments that have come upon us. If we attempt to
vindicate and justify ourselves, we can have no hope that the judgment
will be averted. Daniel, therefore, in the name of the people, began his
prayer with the humble and penitent acknowledgment that all that they
had suffered was deserved.

O Lord, the great and dreadful God - A God great, and to be feared or
venerated - הנורא hanôrâ'. This does not mean "dreadful" in the sense
that there is anything stern or unamiable in his character, but mainly
that he is to be regarded with veneration.

Keeping the covenant and mercy - Keeping his covenant and showing mercy.
This is often ascribed to God, that he is faithful to his covenant; that
is, that he is faithful to his promises to his people, or to those who
sustain a certain relation to him, and who are faithful to "their"
covenant vows. If there is alienation and estrangement, and want of
faithfulness on either side, it does not begin with him. He is faithful
to all his promises, and his fidelity may always be assumed as a basis
of calculation in all our intercourse with him. See the word "covenant,"
in Cruden's "Concordance." The word mercy seems to be added here to
denote that mercy enters into his dealings with us even in keeping the
covenant. We are so sinful and so unfaithful ourselves, that if "he" is
faithful to his covenant, it must be by showing mercy to us.

To them that love him ... - The conditions of the covenant extend no
farther than this, since, in a compact of any kind, one is bound to be
faithful only while the terms are maintained by the other party. So God
binds himself to show favor only while we are obedient, and we can plead
his covenant only when we are obedient, when we confess our sins and
plead his promises in this sense - that he has assured us that he will
restore and receive us if we are penitent. It was this which Daniel
pleaded on this occasion. He could not plead that his people had been
obedient, and had thus any claims to the Divine favor; but he could cast
himself and them on the mercy of a covenant-keeping God, who would
remember his covenant with them if they were penitent, and who would
graciously pardon.

[Daniel 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 9:5</span></span>

We have sinned - Though Daniel was alone, he spake in the name of the
people in general - doubtless recounting the long series of crimes in
the nation which had preceded the captivity, and which were the cause of
the ruin of the city and temple.

And have committed iniquity ... - These varied forms of expression are
designed to give "intensity" to what he says. It is equivalent to saying
that they had sinned in every way possible. The mind, in a state of true
repentance, dwells on its sins, and recounts the various forms in which
iniquity has been done, and multiplies expressions of regret and sorrow
on account of transgression.

From thy precepts - Thy commands; thy laws.

Thy judgments - Thy laws - the word "judgments" in the Scripture
denoting what God judges to be right for us to do, as well as what it is
right for him to inflict.

[Daniel 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">dan 9:6</span></span>

Neither have we hearkened unto thy servants the prophets - Who called
upon us to turn from our sins; who made known the will of God, and who
proclaimed that these judgments would come upon us if we did not repent.

Which spake in thy name to our kings ... - To all classes of the people,
calling on kings and rulers to turn from their idolatry, and the people
to forsake their sins, and to seek the Lord. It was a characteristic of
the prophets that they spared no classes of the nation, but faithfully
uttered all the word of God. Their admonitions had been unheeded, and
the people wow saw clearly that these calamities had come upon them
because they had "not" hearkened to their voice.

[Daniel 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 9:7</span></span>

O Lord, righteousness belongeth unto thee - Margin, "or, thou hast." The
Hebrew is, "to thee is righteousness, to us shame, etc." The state of
mind in him who makes the prayer is that of ascribing righteousness or
justice to God. Daniel feels and admits that God has been right in his
dealings. He is not disposed to blame him, but to take all the shame and
blame to the people. There is no murmuring or complaining on his part as
if God had done wrong in any way, but there is the utmost confidence in
him, and ia his government. This is the true feeling with which to come
before God when we are afflicted, and when we plead for his mercy and
favor. God should be regarded as righteous in all that he has done, and
holy in all his judgments and claims, and there should be a willingness
to address him as holy, and just, and true, and to take shame and
confusion of face to ourselves. Compare [Psa
51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004).

But unto us confusion of faces - Hebrew, "shame of faces;" that is, that
kind of shame which we have when we feel that we are guilty, and which
commonly shows itself in the countenance.

As at this day - As we actually are at this time. That is, he felt that
at that time they were a down-trodden, an humbled, a condemned people.
Their country was in ruins; they were captives in a far distant land,
and all on which they had prided themselves was laid waste. All these
judgments and humiliating things he says they had deserved, for they had
grievously sinned against God.

To the men of Judah - Not merely to the tribe of Judah, but to the
kingdom of that name. After the revolt of the ten tribes - which became
known as the kingdom of Ephraim, because Ephraim was the largest tribe,
or as the kingdom of Israel - the other portion of the people, the
tribes of Judah and Benjamin were known as the kingdom of Judah, since
Judah was by far the larger tribe of the two. This kingdom is referred
to here, because Daniel belonged to it, and because the ten tribes had
been carried away long before and scattered in the countries of the
East. The ten tribes had been carried to Assyria. Jerusalem always
remained as the capital of the kingdom of Judah, and it is to this
portion of the Hebrew people that the prayer of Daniel more especially
pertains.

And to the inhabitants of Jerusalem - Particularly to them, as the
heaviest calamities had come upon them, and as they had been prominent
in the sins for which these judgments had come upon the people.

And unto all Israel - All the people who are descendants of Israel or
Jacob, wherever they may be, embracing not only those of the kingdom of
Judah properly so called, but all who pertain to the nation. They were
all of one blood. They had had a common country. They had all revolted,
and a succession of heavy judgments had come upon the nation as such,
and all had occasion for shame and confusion of face.

That are near, and that are far off - Whether in Babylon, in Assyria, or
in more remote countries. The ten tribes had been carried away some two
hundred years before this prayer was offered by Daniel, and they were
scattered in far distant lands.

Through all the countries whither thou hast driven them ... - In
Babylonia, in Assyria, in Egypt, or in other lands. They were scattered
everywhere, and wherever they were they had common cause for humiliation
and shame.

[Daniel 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 9:8</span></span>

O Lord, to us belongeth confusion ... - To all of us; to the whole
people, high and low, rich and poor, the rulers and the ruled. All had
been partakers of the guilt; all were involved in the calamities
consequent on the guilt. As all had sinned, the judgments had come upon
all, and it was proper that the confession should be made in the name of
all.

[Daniel 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 9:9</span></span>

To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses - Not only does
righteousness belong to him in the sense that he has done right, and
that he cannot be blamed for what he has done, but mercy and forgiveness
belong to him in the sense that he only can pardon, and that these are
attributes of his nature.

Though we have rebelled against him - The word used here and rendered
"though" (כי kı̂y) may mean either "though" or "for." That is, the
passage may mean that mercy belongs to God, and we may hope that he will
show it, "although" we have been so evil and rebellious; or it may mean
that it belongs to him, and he only can show it, "for" we have rebelled
against him; that is, our only hope now is in his mercy, "for" we have
sinned, and forfeited all claims to his favor. Either of these
interpretations makes good sense, but the latter would seem to be most
in accordance with the general strain of this part of the prayer, which
is to make humble and penitent confession. So the Latin Vulgate "quia."
So Theodotion, ὅτι hoti. So Luther and Lengerke, "denn." In the same
way, the passage in [Psa 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#011) is
rendered, "For thy name's sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity, for (כי
kı̂y) it is great" - though this passage will admit of the other
interpretation, "although it is great."

[Daniel 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">dan 9:10</span></span>

Neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord - The commands of God as
made known by the prophets, [Dan 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#006).

[Daniel 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 9:11</span></span>

Yea, all Israel have transgressed ... - Embracing not only the tribe and
the kingdom of Judah, but the whole nation. The calamity, therefore, had
come upon them all.

Even by departing - By departing from thy commandments; or by rebellion
against thee.

That they might not obey thy voice - By refusing to obey thy voice, or
thy commands.

Therefore the curse is poured upon us - As rain descends, or as water is
poured out. The "curse" here refers to what was so solemnly threatened
by Moses in case the nation did not obey God. See Deut. 28:15-68.

And the oath that is written in the law of Moses ... - The word here
rendered "oath" (שׁבועה shebû‛âh) means, properly, a "swearing," or "an
oath;" and hence, either an oath of promise as in a covenant, or an oath
of cursing or imprecation - that is, a curse. It is evidently used in
the latter sense here. See Gesenius, "Lexicon" Daniel saw clearly that
the evils which had been threatened by Moses Deut. 28 had actually come
upon the nation, and he as clearly saw that the cause of all these
calamities was thai which Moses had specified. He, therefore, frankly
and penitently confessed these sins in the name of the whole people, and
earnestly supplicated for mercy.

[Daniel 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">dan 9:12</span></span>

And he hath confirmed his words ... - By bringing upon the people all
that he had threatened in case of their disobedience. Daniel saw that
there was a complete fulfillment of all that he had said would come upon
them. As all this had been threatened, he could not complain; and as he
had confirmed his words in regard to the threatening, he had the same
reason to think that he would in regard to his promises. What Daniel
here says was true in his time, and in reference to his people will be
found to be true at all times, and in reference to all people. Nothing
is more certain than that God will "confirm" all the words that he has
over spoken, and that no sinner can hope to escape on the ground that
God will be found to be false to his threatenings, or that he has
forgotten them, or that he is indifferent to them.

Against our judges that judged us - Our magistrates or rulers.

For under the whole heaven - In all the world.

Hath not been done as hath been done upon Jerusalem - In respect to the
slaughter, and the captivity, and the complete desolation. No one can
show that at that time this was not literally true. The city was in a
state of complete desolation; its temple was in ruins; its people had
been slain or borne into captivity.

[Daniel 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 9:13</span></span>

As it is written in the law of Moses - The word law was given to all the
writings of Moses. See the notes at [Luk
24:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044).

Yet made we not our prayer before the Lord our God - Margin, "entreated
we not the face of." The Hebrew word used here (חלה châlâh) means,
properly, "to be polished;" then to be worn down in strength, to be
weak; then to be sick, or diseased; then in Piel (the form used here),
to rub or stroke the face of anyone, to soothe or caress, and hence, to
beseech, or supplicate. See Gesenius, "Lexicon" Here it means, that, as
a people, they had failed, when they had sinned, to call upon God for
pardon; to confess their sins; to implore his mercy; to deprecate his
wrath. It would have been easy to turn aside his threatened judgments if
they had been penitent, and had sought his mercy, but they had not done
it. What is here said of them can and will be said of all sinners when
the Divine judgment comes upon them.

That we might turn from, our iniquities - That we might seek grace to
turn from our transgressions. "And understand thy truth." The truth
which God had revealed; equivalent to saying that they might be
righteous.

[Daniel 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">dan 9:14</span></span>

Therefore hath the Lord watched upon the evil - The word here used and
rendered watched - שׁקד shâqad - means, properly, "to wake; to be
sleepless; to watch." Then it means to watch over anything, or to be
attentive to it. [Jer 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#012); [Jer
31:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#028); [Jer
44:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#027). - Gesenius, "Lexicon" The
meaning here is, that the Lord had not been inattentive to the progress
of things, nor unmindful of his threatening. He had never slumbered, but
had carefully observed the course of events, and had been attentive to
all that they had done, and to all that he had threatened to do. The
practical "truth" taught here - and it is one of great importance to
sinners - is, that God is not inattentive to their conduct, though he
may seem to be, and that in due time he will show that he has kept an
unslumbering eye upon them. See the notes at [Isa
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#004).

For the Lord our God is righteous in all his works ... - This is the
language of a true penitent; language which is always used by one who
has right feelings when he reflects on the Divine dealings toward him.
God is seen to be righteous in his law and in his dealings, and the only
reason why we suffer is that we have sinned. This will be found to be
true always; and whatever calamities we suffer, it should he a fixed
principle with us to "ascribe righteousness to our Maker," [Job
36:3](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#003).

[Daniel 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">dan 9:15</span></span>

And now, O Lord our God, that hast brought thy people forth out of the
land of Egypt - In former days. The reference to this shows that it is
proper to use "arguments" before God when we plead with him (compare the
notes at [Job 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#004)); that is, to
suggest considerations or reasons why the prayer should be granted.
Those reasons must be, of course, such as will occur to our own minds as
sufficient to make it proper for God to bestow the blessing, and when
they are presented before him, it must be with submission to his higher
view of the subject. The arguments which it is proper to urge are those
derived from the Divine mercy and faithfulness; from the promises of
God; from his former dealings with his people; from our sins and misery;
from the great sacrifice made for sin; from the desirableness that his
name should be glorified. Here Daniel properly refers to the former
Divine interposition in favor of the Hebrew people, and he pleads the
fact that God had delivered them from Egypt as a reason why he should
now interpose and save them. The strength of this argument may be
supposed to consist in such things as the following:

\(a\) in the fact that there was as much reason for interposing now as
there was then;

\(b\) in the fact that his interposing then might be considered as a
proof that he intended to be regarded as their protector, and to defend
them as his people;

\(c\) in the fact that he who had evinced such mighty power at that time
must be able to interpose and save them now, etc.

And hast gotten thee renown - Margin, "made thee a name." So the Hebrew.
The idea is, that that great event had been the means of making him
known as a faithful God, and a God able to deliver. As he was thus
known, Daniel prayed that he would again interpose, and would now show
that he was as able to deliver his people as in former times.

As at this day - That is, as God was then regarded. The remembrance of
his interposition had been diffused abroad, and had been transmitted
from age to age.

We have sinned ... - This turn in the thought shows how deeply the idea
of their sinfulness pressed upon the mind of Daniel. The natural and
obvious course of thought would have been, that, as God had interposed
when his people were delivered from Egyptian bondage, he would now again
interpose; but instead of that, the mind of Daniel is overwhelmed with
the thought that they had sinned grievously against one who had shown
that he was a God so great and glorious, and who had laid them under
such obligations to love and serve him.

[Daniel 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">dan 9:16</span></span>

O Lord, according to all thy righteousness - The word righteousness here
seems to refer to all that was excellent and glorious in the character
of God. The eye of Daniel is fixed upon what he had formerly done; upon
his character of justice, and mercy, and goodness; upon the faithfulness
of God to his people, and, in view of all that was excellent and lovely
in his character, he pleaded that he would interpose and turn away his
anger from his people now. It is the character of God that is the ground
of his plea - and what else is there that can give us encouragement when
we come before him in prayer.

Let thine anger and thy fury be turned away ... - The anger which had
come upon the city, and which appeared to rest, upon it. Jerusalem was
in ruins, and it seemed still to be lying under the wrath of God. The
word rendered fury is the common one to denote wrath or indignation. It
implies no more than anger or indignation, and refers here to the Divine
displeasure against their sins, manifested in the destruction of their
city.

Thy holy mountain - Jerusalem was built on hills, and the city in
general might be designated by this phrase. Or, more probably, there is
allusion either to Mount Zion, or to Mount Moriah.

Because for our sins ... - There is, on the part of Daniel, no
disposition to blame God for what he had done. There is no murmuring or
complaining, as if he had been unjust or severe in his dealings with his
people. Jerusalem was indeed in ruins, and the people were captives in a
distant land, but he felt and admitted that God was just in all that he
had done. It was too manifest to be denied that all these calamities had
come upon them on account of their sins, and this Daniel, in the name of
the people, humbly and penitently acknowledged.

A reproach to all that are about us - All the surrounding nations. They
reproach us with our sins, and with the judgments that have come upon
us, as if we were peculiarly wicked, and were forsaken of heaven.

[Daniel 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 9:17</span></span>

Now, therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant - In behalf of
the people. He pleaded for his people and country, and earnestly
entreated the Lord to be merciful. His argument is based on the
confession of sin; on the character of God; on the condition of the city
and temple; on the former Divine interpositions in behalf of the people;
and by all these considerations, he pleads with God to have mercy upon
his people and land.

And cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary - Upon the temple. That
is, that he would look upon it benignly and favorably. The language is
common in the Scriptures, when favor and kindness are denoted by lifting
up the light of the countenance, and by similar phrases. The allusion is
originally, perhaps, to the sun, which, when it shines brightly, is an
emblem of favor and mercy; when it is overclouded, is an emblem of
wrath.

For the Lord's sake - That is, that he would be propitious for his own
sake; to wit, that his glory might be promoted; that his excellent
character might be displayed; that his mercy and compassion might be
shown. All true prayer has its seat in a desire that the glory of God
may be promoted, and the excellence of his character displayed. That is
of more consequence than "our" welfare, and the gratification of "our"
wishes, and that should be uppermost in our hearts when we approach the
throne of grace.

[Daniel 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">dan 9:18</span></span>

O my God, incline thine ear, and hear - Pleading earnestly for his
attention and his favor, as one does to a man.

Open thine eyes - As if his eyes had been closed upon the condition of
the city, and he did not see it. Of course, all this is figurative, and
is the language of strong and earnest pleading when the heart is greatly
interested.

And the city which is called by thy name - Margin, "whereupon thy name
is called." The margin expresses the sense more literally; but the
meaning is, that the city had been consecrated to God, and was called
his - the city of Jehovah. It was known as the place of his sanctuary -
the city where his worship was celebrated, and which was regarded as his
peculiar dwelling place on the earth. Compare [Psa
48:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001); [Psa
87:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#003). This is a new ground of
entreaty, that the city belonged to God, and that he would remember the
close connection between the prosperity of that city and the glory of
his own name.

[Daniel 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 9:19</span></span>

O Lord, hear ... - The language in this verse does not require any
particular explanation. The repetition - the varied forms of expression
- indicate a mind intent on the object; a heart greatly interested; an
earnestness that cannot be denied. It is language that is respectful,
solemn, devout, but deeply earnest. It is not vain repetition, for its
force is not in the "words" employed, but in the manifest fervour,
earnestness, and sincerity of spirit which pervade the pleading. It is
earnest intercession and supplication that God would hear - that he
would forgive, that he would hearken and do, that he would not defer his
gracious interposition. The sins of the people; the desolation of the
city; the promises of God; the reproach that the nation was suffering -
all these come rushing over the soul, and prompt to the most earnest
pleading that perhaps ever proceeded from human lips.

And these things justified that earnest pleading - for the prayer was
that of a prophet, a man of God, a man that loved his country, a man
that was intent on the promotion of the Divine glory as the supreme
object of his life. Such earnest intercession; such confession of sin;
such a dwelling on arguments why a prayer should be heard, is at all
times acceptable to God; and though it cannot be supposed that the
Divine Mind needs to be instructed, or that our arguments will convince
God or influence him as arguments do men, yet it is undoubtedly proper
to urge them as if they would, for it may be only in this way that our
own minds can be brought into a proper state. The great argument which
we are to urge why our prayers should be heard is the sacrifice which
has been made for sin by the Redeemer, and the fact that he has
purchased for us the blessings which we need; but in connection with
that it is proper to urge our own sins and necessities; the wants of our
friends or our country; our own danger and that of others; the
interposition of God in times past in behalf of his people, and his own
gracious promises and purposes. If we have the spirit, the faith, the
penitence, the earnestness of Daniel, we may be sure that our prayers
will be heard as his was.

[Daniel 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">dan 9:20</span></span>

And whiles I was speaking ... - In the very time when I was thus
pleading.

For the holy mountain of my God - See the notes at [Dan
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#016).

[Daniel 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">dan 9:21</span></span>

Yea, whiles I was speaking in prayer - How "long" the prayer continued
we are not informed. It is probable that we have only the substance of
it, and that Daniel has recorded only the topics on which he dwelt more
at length. The subject was of great importance, and it is reasonable to
suppose that a day had been devoted to an examination of the prophecies,
and to solemn prayer.

Even the man Gabriel - Who had the appearance of a man, and hence, so
called.

Whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning - That is, in a "former"
vision. See the notes at [Dan 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#016). It
cannot refer to what is mentioned in this (the ninth) chapter, for

\(a\) he had as yet had no vision, but all that is recorded is a prayer;

\(b\) there is no intimation that Gabriel had appeared to him at the
beginning of the prayer; and

\(c\) it is declared that at the beginning of the prayer, Gabriel, then
evidently in heaven, had received commandment to go to Daniel, and to
communicate the message to him, [Dan
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023).

The meaning undoubtedly is, that the personage who now appeared to him
he recognized to be the same who had appeared in a former vision on the
banks of the Ulai. The proper meaning of the Hebrew here is, "in a
vision at the beginning," as in our translation. So the Vulgate, "a
principio;" and so Theodotion - ἐν τῇ ἀρχῇ en tē archē. The Hebrew word
תחלה techı̂llâh means, properly, "beginning," [Hos
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#002); [Pro
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#010); but, in connection with the
preposition, as here - בתחלה battechı̂llâh - it means also, "before,
formerly," [Gen 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#003); [Gen
41:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#021); [Gen
43:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#018), [Gen
43:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#020); [Isa
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#026).

Being caused to fly swiftly - Margin, "with weariness," or "flight." On
the difficult Hebrew expression here - ביעף מעף mu‛âp bı̂y‛âp - Lengerke
may be consulted, in loc. The words, according to Gesenius, are derived
from יעף yâ‛ap, to go swiftly, and then, to be wearied, to faint, either
with running, [Jer 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#024), or with
severe labor, [Isa 40:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#028), or with
sorrows, [Isa 50:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004). If derived from
this word, the meaning in Hophal, the form used here, would be, "wearied
with swift running," and the sense is, that Gabriel had borne the
message swiftly to him, and appeared before him as one does who is
wearied with a rapid course. If this be the idea, there is no direct
allusion to his "flying," but the reference is to the rapidity with
which he had come on the long journey, as if exhausted by his journey.
The Latin Vulgate renders it cito volans - quickly flying; Theodotion,
πετόμενος petomenos - flying; the Codex Chisianus, τάχει φερόμενος
tachei pheromenos - "borne swiftly." The Syriac, "with a swift flying he
flew and came from heaven." It cannot be determined with certainty, from
the words used here, that the coming of Gabriel was by an act of
"flying" as with wings. The common representation of the angels in the
Old Testament is not with wings, though the cherubim and Seraphim ([Isa
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002), following.) are represented with
wings; and in [Rev 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006), we have a
representation of an angel flying. Probably the more exact idea here is
that of a rapid course, so as to produce weariness, or such as would
naturally produce fatigue.

Touched me - Daniel was doubtless at this time engaged in prayer.

About the time of the evening oblation - The evening sacrifice. This was
at the ninth hour of the day, or about three o'clock in the afternoon.

[Daniel 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">dan 9:22</span></span>

And he informed me - Hebrew, Gave me intelligence or understanding. That
is, about the design of his visit, and about what would be hereafter.

And talked with me - Spake unto me.

O Daniel, I am now come forth to give thee skill - Margin, "make thee
skillful of." The Hebrew is, literally, "to make thee skillful, or wise,
in understanding." The design was to give him information as to what was
to occur.

[Daniel 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">dan 9:23</span></span>

At the beginning of thy supplications - We are not informed at what time
Daniel began to pray, but as remarked above, it is most natural to
suppose that he devoted the day to prayer, and had commenced these
solemn acts of devotion in the morning.

The commandment came forth - Margin, "word." That is, the word of God.
This evidently means, in heaven; and the idea is, that as soon as he
began to pray a command was issued from God to Gabriel that he should
visit Daniel, and convey to him the important message respecting future
events. It is fair to conclude that he had at once left heaven in
obedience to the order, and on this high embassage, and that he had
passed over the amazing distance between heaven and earth in the short
time during which Daniel was engaged in prayer. If so, and if heaven -
the peculiar seat of God, the dwelling-place of angels and of the just -
is beyond the region of the fixed stars, some central place in this vast
universe, then this may give us some idea of the amazing rapidity with
which celestial beings may move. It is calculated that there are stars
so remote from our earth, that their light would not travel down to us
for many thousand years. If so, how much more rapid may be the movements
of celestial beings than even light; perhaps more than that of the
lightning's flash - than the electric fluid on telegraphic wires -
though "that" moves at the rate of more than 200,000 miles in a second.
Compare Dick's "Philosophy of a Future State," p. 220. "During the few
minutes employed in uttering this prayer," says Dr. Dick, "this angelic
messenger descended from the celestial regions to the country of
Babylonia. This was a rapidity of motion surpassing the comprehension of
the most vigorous imagination, and far exceeding even the amazing
velocity of light." With such a rapidity it may be our privilege yet to
pass from world to world on errands of mercy and love, or to survey in
distant parts of the universe the wonderful works of God.

And I am come to show thee - To make thee acquainted with what will yet
be.

For thou" art "greatly beloved - Margin, as in Hebrew, "a man of
desires." That is, he was one whose happiness was greatly desired by
God; or, a man of God's delight; that is, as in our version, greatly
beloved. It was on this account that his prayer was heard, and that God
sent to him this important message respecting what was to come.

Therefore understand the matter - The matter respecting what was yet to
occur in regard to his people.

And consider the vision - This vision - the vision of future things
which he was now about to present to his view. From this passage,
describing the appearance of Gabriel to Daniel, we may learn,

\(a\) That our prayers, if sincere, are heard in heaven "as soon" as
they are offered. They enter at once into the ears of God, and he
regards them at the instant.

\(b\) A command, as it were, may be at once issued to answer them - "as
if" he directed an angel to bear the answer at once.

\(c\) The angels are ready to hasten down to men, to communicate the
will of God. Gabriel came evidently with pleasure on his embassage, and
to a benevolent being anywhere there is nothing more grateful than to be
commissioned to bear glad tidings to others. Possibly that may be a part
of the employment of the righteous forever.

\(d\) The thought is an interesting one, if we are permitted to
entertain it, that good angels may be constantly employed as Gabriel
was; that whenever prayer is offered on earth they may be commissioned
to bring answers of peace and mercy, or despatched to render aid, and
that thus the universe may be constantly traversed by these holy beings
ministering to those who are "heirs of salvation," [Heb
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001), [Heb
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#004).

[Daniel 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">dan 9:24</span></span>

Seventy weeks are determined - Here commences the celebrated prophecy of
the seventy weeks - a portion of Scripture Which has excited as much
attention, and led to as great a variety of interpretation, as perhaps
any other. Of this passage, Professor Stuart ("Hints on the
Interpretation of Prophecy," p. 104) remarks, "It would require a volume
of considerable magnitude even to give a history of the ever-varying and
contradictory opinions of critics respecting this "locus vexatissimus;
"and perhaps a still larger one to establish an exegesis which would
stand. I am fully of opinion, that no interpretation as yet published
will stand the test of thorough grammatico-historical criticism; and
that a candid, and searching, and thorough "critique" here is still a
"desideratum." May some expositor, fully adequate to the task, speedily
appear!" After these remarks of this eminent Biblical scholar, it is
with no great confidence of success that I enter on the exposition of
the passage.

Yet, perhaps, though "all" difficulties may not be removed, and though I
cannot hope to contribute anything "new" in the exposition of the
passage, something may be written which may relieve it of some of the
perplexities attending it, and which may tend to show that its author
was under the influence of Divine inspiration. The passage may be
properly divided into two parts. The first, in [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024), contains a "general" statement
of what would occur in the time specified - the seventy weeks; the
second, [Dan 9:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025), contains a
"particular" statement of the manner in which that would be
accomplished. In this statement, the whole time of the seventy weeks is
broken up into three smaller portions of seven, sixty-two, and one -
designating evidently some important epochs or periods [Dan
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025), and the last one week is again
subdivided in such a way, that, while it is said that the whole work of
the Messiah in confirming the covenant would occupy the entire week, yet
that he would be cut off in the middle of the week, [Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027).

In the "general" statement [Dan 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024)
it is said that there was a definite time - seventy weeks - during which
the subject of the prediction would be accomplished; that is, during
which all that was to be done in reference to the holy city, or in the
holy city, to finish the transgression, to make an end of sin, etc.,
would be effected. The things specified in this verse are "what was to
be done," as detailed more particularly in the subsequent verses. The
design in this verse seems to have been to furnish a "general" statement
of what was to occur in regard to the holy city - of that city which had
been selected for the peculiar purpose of being a place where an
atonement was to be made for human transgression. It is quite clear that
when Daniel set apart this period for prayer, and engaged in this solemn
act of devotion, his design was not to inquire into the ultimate events
which would occur in Jerusalem, but merely to pray that the purpose of
God, as predicted by Jeremiah, respecting the captivity of the nation,
and the rebuilding of the city and temple, might be accomplished. God
took occasion from this, however, not only to give an implied assurance
about the accomplishment of these purposes, but also to state in a
remarkable manner the "whole" ultimate design respecting the holy city,
and the great event which was ever onward to characterize it among the
cities of the world. In the consideration of the whole passage [Dan
9:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024), it will be proper, first, to
examine into the literal meaning of the words and phrases, and then to
inquire into the fulfillment.

Seventy weeks - שׁבעים שׁבעים shâbu‛ı̂ym shı̂b‛ı̂ym. Vulgate, Septuaginta
hebdomades. So Theodotion, Ἑβδομήκοντα ἑβδομάδες Hebdomēkonta
hebdomades. Prof. Stuart ("Hints," p. 82) renders this "seventy sevens;"
that is, seventy times seven years: on the ground that the word denoting
"weeks" in the Hebrew is not שׁבעים shâbu‛ı̂ym, but שׁבעות shâbu‛ôth.
"The form which is used here," says he, "which is a regular masculine
plural, is no doubt purposely chosen to designate the plural of seven;
and with great propriety here, inasmuch as there are many sevens which
are to be joined together in one common sum. Daniel had been meditating
on the close of the seventy "years" of Hebrew exile, and the angel now
discloses to him a new period of "seventy times seven," in which still
more important events are to take place. Seventy sevens, or (to use the
Greek phraseology), "seventy heptades," are determined upon thy people.

Heptades of what? Of days, or of years? No one can doubt what the answer
is. Daniel had been making diligent search respecting the seventy
"years;" and, in such a connection, nothing but seventy heptades of
years could be reasonably supposed to be meant by the angel." The
inquiry about the "gender" of the word, of which so much has been said
(Hengstenberg, "Chris." ii. 297), does not seem to be very important,
since the same result is reached whether it be rendered "seventy
sevens," or "seventy weeks." In the former ease, as proposed by Prof.
Stuart, it means seventy sevens of "years," or 490 years; in the other,
seventy "weeks" of years; that is, as a "week of years" is seven years,
seventy such weeks, or as before, 490 years. The usual and proper
meaning of the word used here, however - שׁבוּע shâbûa‛a is a "seven,"
ἐβδομάς hebdomas, i. e., a week. - Gesenius, "Lexicon" From the
"examples" where the word occurs it would seem that the masculine or the
feminine forms were used indiscriminately.

The word occurs only in the following passages, in all of which it is
rendered "week," or "weeks," except in [Eze
45:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#021), where it is rendered "seven,"
to wit, days. In the following passages the word occurs in the masculine
form plural, [Dan 9:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024); [Dan
10:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#002); in the following in the
feminine form plural, [Exo 34:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#022); [Num
28:26](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#026); [Deu
16:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#009), [Deu
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#016); [Ch2
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#013); [Jer
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#024); [Eze
45:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#021); and in the following in the
singular number, common gender, rendered "week," [Gen
29:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#027), and in the dual masculine in
[Lev 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#005), rendered "two weeks." From
these passages it is evident that nothing certain can be determined
about the meaning of the word from its gender. It would seem to denote
"weeks," periods of seven days - "hebdomads" - in either form, and is
doubtless so used here. The fair translation would be, weeks seventy are
determined; that is, seventy times seven days, or four hundred and
ninety "days." But it may be asked here, whether this is to be taken
literally, as denoting four hundred and ninety days? If not, in what
sense is it to be understood? and why do we understand it in a different
sense? It is clear that it must be explained literally as denoting four
hundred and ninety "days," or that these days must stand for years, and
that the period is four hundred and ninety "years." That this latter is
the true interpretation, as it has been held by all commentators, is
apparent from the following considerations:

\(a\) This is not uncommon in the prophetic writings. See the notes at
[Dan 7:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024). (See also Editor's
Preface to volume on Revelation.)

\(b\) Daniel had been making inquiry respecting the seventy "years," and
it is natural to suppose that the answer of the angel would have respect
to "years" also; and, thus understood, the answer would have met the
inquiry pertinently - " not seventy years, but a week of years - seven
times seventy years." Compare [Mat
18:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#021). "In such a connection,
nothing but seventy heptades of years could be reasonably supposed to be
meant by the angel." - Prof. Stuart's "Hints," etc., p. 82.

\(c\) Years, as Prof. Stuart remarks, are the measure of all
considerable periods of time. When the angel speaks, then, in reference
to certain events, and declares that they are to take place during
"seventy heptades," it is a matter of course to suppose that he means
years.

\(d\) The circumstances of the case demand this interpretation. Daniel
was seeking comfort in view of the fact that the city and temple had
been desolate now for a period of seventy years. The angel comes to
bring him consolation, and to give him assurances about the rebuilding
of the city, and the great events that were to occur there. But what
consolation would it be to be told that the city would indeed be
rebuilt, and that it would continue seventy ordinary weeks - that is, a
little more than a year, before a new destruction would come upon it? It
cannot well be doubted, then, that by the time here designated, the
angel meant to refer to a period of four hundred and ninety years; and
if it be asked why this number was not literally and exactly specified
in so many words, instead of choosing a mode of designation
comparatively so obscure, it may be replied,

\(1\) that the number "seventy" was employed by Daniel as the time
respecting which he was making inquiry, and that there was a propriety
that there should be a reference to that fact in the reply of the angel
- "one" number seventy had been fulfilled in the desolations of the
city, there would be "another" number seventy in the events yet to
occur;

\(2\) this is in the usual prophetic style, where there is, as
Hengstenberg remarks ("Chris." ii. 299), often a "concealed
definiteness." It is usual to designate numbers in this way.

\(3\) The term was sufficiently clear to be understood, or is, at all
events, made clear by the result. There is no reason to doubt that
Daniel would so understand it, or that it would be so interpreted, as
fixing in the minds of the Jewish people the period when the Messiah was
about to appear. The meaning then is, that there would be a period of
four hundred and ninety years, during which the city, after the order of
the rebuilding should go forth [Dan
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025), until the entire consummation of
the great object for which it should be rebuilt: and that then the
purpose would be accomplished, and it would be given up to a greater
ruin. There was to be this long period in which most important
transactions were to occur in the city.

Are determined - The word used here (נחתך nechettak from חתך châtak)
occurs nowhere else in the Scriptures. It properly means, according to
Gesenius, to cut off, to divide; and hence, to deterinine, to destine,
to appoint. Theodotion renders it, sunetmeetheesan - are cut off,
decided, defined. The Vulgate renders it, "abbreviate sunt." Luther,
"Sind bestimmet" - are determined. The meaning would seem to be, that
this portion of time - the seventy weeks - was "cut off" from the whole
of duration, or cut out of it, as it were, and set by itself for a
definite purpose. It does not mean that it was cut off from the time
which the city would naturally stand, or that this time was
"abbreviated," but that a portion of time - to wit, four hundred and
ninety years - was designated or appointed with reference to the city,
to accomplish the great and important object which is immediately
specified. A certain, definite period was fixed on, and when this was
past, the promised Messiah would come. In regard to the construction
here - the singular verb with a plural noun, see Hengstenberg, "Christ.
in, loc." The true meaning seems to be, that the seventy weeks are
spoken of "collectively," as denoting a period of time; that is, a
period of seventy weeks is determined. The prophet, in the use of the
singular verb, seems to have contemplated the time, not as separate
weeks, or as particular portions, but as one period.

Upon thy people - The Jewish people; the nation to which Daniel
belonged. This allusion is made because he was inquiring about the close
of their exile, and their restoration to their own land.

And upon thy holy city - Jerusalem, usually called the holy city,
because it was the place where the worship of God was celebrated, [Isa
52:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001); [Neh
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#001), [Neh
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#018); [Mat
27:53](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#053). It is called "thy holy city" -
the city of Daniel, because he was here making special inquiry
respecting it, and because he was one of the Hebrew people, and the city
was the capital of their nation. As one of that nation, it could be
called "his." It was then, indeed, in ruins, but it was to be rebuilt,
and it was proper to speak of it as if it were then a city. The meaning
of "upon thy people and city" (על ‛al) is, "respecting" or "concerning."
The purpose respecting the seventy weeks "pertains" to thy people and
city; or there is an important period of four hundred and seventy years
determined on, or designated, respecting that people and city.

To finish the transgression - The angel proceeds to state what was the
object to be accomplished in this purpose, or what would occur during
that period. The first thing, "to finish the transgression." The margin
is, "restrain." The Vulgate renders it, ut consummetur proevaricatio.
Theodotion, τοῦ συντελεσθῆναι ἁμαρτίαν tou suntelesthēnai hamartian - to
finish sin. Thompson renders this, "to finish sin-offerings." The
difference between the marginal reading ("restrain") and the text
("finish") arises from a doubt as to the meaning of the original word.
The common reading of the text is כלא kallē', but in 39 Codices examined
by Kennicott, it is כלה. The reading in the text is undoubtedly the
correct one, but still there is not absolute certainty as to the
signification of the word, whether it means to "finish" or to
"restrain." The proper meaning of the word in the common reading of the
text (כלא kâlâ') is, to shut up, confine, restrain - as it is rendered
in the margin.

The meaning of the other word found in many manuscripts (כלה kâlâh) is,
to be completed, finished, closed - and in Piel, the form used here, to
complete, to finish - as it is translated in the common version.
Gesenius ("Lexicon") supposes that the word here is "for" - כלה kallēh -
meaning to finish or complete. Hengstenberg, who is followed in this
view by Lengerke, supposes that the meaning is to "shut up
transgression," and that the true reading is that in the text - כלא -
though as that word is not used in Piel, and as the Masoretes had some
doubts as to the derivation of the word, they gave to it not its
appropriate "pointing" in this place - which would have been כלא keloh -
but the pointing of the other word (כלה kalēh) in the margin. According
to Hengstenberg, the sense here of "shutting up" is derived from the
general notion of "restraining" or "hindering," belonging to the word;
and he supposes that this will best accord with the other words in this
member of the verse - "to cover," and "to seal up."

The idea according to him is, that "sin, which hitherto lay naked and
open before the eyes of a righteous God, is now by his mercy shut up,
sealed, and covered, so that it can no more be regarded as existing - a
figurative description of the forgiveness of sin." So Lengerke renders
it, "Ura einzuschliessen (den) Abfall." Bertholdt, "Bis der Frevel
vollbracht." It seems most probable that the true idea here is that
denoted in the margin, and that the sense is not that of "finishing,"
but that of "restraining, closing, shutting up," etc. So it is rendered
by Prof. Stuart - "to restrain transgression." - "Com. on Daniel, in
loc." The word is used in this sense of "shutting up," or "restraining,"
in several places in the Bible: [Sa1
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#010), "and shut up their calves at
home;" [Jer 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#003), "Zedekiah had shut
him up;" [Psa 88:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#008), "I am shut up, and
I cannot come forth;" [Jer 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#002),
"Jeremiah the prophet was shut up."

The sense of "shutting up," or "restraining," accords better with the
connection than that of "finishing." The reference of the whole passage
is undoubtedly to the Messiah, and to what would be done sometime during
the "seventy weeks;" and the meaning here is, not that he would "finish
transgression" - which would not be true in any proper sense, but that
he would do a work which would "restrain" iniquity in the world, or,
more strictly, which would "shut it up" - enclose it - as in a prison,
so that it would no more go forth and prevail. The effect would be that
which occurs when one is shut up in prison, and no longer goes at large.
There would be a restraining power and influence which would check the
progress of sin. This does not, I apprehend, refer to the particular
transgressions for which the Jewish people had suffered in their long
captivity, but sin (הפשׁע hapesha‛) in general - the sin of the world.

There would be an influence which would restrain and curb it, or which
would shut it up so that it would no longer reign and roam at large over
the earth. It is true that this might not have been so understood by
Daniel at the time, for the "language" is so general that it "might"
have suggested the idea that it referred to the sins of the Jewish
people. This language, if there had been no farther explanation of it,
might have suggested the idea that in the time specified - seventy weeks
- there would be some process - some punishment - some Divine discipline
- by which the iniquities of that people, or their propensity to sin,
for which this long captivity had come upon them, would be cohibited, or
restrained. But the language is not such as necessarily to confine the
interpretation to that, and the subsequent statements, and the actual
fulfillment in the work of the Messiah, lead us to understand this in a
much higher sense, as having reference to sin in general, and as
designed to refer to some work that would ultimately be an effectual
check on sin, and which would tend to cohibit, or restrain it altogether
in the world. Thus understood, the language will well describe the work
of the Redeemer - that work which, through the sacrifice made on the
cross, is adapted and designed to restrain sin altogether.

And to make an end of sins - Margin, "to seal up." The difference here
in the text and the margin arises from a difference in the readings in
the Hebrew. The common reading in the text is חתם châthēm - from חתם
châtham - "to seal, to seal up." But the Hebrew marginal reading is a
different word - התם hâthēm, from תמם tâmam - "to complete, to perfect,
to finish." The "pointing" in the text in the word חתם châtēm is not the
proper pointing of that word, which would have been חתם chetom, but the
Masoretes, as is not unfrequently the case, gave to the word in the text
the pointing of another word which they placed in the margin. The
marginal reading is found in fifty-five manuscripts (Lengerke), but the
weight of authority is decidedly in favor of the common reading in the
Hebrew text - "to seal," and not to "finish," as it is in our
translation.

The marginal reading, "to finish," was doubtless substituted by some
transcribers, or rather "suggested" by the Masoretes, because it seemed
to convey a better signification to say that "sin would be finished,"
than to say that it would be "sealed." The Vulgate has followed the
reading in the margin - et finem accipiat peccatum; Theodotion has
followed the other reading, σφραγίας ἁμαρτίας sphragisai hamartias.
Luther also has it, "to seal." Coverdale, "that sin may have an end."
The true rendering is, doubtless, "to seal sin;" and the idea is that of
removing it from sight; to remove it from view. "The expression is
taken," says Lengerke, "from the custom of sealing up those things which
one lays aside and conceals." Thus in [Job
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#007), "And sealeth up the stars;" that
is, he so shuts them up in the heavens as to prevent their shining - so
as to hide them from the view. They are concealed, hidden, made close -
as the contents of a letter or package are sealed, indicating that no
one is to examine them.

See the note at that passage. So also in [Job
37:7](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#007), referring to winter, it is said,
"He sealeth up the hand of every man, that all men may know his work."
That is, in the winter, when the snow is on the ground, when the streams
are frozen, the labors of the farmer must cease. The hands can no more
be used in ordinary toil. Every man is prevented from going abroad to
his accustomed labor, and is, as it were, "sealed up" in his dwelling.
Compare [Jer 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#011), [Jer
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#014); [Isa
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#011); [Sol
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#012). The idea in the passage before
us is, that the sins of our nature will, as it were, be sealed up, or
closed, or hidden, so that they will not be seen, or will not develop
themselves; that is, "they will be inert, inefficient, powerless." -
Prof. Stuart. The language is applicable to anything that would hide
them from view, or remove them from sight - as a book whose writing is
so sealed that we cannot read it; a tomb that is so closed that we
cannot enter it and see its contents; a package that is so sealed that
we do not know what is within it; a room that is so shut up that we may
not enter it, and see what is within.

It is not to be supposed that Daniel would see clearly how this was to
be done; but we, who have now a full revelation of the method by which
God can remove sin, can understand the method in which this is
accomplished by the blood of the atonement, to wit, that "by" that
atonement sin is now forgiven, or is treated as if it were hidden from
the view, and a seal, which may not be broken, placed on what covers it.
The language thus used, as we are now able to interpret it, is
strikingly applicable to the work of the Redeemer, and to the method by
which God removes sin. In not a few manuscripts and editions the word
rendered "sins" is in the singular number. The amount of authority is in
favor of the common reading - sins - though the sense is not materially
varied. The work would have reference to "sin," and the effect would be
to seal it, and hide it from the view.

And to make reconciliation for iniquity - More literally, "and to cover
iniquity." The word which is rendered to "make reconciliation " - כפר
kâphar - properly means "to cover" (from our English word cover); to
cover over, to overlay, as with pitch [Gen
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#014); and hence, to cover over sin;
that is, to atone for it, pardon it, forgive it. It is the word which is
commonly used with reference to atonement or expiation, and seems to
have been so understood by our translators. It does not necessarily
refer to the means by which sin is covered over, etc., by an atonement,
but is often used in the general sense of "to pardon or forgive."
Compare the notes at [Isa 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#007), and
more fully. See the notes at [Isa
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003). Here there is no necessary
allusion to the atonement which the Messiah would make in order to cover
over sin; that is, the word is of so general a character in its
signification that it does not necessarily imply this, but it is the
word which would naturally be used on the supposition that it had such a
reference. As a matter of fact, undoubtedly, the means by which this was
to be done was by the atonement, and that was referred to by the Spirit
of inspiration, but this is not essentially implied in the meaning of
the word. In whatever way that should be done, this word would be
properly used as expressing it. The Latin Vulgate renders thus, et
deleatur iniquitas. Theodotion, ἀπαλεῖψαι τὰς ἀδικίας apaleipsai tas
adikias - "to wipe out iniquities." Luther, "to reconcile for
transgression." Here are three things specified, therefore, in regard to
sin, which would be done. Sin would be

Restrained,

Sealed up,

Covered over.

These expressions, though not of the nature of a climax, are intensive,
and show that the great work referred to pertained to sin, and would be
designed to remove it. Its bearing would be on human transgression; on
the way by which it might be pardoned; on the methods by which it would
be removed from the view, and be kept from rising up to condemn and
destroy. Such expressions would undoubtedly lead the mind to look
forward to some method which was to be disclosed by which sin could be
consistently pardoned and removed. In the remainder of the verse, there
are three additional things which would be done as necessary to complete
the work: -

To bring in everlasting righteousness;

To seal up the vision and prophecy; and

To anoint the Most Holy.

And to bring in everlasting righteousness - The phrase "to bring in" -
literally, "to cause to come" - refers to some direct agency by which
that righteousness would be introduced into the world. It would be such
an agency as would cause it to exist; or as would establish it in the
world. The "mode" of doing this is not indeed here specified, and, so
far as the "word" used here is concerned, it would be applicable to any
method by which this would be done - whether by making an atonement; or
by setting an example; or by persuasion; or by placing the subject of
morals on a better foundation; or by the administration of a just
government; or in any other way. The term is of the most general
character, and its exact force here can be learned only by the
subsequently revealed facts as to the way by which this would be
accomplished. The essential idea in the language is, that this would be
"introduced" by the Messiah; that is, that he would be its author.

The word "righteousness" here also (צדק tsedeq) is of a general
character. The fair meaning would be, that some method would be
introduced by which men would become "righteous." In the former part of
the verse, the reference was to "sin" - to the fact of its existence -
to the manner in which it would be disposed of - to the truth that it
would be coerced, sealed up, covered over. Here the statement is, that,
in contradistinction from that, a method would be introduced by which
man would become, in fact, righteous and holy. But the "word" implies
nothing as to the method by which this would be done. Whether it would
be by a new mode of justification, or by an influence that would make
men personally holy - whether this was to be as the result of example,
or instruction, or an atoning sacrifice - is not necessarily implied in
the use of this word. That, as in the cases already referred to, could
be learned only by subsequent develop. ments.

It would be, doubtless, understood that there was a reference to the
Messiah - for that is specified in the next verse; and it would be
inferred from this word that, under him, righteousness would reign, or
that men would be righteous, but nothing could be argued from it as to
the methods by which it would be done. It is hardly necessary to add,
that, in the prophets, it is constantly said that righteousness would
characterize the Messiah and his times; that he would come to make men
righteous, and to set up a kingdom of righteousness in the earth. Yet
the exact mode in which it was to be done would be, of course, more
fully explained when the Messiah should himself actually appear. The
word "everlasting" is used here to denote that the righteousness would
be permanent and perpetual. In reference to the method of becoming
righteous, it would be unchanging - the standing method ever onward by
which men would become holy; in reference to the individuals who should
become righteous under this system, it would be a righteousness which
would continue forever.

This is the characteristic which is everywhere given of the
righteousness which would be introduced by the Messiah. Thus in [Isa
51:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#006) : "Lift up your eyes to the
heavens, and look upon the earth beneath: for the heavens shall vanish
away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they
that dwell therein shall die in like manner: but my salvation shall be
forever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished. Hearken unto me,
ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law; fear ye
not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings. For
the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them
like wool: but my righteousness shall be forever, and my salvation from
generation to generation." So [Isa
45:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#017) : "But Israel shall be saved in
the Lord with an everlasting salvation; ye shall not be ashamed nor
confounded, world without end."

Compare [Jer 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#003). The language used
in the passage before us, moreover, is such as could not properly be
applied to anything but that righteousness which the Messiah would
introduce. It could not be used in reference to the temporal prosperity
of the Jews on their return to the holy land, nor to such righteousness
as the nation had in former times. The fair and proper meaning of the
term is, that it would be "eternal" - what would "endure forever" -
עלמים צדק tsedeq ‛olâmı̂ym. It would place righteousness on a permanent
and enduring foundation; introduce that which would endure through all
changes, and exist when the heavens would be no more. In the plan itself
there would be no change; in the righteousness which anyone would
possess under that system there would be perpetual duration - it would
exist forever and ever. This is the nature of that righteousness by
which men are now justified; this is what all who are interested in the
scheme of redemption actually possess. The "way" in which this
"everlasting righteousness" would be introduced is not stated here, but
is reserved for future revelations. Probably all that the words would
convey to Daniel would be, that there would be some method disclosed by
which men would become righteous, and that this would not be temporary
or changing, but would be permanent and eternal. It is not improper that
"we" should understand it, as it is explained by the subsequent
revelations in the New Testament, as to the method by which sinners are
justified before God.

And to seal up the vision and prophecy - Margin, as in the Hebrew,
"prophet." The evident meaning, however, here is "prophecy." The word
seal is found, as already explained, in the former part of the verse -
"to seal up sins." The word "vision" (for its meaning, see the notes at
[Isa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)) need not be understood as
referring particularly to the visions seen by Daniel, but should be
understood, like the word "prophecy" or "prophet" here, in a general
sense - as denoting all the visions seen by the prophets - the series of
visions relating to the future, which had been made known to the
prophets. The idea seems to be that they would at that time be all
"sealed," in the sense that they would be closed or shut up - no longer
open matters - but that the fulfillment would, as it were, close them up
forever. Till that time they would be open for penusal and study; then
they would be closed up as a sealed volume which one does not read, but
which contains matter hidden from the view.

Compare the notes at [Isa 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016) : "Bind
up the testimony; seal the law among my disciples." See also [Dan
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#026); [Dan
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004). In Isaiah [Isa
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016) the meaning is, that the prophecy
was complete, and the direction was given to bind it up, or roll it up
like a volume, and to seal it. In [Dan
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#026), the meaning is, seal up the
prophecy, or make a permanent record of it, that when it is fulfilled,
the event may be compared with the prophecy, and it may be seen that the
one corresponds with the other. In the passage before us, Gesenius
("Lexicon") renders it, "to complete, to finish" - meaning that the
prophecies would be fulfilled. Hengstenberg supposes that it means, that
"as soon as the fulfillment takes place, the prophecy, although it
retains, in other respects, its great importance, reaches the end of its
destination, in so far as the view of believers, who stand in need of
consolation and encouragement, is no longer directed to it, to the
future prosperity, but to what has appeared."

Lengerke supposes that it means to confirm, corroborate, ratify -
bekraftigen, bestatigen; that is, "the eternal righteousness will be
given to the pious, and the predictions of the prophets will be
confirmed and fulfilled." To seal, says he, has also the idea of
confirming, since the contents of a writing are secured or made fast by
a seal. After all, perhaps, the very idea here is, that of "making
fast," as a lock or seal does - for, as is well known, a seal was often
used by the ancients where a lock is with us; and the sense may be,
that, as a seal or lock made fast and secure the contents of a writing
or a book, so the event, when the prophecy was fulfilled, would make it
"fast" and "secure." It would be, as it were, locking it up, or sealing
it, forever. It would determine all that seemed to be undetermined about
it; settle all that seemed to be indefinite, and leave it no longer
uncertain what was meant. According to this interpretation the meaning
would be, that the prophecies would be sealed up or settled by the
coming of the Messiah. The prophecies terminated on him (compare [Rev
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010)); they would find their
fulfillment in him; they would be completed in him - and might then be
regarded as closed and consummated - as a book that is fully written and
is sealed up. All the prophecies, and all the visions, had a reference
more or less direct to the coming of the Messiah, and when he should
appear they might be regarded as complete. The spirit of prophecy would
cease, and the facts would confirm and seal all that had been written.

And to anoint the Most Holy - There has been great variety in the
interpretation of this expression. The word rendered "anoint" - משׁח
meshocha - infinitive from משׁח mâshach (from the word Messiah, [Dan
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025)), means, properly, to strike or
draw the hand over anything; to spread over with anything, to smear, to
paint, to anoint. It is commonly used with reference to a sacred rite,
to anoint, or consecrate by unction, or anointing to any office or use;
as, e. g., a priest, [Exo 28:41](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#041); [Exo
40:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#015); a prophet, [Kg1
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#016); [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001); a king, [Sa1
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001); [Sa1
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#001); [Sa2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#004); [Kg1
1:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#034). So it is used to denote the
consecration of a stone or column as a future sacred place, [Gen
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#013); or vases and vessels as
consecrated to God, [Exo 40:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#009), [Exo
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#011); [Lev
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#011); [Num
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#001). The word would then denote a
setting apart to a sacred use, or consecrating a person or place as
holy. Oil, or an unguent, prepared according to a specified rule, was
commonly employed for this purpose, but the word may be used in a
figurative sense - as denoting to set apart or consecrate in any way
"without" the use of oil - as in the case of the Messiah. So far as this
word, therefore, is concerned, what is here referred to may have
occurred without the literal use of oil, by any act of consecration or
dedication to a holy use.

The phrase, "the Most Holy" (קדשׁים קדשׁ qôdesh qādāshı̂ym) has been very
variously interpreted. By some it has been understood to apply literally
to the most holy place - the holy of holies, in the temple; by others to
the whole temple, regarded as holy; by others to Jerusalem at large as a
holy place; and by others, as Hengstenberg, to the Christian church as
"a" holy place. By some the thing here referred to is supposed to have
been the consecration of the most holy place after the rebuilding of the
temple; by others the consecration of the whole temple; by others the
consecration of the temple and city by the presence of the Messiah, and
by others the consecration of the Christian church, by his presence. The
phrase properly means "holy of holies," or most holy. It is applied
often in the Scriptures to the "inner sanctuary," or the portion of the
tabernacle and temple containing the ark of the covenant, the two tables
of stone, etc.

See the notes at [Mat 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012). The
phrase occurs in the following places in the Scripture: [Exo
26:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#033); [Exo
29:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#037); [Exo
30:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#029), [Exo
30:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#036); [Exo
40:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#010); [Lev
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#003), [Lev
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#010), "et al." - in all, in about
twenty-eight places. See the "Englishman's Hebrew Concordance." It is
not necessarily limited to the inner sanctuary of the temple, but may be
applied to the whole house, or to anything that was consecrated to God
in a manner peculiarly sacred. In a large sense, possibly it might apply
to Jerusalem, though I am not aware that it ever occurs in this sense in
the Scriptures, and in a figurative sense it might be applied
undoubtedly, as Hengstenberg supposes, to the Christian church, though
it is certain that it is not elsewhere thus used. In regard to the
meaning of the expression - an important and difficult one, as is
admitted by all - there are five principal opinions which it may be well
to notice. The truth will be found in one of them.

\(1\) That it refers to the consecration by oil or anointing of the
temple, that would be rebuilt after the captivity, by Zerubbabel and
Joshua. This was the opinion of Michaelis and Jahn. But to this opinion
there are insuperable objections:

\(a\) That, according to the uniform tradition of the Jews, the holy oil
was wanting in the second temple. In the case of the first temple there
might have been a literal anointing, though there is no evidence of
that, as there was of the anointing of the vessels of the tabernacle,
[Exo 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#022), etc. But in the second
temple there is every evidence that there can be, that there was no
literal anointing.

\(b\) The "time" here referred to is a fatal objection to this opinion.
The period is seventy weeks of years, or four hundred and ninety years.
This cannot be doubted (see the notes at the first part of the verse) to
be the period referred to; but it is absurd to suppose that the
consecration of the new temple would be deferred for so long a time, and
there is not the slightest evidence that it was. This opinion,
therefore, cannot be entertained.

\(2\) The second opinion is, that it refers to the re-consecration and
cleansing of the temple after the abominations of Antiochus Epiphanes.
See the notes at [Dan 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#014). But this
opinion is liable substantially to the same objections as the other. The
cleansing of the temple, or of the sanctuary, as it is said in [Dan
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#014), did "not" occur four hundred and
ninety years after the order to rebuild the temple [Dan
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025), but at a much earlier period. By
no art of construction, if the period here referred to is four hundred
and ninety years, can it be made to apply to the re-dedication of the
temple after Antiochus had defiled it.

\(3\) Others have supposed that this refers to the Messiah himself, and
that the meaning is, that he, who was most holy, would then be
consecrated or anointed as the Messiah. It is probable, as Hengstenberg
("Christ." ii. 321, 322) has shown, that the Greek translators thus
understood it, but it is a sufficient objection to this that the phrase,
though occurring many times in the Scriptures, is never applied to
"persons," unless this be an instance. Its uniform and proper
application is to "things," or "places," and it is undoubtedly so to be
understood in this place.

\(4\) Hengstenberg supposes (pp. 325-328) that it refers to the
Christian church as "a" holy place, or "the New Temple of the Lord,"
"the Church of the New covenant," as consecrated and supplied with the
gifts of the Spirit. But it is a sufficient refutation of this opinion
that the phrase is nowhere else so used; that it has in the Old
Testament a settled meaning as referring to the tabernacle or the
temple; that it is nowhere employed to denote a collection of "people,"
anymore than an individual person - an idea which Hengstenberg himself
expressly rejects (p. 322); and that there is no proper sense in which
it can be said that the Christian church is "anointed." The language is
undoubtedly to be understood as referring to some "place" that was to be
thus consecrated, and the uniform Hebrew usage would lead to the
supposition that there is reference, in some sense, to the temple at
Jerusalem.

\(5\) It seems to me, therefore, that the obvious and fair
interpretation is, to refer it to the temple - as the holy place of God;
his peculiar abode on earth. Strictly and properly speaking, the phrase
would apply to the inner room of the temple - the sanctuary properly so
called (see the notes at [Heb 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#002));
but it might he applied to the whole temple as consecrated to the
service of God. If it be asked, then, what anointing or consecration is
referred to here, the reply, as it seems to me, is, not that it was then
to be set apart anew, or to be dedicated; not that it was literally to
be anointed with the consecrating oil, but that it was to be consecrated
in the highest and best sense by the presence of the Messiah - that by
his coming there was to be a higher and more solemn consecration of the
temple to the real purpose for which it was erected than had occurred at
any time. It was reared as a holy place; it would become eminently holy
by the presence of him who would come as the anointed of God, and his
coming to it would accomplish the purpose for which it was erected, and
with reference to which all the rites observed there had been ordained,
and then, this work having been accomplished, the temple, and all the
rites pertaining to it, would pass away.

In confirmation of this view, it may be remarked, that there are
repeated allusions to the coming of the Messiah to the second temple,
reared after the return from the captivity - as that which would give a
peculiar sacredness to the temple, and which would cause it to surpass
in glory all its ancient splendor. So in [Hag
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#007), [Hag
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#009) : "And I will shake all nations,
and the desire of all nations shall come: and I will fill this house
with glory, saith the Lord of hosts. - The glory of this latter house
shall be greater than of the former, saith the Lord of hosts: and in
this place will I give peace, saith the Lord of hosts." So [Mal
3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001) : "The Lord, whom ye seek, shall
suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant whom ye
delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the Lord of hosts. But who may
abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for
he is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap," etc.

Compare [Mat 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#006) : "But I say unto
you, That in this place is one greater than the temple." Using the word
"anoint," therefore, as denoting to consecrate, to render holy, to set
apart to a sacred use, and the phrase "holy of holies" to designate the
temple as such, it seems to me most probable that the reference here is
to the highest consecration which could be made of the temple in the
estimation of a Hebrew, or, in fact, the presence of the Messiah, as
giving a sacredness to that edifice which nothing else did give or could
give, and, therefore, as meeting all the proper force of the language
used here. On the supposition that it was designed that there should be
a reference to this event, this would be such language as would have
been not unnaturally employed by a Hebrew prophet. And if it be so, this
may be regarded as the probable meaning of the passage. In this sense,
the temple which was to be reared again, and about which Daniel felt so
solicitous, would receive its highest, its truest consecration, as
connected with an event which was to bring in everlasting righteousness,
and to seal up the vision and the prophecy.

\(D\) Simultaneously with this event, as the result of this, we are to
anticipate such a spread of truth and righteousness, and such a reign of
the saints on the earth, as would be properly symbolized by the coming
of the Son of man to the ancient of days to receive the kingdom, [Dan
7:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013). As shown in the
interpretation of those verses, this does not necessarily imply that
there would be any visible appearing of the Son of man, or any personal
reign (see the note at these verses), but there would be such a making
over of the kingdom to the Son of man and to the saints as would be
properly symbolized by such a representation. That is, there would be
great changes; there would be a rapid progress of the truth; there would
be a spread of the gospel; there would be a change in the governments of
the world, so that the power would pass into the hands of the righteous,
and they would in fact rule. From that time the "saints" would receive
the kingdom, and the affairs of the world would be put on a new footing.
From that period it might be said that the reign of the saints would
commence; that is, there would be such changes in this respect that that
would constitute an epoch in the history of the world - the proper
beginning of the reign of the saints on the earth - the setting up of
the new and final dominion in the world. If there should be such changes
- such marked progress - such facilities for the spread of truth - such
new methods of propagating it - and such certain success attending it,
all opposition giving way, and persecution ceasing, as would properly
constitute an epoch or era in the world's history, which would be
connected with the conversion of the world to God, this would fairly
meet the interpretation of this prophecy; this occurring, all would have
taken place which could be fairly shown to be implied in the vision.

\(E\) We are to expect a reign of righteousness on the earth. On the
character of what we are fairly to expect from the words of the
prophecy, see the notes at [Dan 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014).
The prophecy authorizes us to anticipate a time when there shall be a
general prevalence of true religion; when the power in the world shall
be in the hands of good men - of men fearing God; when the Divine laws
shall be obeyed - being acknowledged as the laws that are to control
men; when the civil institutions of the world shall be pervaded by
religion, and moulded by it; when there shall be no hinderance to the
free exercise of religion, and when in fact the reigning power on the
earth shall be the kingdom which the Messiah shall set up. There is
nothing more certain in the future than such a period, and to that all
things are tending. Such a period would fulfill all that is fairly
implied in this wonderful prophecy, and to that faith and hope should
calmly and confidently look forward. For that they who love their God
and their race should labor and pray; and by the certain assurance that
such a period will come, we should be cheered amidst all the moral
darkness that exists in the world, and in all that now discourages us in
our endeavors to do good.

[Daniel 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">dan 9:25</span></span>

Know, therefore, and understand - Hengstenberg renders this, "and thou
wilt know and understand;" and supposes that the design of Gabriel is to
awaken the attention and interest of Daniel by the assurance that, if he
would give attention, he would understand the subject by the explanation
which he was about to give. So also Theodotion renders it in the future
tense. The Hebrew is in the future tense, and would probably convey the
idea that he might, or would know and understand the matter. So Lengerke
renders it, "Und so mogest du wissen," etc. The object is doubtless to
call the attention of Daniel to the subject, with the assurance that he
might comprehend the great points of the communication which he was
about to make respecting the seventy weeks. In the previous verse, the
statement was a general one; in this, the angel states the time when the
period of the seventy weeks was to commence, and then that the whole
period was to be broken up or divided into three smaller portions or
epochs, each evidently marking some important event, or constituting an
important era. The first period of seven weeks was evidently to be
characterized by something in which it would be different from what
would follow, or it would reach to some important epoch, and then would
follow a continuous period of sixty-two weeks, after which, during the
remaining one week, to complete the whole number of seventy, the Messiah
would come and would be cut off, and the series of desolations would
commence which would result in the entire destruction of the city.

That from the going forth of the commandment - Hebrew, "of the word" -
דבר dâbâr. It is used, however, as in [Dan
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023), in the sense of commandment or
order. The expression "gone forth" (מצא môtsâ') would properly apply to
the "issuing" of an order or decree. So in [Dan
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023) - דבר יצא yâtsâ' dâbâr - "the
commandment went forth." The word properly means a going forth, and is
applied to the rising sun, that goes forth from the east, [Psa
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#006) (7); then a "place" of going
forth, as a gate, a fountain of waters, the east, etc., [Eze
42:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#011); [Isa
41:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#018); [Psa
75:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#006) (7). The word here has undoubted
reference to the promulgation of a decree or command, but there is
nothing in the words to determine "by whom" the command was to be
issued. So far as the "language" is concerned, it would apply equally
well to a command issued by God, or by the Persian king, and nothing but
the circumstances can determine which is referred to. Hengstenberg
supposes that it is the former, and that the reference is to the Divine
purpose, or the command issued from the "heavenly council" to rebuild
Jerusalem. But the more natural and obvious meaning is, to understand it
of the command' actually issued by the Persian monarch to restore and
build the city of Jerusalem. This has been the interpretation given by
the great body of expositors, and the reasons for it seem to be
perfectly clear:

\(a\) This would be the interpretation affixed to it naturally, if there
were no theory to support, or if it did not open a chronological
difficulty not easy to settle.

\(b\) This is the only interpretation which can give anything like
definiteness to the passage. Its purpose is to designate some fixed and
certain period from which a reckoning could be made as to the time when
the Messiah would come. But, so far as appears, there was no such
definite and marked command on the part of God; no period which can be
fixed upon when he gave commandment to restore and build Jerusalem; no
exact and settled point from which one could reckon as to the period
when the Messiah would come. It seems to me, therefore, to be clear,
that the allusion is to some order to rebuild the city, and as this
order could come only from one who had at that time jurisdiction over
Jerusalem, and Judea, and who could command the resources necessary to
rebuild the ruined city, that order must be one that would emanate from
the reigning power; that is, in fact, the Persian power - for that was
the power that had jurisdiction at the close of the seventy years'
exile. But, as there were several orders or commands in regard to the
restoration of the city and the temple, and as there has been much
difficulty in ascertaining the exact chronology of the events of that
remote period, it has not been easy to determine the precise order
referred to, or to relieve the whole subject from perplexity and
difficulty. Lengerke supposes that the reference here is the same as in
[Dan 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#002), to the promise made to
Jeremiah, and that this is the true point from which the reckoning is to
be made. The exact edict referred to will be more properly considered at
the close of the verse. All that is necessarily implied here is, that
the time from which the reckoning is to be commenced is some command or
order issued to restore and build Jerusalem.

To restore - Margin, "build again." The Hebrew is, properly, "to cause
to return" - להשׁיב lehâshı̂yb. The word might be applied to the return
of the captives to their own land, but it is evidently used here with
reference to the city of Jerusalem, and the meaning must be, "to restore
it to its former condition." It was evidently the purpose to cause it to
return, as it were, to its former spendour; to reinstate it in its
former condition as a holy city - the city where the worship of God
would be celebrated, and it is this purpose which is referred to here.
The word, in Hiphil, is used in this sense of restoring to a former
state, or to renew, in the following places: [Psa
80:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#003), "Turn us again - השׁיבנוּ
hăshı̂ybēnû - and cause thy face to shine." So [Psa
80:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#007), [Psa
80:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#019). [Isa
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#026), "And I will "restore" thy judges
as at the first," etc. The meaning here would be met by the supposition
that Jerusalem was to be put into its former condition.

And to build Jerusalem - It was then in ruins. The command, which is
referred to here, must be one to build it up again - its houses, temple,
walls; and the fair sense is, that some such order would be issued, and
the reckoning of the seventy weeks must "begin" at the issuing of this
command. The proper interpretation of the prophecy demands that "that"
time shall be assumed in endeavoring to ascertain when the seventy weeks
would terminate. In doing this, it is evidently required in all fairness
that we should not take the time when the Messiah "did" appear - or the
birth of the Lord Jesus, assuming that to be the "terminus ad quem" -
the point to which the seventy weeks were to extend - and then reckon
"backward" for a space of four hundred and ninety years, to see whether
we cannot find some event which by a possible construction would bear to
be applied as the "terminus a quo," the point from which we are to begin
to reckon; but we are to ascertain when, in fact, the order was given to
rebuild Jerusalem, and to make "that" the "terminus a quo" - the
starting point in the reckoning. The consideration of the fulfillment of
this may with propriety be reserved to the close of the verse.

Unto the Messiah - The word Messiah occurs but four times in the common
version of the Scriptures: [Dan
9:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025) : [Joh
1:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#041); [Joh
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#025). It is synonymous in meaning with
the word "Christ," the Anointed. See the notes at [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001). Messiah is the Hebrew word;
Christ the Greek. The Hebrew word (משׁיח mâshı̂yach) occurs frequently in
the Old Testament, and, with the exception of these two places in
Daniel, it is uniformly translated "anointed," and is applied to
priests, to prophets, and to kings, as being originally set apart to
their offices by solemn acts of anointing. So far as the "language" is
concerned here, it might be applied to anyone who sustained these
offices, and the proper application is to be determined from the
connection. Our translators have introduced the article - "unto the
Messiah." This is wanting in the Hebrew, and should not have been
introduced, as it gives a definiteness to the prophecy which the
original language does not necessarily demand.

Our translators undoubtedly understood it as referring to him who is
known as the Messiah, but this is not necessarily implied in the
original. All that the language fairly conveys is, "until an anointed
one." Who "that" was to be is to be determined from other circumstances
than the mere use of the language, and in the interpretation of the
language it should not be assumed that the reference is to any
particular individual. That some eminent personage is designated; some
one who by way of eminence would be properly regarded as anointed of
God; some one who would act so important a part as to characterize the
age, or determine the epoch in which he should live; some one so
prominent that he could be referred to as "anointed," with no more
definite appellation; some one who would be understood to be referred to
by the mere use of this language, may be fairly concluded from the
expression used - for the angel clearly meant to imply this, and to
direct the mind forward to some one who would have such a prominence in
the history of the world.

The object now is merely to ascertain the meaning of the "language." All
that is fairly implied is, that it refers to some one who would have
such a prominence as anointed, or set apart to the office of prophet,
priest, or king, that it could be understood that he was referred to by
the use of this language. The reference is not to the anointed one, as
of one who was already known or looked forward to as such - for then the
article would have been used; but to some one who, when he appeared,
would have such marked characteristics that there would be no difficulty
in determining that he was the one intended. Hengstenberg well remarks,
"We must, therefore, translate "an anointed one, a prince," and assume
that the prophet, in accordance with the uniform character of his
prophecy, chose the more indefinite, instead of the more definite
designation, and spoke only of AN anointed one, a prince, instead of the
anointed one, the prince - κατ ̓ ἐξοχήν kat' exochēn - and left his
hearers to draw a deeper knowledge respecting him, from the prevailing
expectations, grounded on earlier prophecies of a future great King,
from the remaining declarations of the context, and from the
fulfillment, the coincidence of which with the prophecy must here be the
more obvious, since an accurate date had been given." - Christol. ii.
334, 335.

The Vulgate renders this, Usque ad Christum ducem - "even to Christ the
leader," or ruler. The Syriac, "to the advent of Christ the king."
Theodotion, ἕως Χριστοῦ ἡγουμένου heōs Christou hēgoumenou - "Christ the
leader," or ruler. The question whether this refers to Christ will be
more appropriately considered at the close of the verse. The inquiry
will then occur, also, whether this refers to his birth, or to his
appearance as the anointed one - his taking upon himself publicly the
office. The language would apply to either, though it would perhaps more
properly refer to the latter - to the time when he should appear as such
- or should be anointed, crowned, or set apart to the office, and be
fully instituted in it. It could not be demonstrated that either of
these applications would be a departure from the fair interpretation of
the words, and the application must be determined by some other
circumstances, if any are expressed. What those are in the case will be
considered at the close of the verse.

The Prince - נגיד nāgı̂yd. This word properly means a leader, a prefect,
a prince. It is a word of very general character, and might be applied
to any leader or ruler. It is applied to an overseer, or, as we should
say, a "secretary" of the treasury, [Ch1
26:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#024); [Ch2
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#012); an overseer of the temple, [Ch1
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#011); [Ch2
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#013); of the palace, [Ch2
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#007); and of military affairs, [Ch1
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#001); [Ch2
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#021). It is also used absolutely to
denote a prince of a people, any one of royal dignity, [Sa1
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#016); [Sa1
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001); [Sa1
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#014). - Gesenius. So far as this
word, therefore, is concerned, it would apply to any prince or leader,
civil or military; any one of royal dignity, or who should distinguish
himself, or make himself a leader in civil, ecclesiastical, or military
affairs, or who should receive an appointment to any such station. It is
a word which would be as applicable to the Messiah as to any other
leader, but which has nothing in itself to make it necessary to apply it
to him. All that can be fairly deduced from its use here is, that it
would be some prominent leader; some one that would be known without
anymore definite designation; someone on whom the mind would naturally
rest, and someone to whom when he appeared it would be applied without
hesitation and without difficulty. There can be no doubt that a Hebrew,
in the circumstances of Daniel, and with the known views and
expectations of the Hebrew people, would apply such a phrase to the
Messiah.

Shall be seven weeks - See the notes at [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024). The reason for dividing the
whole period into seven weeks, sixty-two weeks, and one week, is not
formally stated, and will be considered at the close of the verse. All
that is necessary here in order to an explanation of the language, and
of what is to be anticipated in the fulfillment, is this:

\(a\) That, according to the above interpretation [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024), the period would be forty-nine
years.

\(b\) That this was to be the "first" portion of the whole time, not
time that would be properly taken out of any part of the whole period.

\(c\) That there was to be some event at the end of the forty-nine years
which would designate a period, or a natural division of the time, or
that the portion which was designated by the forty-nine years was to be
distinctly characterized from the next period referred to as sixty-two
weeks, and the next period as one week.

\(d\) No intimation is given in the words as to the nature of this
period, or as to what would distinguish one portion from the others, and
what that was to be is to be learned from subsequent explanations, or
from the actual course of events. If one period was characterized by
war, and another by peace; one in building the city and the walls, and
the other by quiet prosperity; one by abundance, and the other by
famine; one by sickness, and the other by health - all that is fairly
implied by the words would be met. It is foretold only that there would
be something that would designate these periods, and serve to
distinguish the one from the other.

And threescore and two weeks - Sixty-two weeks; that is, as above
explained [Dan 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024), four hundred and
thirty-four years. The fair meaning is, that there would be something
which would characterize that long period, and serve to distinguish it
from what preceded it. It is not indeed intimated what that would be,
and the nature of the case seems to require that we should look to the
events - to the facts in the course of the history to determine what
that was. Whether it was peace, prosperity, quiet, order, or the
prevalence of religion as contrasted with the former period, all that
the words fairly imply would be fulfilled in either of them.

The street shall be built again - This is a general assertion or
prediction, which does not seem to have any special reference to the
"time" when it would be done. The fair interpretation of the expression
does not require us to understand that it should be after the united
period of the seven weeks and the sixty-two weeks, nor during either one
of those periods; that is, the language is not such that we are
necessarily required to affix it to any one period. It seems to be a
general assurance designed to comfort Daniel with the promise that the
walls and streets of Jerusalem, now desolate, would be built again, and
that this would occur some time during this period. His mind was
particularly anxious respecting the desolate condition of the city, and
the declaration is here made that it would be restored. So far as the
languages - the grammatical construction is concerned, it seems to me
that this would be fulfilled if it were done either at the time of the
going forth of the commandment, or during either of the periods
designated, or even after these periods.

It is, however, most natural, in the connection, to understand it of the
"first" period - the seven weeks, or the forty-nine years - since it is
said that "the commandment would go forth to restore, and to build
Jerusalem;" and since, as the whole subsequent period is divided into
three portions, it may be presumed that the thing that would
characterize the first portion, or what would first be done, would be to
execute the commandment - that is, to restore and build the city. These
considerations would lead us, therefore, to suppose that the thing which
would characterize the first period - the forty-nine years - would be
the rebuilding of the city; and "the time" - a time which, considering
the extent and entireness of the ruins, the nature of the opposition
that might be encountered, the difficulty of collecting enough from
among the exiles to return and do it, the want of means, and the
embarrassments which such an undertaking might be supposed to involve,
cannot, probably, be regarded as too long.

The word rendered "street" - רחוב rechôb - means a "street," so called
from its "breadth," and would properly, therefore, be applied to a wide
street. Then it denotes a market-place, or a forum - the broad open
place at the gates of Oriental cities where public trials were held, and
things exposed for sale, [Ch2 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#006). In
[Ezr 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#009), the word refers to the area
or court before the temple: "And all the people sat in the street (ברחוב
bı̂rechôb) of the house of God," etc. Compare [Neh
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001), [Neh
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#003), [Neh
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#016). The reference in this place,
therefore, may be to that area or court; or it may be to any place of
concourse, or any thoroughfare. It is such language as would be
naturally used to denote that the city would be restored to its former
condition. The phrase "shall be built again" is, in the margin, "return
and be builded." This is in accordance with the Hebrew. That is, it
would be restored to its former state; it would, as it were, come back
and be built up again. Hengstenberg renders it "a street is restored and
built." The phrase properly implies that it would assume its former
condition, the word "built" here being used in the sense of "made," as
we speak of "making a road." Lengerke renders it, wird wieder
hergestellt - "shall be again restored." Theodotion renders it,
ἐπιστρέψει epistrepsei - "it shall return," understanding it as meaning
that there would be a return, to wit, from the exile. But the more
correct meaning undoubtedly is, that the street would return to its
former state, and be rebuilt.

And the wall - Margin, "ditch." Hengstenberg renders this, "and firmly
is it determined;" maintaining that the word חרוּץ chârûts here means
fixed, determined, resolved on, and that the idea is, the purpose that
the city should be rebuilt was firmly resolved on in the Divine mind,
and that the design of what is here said was to comfort and animate the
returned Hebrews in their efforts to rebuild the city, in all the
discouragements and troubles which would attend such an undertaking. The
common interpretation, however, has been that it refers to a ditch,
trench, or wall, that would be constructed at the time of the rebuilding
of the city. So the Vulgate, "muri, walls." So Theodotion, τεῖχος
teichos - wall. The Syriac renders it, "Jerusalem, and the villages, and
the streets." Luther, Mauren, walls. Lengerke renders it, as
Hengstenberg does, "and it is determined." Maurer understands the two
expressions, "street and wall," to be equivalent to "within and without"
- meaning that the city would be thoroughly and entirely rebuilt.

The Hebrew word חרוּץ chârûts means, properly, what is cut in, or dug
out, from חרץ chârats - to cut in. The word is translated "sharp-pointed
things" in [Job 41:30](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#030); "gold, fine
gold, choice gold," in [Psa 68:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#013);
[Pro 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#014); [Pro
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#010), [Pro
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#019); [Pro
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#016); [Zac
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#003); a threshing instrument, [Isa
28:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#027); [Amo
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#003); sharp (referring to a threshing
instrument), [Isa 41:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#015); "wall," [Dan
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025); and "decision," [Joe
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#014). It does not elsewhere occur in
the Scriptures. The notion of "gold" as connected with the word is
probably derived from the fact of its being dug for, or eagerly sought
by men. That idea is, of course, not applicable here. Gesenius supposes
that it here means a "ditch or trench" of a fortified city. This seems
to me to be the probable signification. At all events, this has the
concurrence of the great body of interpreters; and this accords well
with the connection. The word does not properly mean "wall," and it is
never elsewhere so used. It need not be said that it was common, if not
universal, in wailed cities to make a deep ditch or trench around them
to prevent the approach of an enemy, and such language would naturally
be employed in speaking of the rebuilding of a city. Prof. Stuart
renders it, "with broad spaces, and narrow limits."

Even in troublous times - Margin, "strait of." Hengstenberg, "in a time
of distress." Lengerke, Im Druck der Zeiten - in a pressure of times.
Vulgate, In angustia temporum. Theodotion, in the Septuagint, renders
it, "And these times shall be emptied out" (Thompson) - καὶ
ἐκκενωθήσονται οἱ καιροί kai ekkenōthēsontai hoi kairoi. The proper
meaning of the Hebrew word (צוק tsôq) is, distress, trouble, anguish;
and the reference is, doubtless. to times that would be characterized by
trouble, perplexity, and distress. The allusion is clearly to the
rebuilding of the city, and the use of this language would lead us to
anticipate that such an enterprise would meet with opposition or
embarrasment; that there would be difficulty in accomplishing it; that
the work would not be carried on easily, and that a considerable time
would be necessary to finish it.

Having gone through with an investigation of the meaning of the words
and phrases of this verse, we are now prepared to inquire more
particularly what things are referred to, and whether the predictions
have been fulfilled. The points which it is necessary to examine are the
following: - To whom reference is made by the Messiah the Prince; the
time designated by the going forth of the commandment - or the "terminus
a quo;" the question whether the whole period extends to the "birth" of
him here referred to as the Messiah the Prince, or to his assuming the
office or appearing as such; the time embraced in the first seven weeks
- and the fulfillment - or the question whether, from the time of the
going forth of the commandment to the appearing of the Messiah, the
period of the four hundred and ninety years can be fairly made out.
These are evidently important points, and it need not be said that a
great variety of opinions has prevailed in regard to them, and that they
are attended with no little difficulty.

I. To whom reference is made as the Messiah the Prince. In the
exposition of the meaning of the words, we have seen that there is
nothing in the language itself to determine this. It is applicable to
anyone who should be set apart as a ruler or prince, and might be
applied to Cyrus, to any anointed king, or to him who is properly
designated now as the Messiah - the Lord Jesus. Compare the notes at
[Isa 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001). It is unnecessary to show
that a great variety of opinions has been entertained, both among the
Jewish rabbis and among Christian commentators, respecting the question
to whom this refers. Among the Jews, Jarchi and Jacchiades supposed that
it referred to Cyrus; Ben Gersom, and others, to Zerubbabel; Aben Ezra
to Nehemiah; rabbi Azariah to Artaxerxes. Bertholdt, Lengerke, Maurer,
and this class of expositors generally, suppose that the reference is to
Cyrus, who is called the Messiah, or the "Anointed," in [Isa
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001).

According to this interpretation, it is supposed that the reference is
to the seventy years of Jeremiah, and that the meaning is, that "seven
weeks," or forty-nine years, would elapse from the desolation of the
city until the time of Cyrus. See Maurer, in loc. Compare also Lengerke,
pp. 444, 445. As specimens of the views entertained by those who deny
the reference of the passage to the Messiah, and of the difculties and
absurdities of those views, we may notice those of Etchhorn and
Bertholdt. Eichhorn maintains that the numbers referred to are round
numbers, and that we are not to expect to be able to make out an exact
conformity between those numbers and the events. The "commandment"
mentioned in [Dan 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025) he supposes
refers to the order of Cyrus to restore and rebuild the city, which
order was given, according to Usher, A.M. 3468. From this point of time
must the "sevenweeks," or the forty-nine years, be reckoned; but,
according to his view, the reckoning must be "backward and forward;"
that is, it is seven weeks, or forty-nine years, backward to
Nebuchadnezzar, who is here called "Messiah the Prince," who destroyed
the temple and city, A.M. 3416 - or about fifty-two years before the
going forth of the edict of Cyrus. From that time, the reckoning of the
sixty-two weeks must be commenced.

But again, this is not to be computed literally from the time of
Nebuchadnezzar; but since the Jews, in accordance with [Jer
25:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#011), reckoned seventy years,
instead of the true time, the point from which the estimate is to begin
is the fourth year of the reign of Jehoiakim, and this occurred,
according to Usher, A.M. 3397. Reckoning from this point onward, the
sixty-two weeks, or 434 years, would bring us to the time of Antiochus
Epiphanes (A.M. 3829). At the end of the sixty-two weeks, in the first
year of Antiochus Epiphanes, the high priest, Onias III (the Messiah of
[Dan 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026)), was displaced - "cut off"
- יכרת yı̂kârēth - and Jason was appointed in his place, and Menelaus the
year after removed him. Titus Onias had properly no successor, etc. This
absurd opinion Bertholdt (p. 605, following) attempts to set aside - a
task which is very easily performed, and then proposes his own - a
hypothesis not less absurd and improbable. According to his theory (p.
613, following), the seventy years have indeed a historical basis, and
the time embraced in them extends from the destruction of Jerusalem by
Nebuchadnezzar to the death of Antiochus Epiphanes. It is divided into
three periods:

\(a\) The seven first hebdomads extend from the destruction of Jerusalem
by Nebuchadnezzar to king, Cyrus, who gave the exiles permission to
return to their land. This is the period during which Jerusalem must lie
waste [Dan 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#002); and after the close of
this, by the favor of Cyrus [Dan 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025),
the promise of Jeremiah ([Dan 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025) -
דבר dâbâr - "commandment"), that Jerusalem shall be rebuilt, goes forth.

\(b\) The following sixty-two weeks extend from the return of the exiles
to the beginning of the troubles and persecutions under Antiochus. This
is the period of the rebuilding of Jerusalem [Dan
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025).

\(c\) The last period of one week extends from the time of the
oppressions and wrongs commenced under Antiochus, to the death of
Antiochus. See this view fully explained and illustrated in Bertholdt,
"ut supra." The great mass of Christian interpreters, however, have
supposed that the reference is to the Messiah properly so called - the
promised Saviour of the world - the Lord Jesus. In support of this
opinion, the following considerations may be suggested, which seem to me
to be conclusive:

\(1\) The language itself is such as is properly applicable to him, and
such as would naturally suggest him. It is true, as we see in [Isa
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001), that the term Messiah may be
applied to another, as it is there to Cyrus (see the note at the meaning
of the word in that place, and in the exposition of this verse), but it
is also true that if the term stands by itself, and with no explanation,
it would naturally suggest him who, by way of eminence, is known as the
Messiah. In [Isa 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001), it is expressly
limited to Cyrus, and there can be no danger of mistake. Here there is
no such limitation, and it is natural, therefore, to apply it in the
sense in which among the Hebrews it would be obviously understood. Even
Bertholdt admits the force of this. Thus (p. 563) he says: "That at the
words נגיד משׁיח mâshı̂yach nāgı̂yd (Messiah the Prince) we should be led
to think of the Messiah, Jesus, and at those, [Dan
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026), לו ואין משׁיח יכרת yı̂kârēth
mâshı̂yach ve'ēyn lô (shall be cut off but not for himself), of his
crucifixion, though not absolutely necessary, is still very natural."

\(2\) This would be the interpretation which would be given to the words
by the Jews. They were so much accustomed to look forward to a great
prince and deliverer, who would be by way of eminence the Anointed of
the Lord, that, unless there was some special limitation or designation
in the language, they would naturally apply it to the Messiah, properly
so called. Compare [Isa 9:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006). Early
in the history of the Jews, the nation had become accustomed to the
expectation that such a deliverer would come, and its hopes were centerd
on him. In all times of national trouble and calamity; in all their
brightest visions of the future, they were accustomed to look to him as
one who would deliver them from their troubles, and who would exalt
their people to a pitch of glory and of honor, such as they had never
known before. Unless, therefore, there was something in the connection
which would demand a different interpretation, the language would be of
course applied to the Messiah. But it cannot be pretended that there is
anything in the connection that demands such a limitation, nor which
forbids such an application.

\(3\) So far as the ancient versions throw any light on the subject,
they show that this is the correct interpretation. So the Latin Vulgate,
usque ad Christum ducem. So the Syriac, "unto Messiah, the most holy" -
literally, "holy of holies." So Theodotion - ἔως Χριστοῦ heōs Christou -
where there can be little doubt that the Messiah was understood to be
referred to. The same is found in the Arabic. The Codex Chisianus is in
utter confusion on this whole passage, and nothing can be made of it.

\(4\) All the circumstances referred to in connection with him who is
here called "Messiah the Prince" are such as to be properly applicable
to the work which the Lord Jesus came to do, and not to Cyrus, or
Antiochus, or any other leader or ruler. See the notes at [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024). To no other one, according to
the interpretation which the passage in that verse seems to demand, can
the expressions there used be applied. In that exposition it was shown
that the verse is designed to give a general view of what would be
accomplished, or of what is expressed more in detail in the remaining
verses of the vision, and that the language there used can be applied
properly to the work which the Lord Jesus came to accomplish. Assuredly
to no one else can the phrases "to restrain transgression," "to seal up
sins," "to cover over iniquity," "to bring in everlasting
righteousness," "to seal up the vision and prophecy," and "to consecrate
the most holy place," be so well applied. The same is true of the
language in the subsequent part of the prophecy, "Messiah shall be cut
off," "not for himself ... shall confirm the covenant ... cause the
oblation to cease." Any one may see the perplexities in which they are
involved by adopting another interpretation, by consulting Bertholdt, or
Lengerke on the passage.

\(5\) The expression used here ("prince" - נגיד nāgı̂yd - is applied to
the Messiah beyond all question in [Isa
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#004) : "I have given him for a witness
to the people, a leader - נגיד nāgı̂yd - and a commander to the people."

\(6\) The perplexity attending any other interpretation is an additional
proof of this point. In full illustration of this, it is necessary only
to refer to the views of Bertholdt and Eichhorn as above exhibited.
Whatever may be said about the difficulties on the supposition that it
refers to the Lord Jesus - the true Messiah - no one can undertake to
reconcile the applications which they have proposed with any belief of
the inspiration of the passage. These considerations seem to me to make
it clear that the prophecy had reference to the Messiah properly so
called - the hope and the expectation of the Jewish people. There can be
no doubt that Daniel would so understand it; there can be no doubt that
it would be so applied by the Jews.

II\. The next question is, From what point are we to reckon in computing
the time when the Messiah would appear - the "terminus a quo?" It is
important to fix this, for the whole question of the fulfillment depends
on it, and "honesty" requires that it should be determined without
reference to the time to which four hundred and ninety years would reach
- or the "terminus ad quem." It is clearly not proper to do as Prideaux
does, to assume that it refers to the birth of Christ, and then to
reckon backward to a time which may be made to mean the "going forth of
the commandment." The true method, undoubtedly, would be to fix on a
time which would accord with the expression here, with no reference to
the question of the fulfillment for in that way only can it be
determined to be a true "prophecy," and in that way only would it be of
any use to Daniel, or to those who succeeded him. It need hardly be
said, that a great variety of opinions have been maintained in regard to
the time designated by the "going forth of the commandment." Bertholdt
(pp. 567, 568) mentions no less than thirteen opinions which have been
entertained on this point, and in such a variety of sentiment, it seems
almost hopeless to be able to ascertain the truth with certainty. Now,
in determining this, there are a few points which may be regarded as
certain. They are such as these:

\(a\) That the commandment referred to is one that is issued by some
prince or king having authority, and not the purpose of God. See the
notes above on the first part of the verse.

\(b\) That the distinct command would be to "restore and build
Jerusalem." This is specified, and therefore would seem to be
distinguished from a command to build the temple, or to restore that
from its state of ruin. It is true that the one might appear to be
implied in the other, and yet this does not necessarily follow. For
various causes it might be permitted to the Jews to rebuild their
temple, and there might be a royal ordinance commanding that, while
there was no purpose to restore the city to its former power and
splendor, and even while there might be strong objections to it. For the
use of the Jews who still resided in Palestine, and for those who were
about to return, it might be a matter of policy to permit them to
rebuild their temple, and even to aid them in it, while yet it might be
regarded as perilous to allow them to rebuild the city, and to place it
in its former condition of strength and power.

It was a place easily fortified; it had cost the Babylonian monarch much
time, and had occasioned him many losses, before he had been able to
conquer and subdue it, and, even to Cyrus, it might be a matter of very
questionable policy to allow it to be built and fortified again.
Accordingly we find that, as a matter of fact, the permission to rebuild
the temple, and the permission to rebuild the city, were quite different
things, and were separately granted by different sovereigns, and that
the work was executed by different persons. The former might, without
impropriety, be regarded as the close of the captivity - or the end of
the "seventy years" of Jeremiah - for a permission to rebuild the temple
was, in fact, a permission to return to their own country, and an
implied purpose to aid them in it, while a considerable interval might,
and probably would elapse, before a distinct command was issued to
restore and rebuild the city itself, and even then a long period might
intervene before it would be completed.

Accordingly, in the edict published by Cyrus, the permission to rebuild
the temple is the one that is carefully specified: "Thus saith Cyrus,
king of Persia, The Lord God of heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of
the earth; and he hath charged me to "build him an house" at Jerusalem,
which is in Judah. Who is there among you of all his people? his God be
with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and "build
the house of the Lord God of Israel" (he is the God), which is in
Jerusalem," [Ezr 1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#002). In this order
there is nothing said of the restoration of the city, and that in fact
occurred at a different time, and under the direction of different
leaders. The first enterprise was to rebuild the temple; it was still a
question whether it would be a matter of policy to allow the city to be
rebuilt, and that was in fact accomplished at a different time. These
considerations seem to make it certain that the edict referred to here
was not what was issued by "Cyrus," but must have been a subsequent
decree bearing particularly on the rebuilding of the city itself. It is
true that the command to rebuild the temple would imply that either
there were persons residing amidst the ruins of Jerusalem, or in the
land of Palestine, who were to worship there, and that there would be
inhabitants in Jerusalem, probably those who would go from Babylon - for
otherwise the temple would be of no service, but still this might be,
and there be no permission to rebuild the city with any degree of its
ancient strength and splendor, and none to surround it with walls - a
very material thing in the structure of an ancient city.

\(c\) This interpretation is confirmed by the latter part of the verse:
"the street shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous
times." If the word rendered "wall" means "trench or ditch," as I have
supposed, still it was a trench or ditch which was designed as a
"defense" of a city, or which was excavated for making a wall, for the
purpose of fortifying a walled city in order to make it stronger, and
the expression is one which would not be applied to the mere purpose of
rebuilding the temple, nor would it be used except in a command to
restore the city itself. We are, then, in the fair interpretation of the
passage, required now to show that such a command went forth from the
Persian king to "restore and rebuild" the city itself - that is, a
permission to put it into such a condition of strength as it was before.

In order to see how this interpretation accords with the facts in the
case, and to determine whether such a period can be found as shall
properly correspond with this interpretation, and enable us to ascertain
the point of time here referred to - the "terminus a quo" - it is proper
to inquire what are the facts which history has preserved. For this
purpose, I looked at this point of the investigation into Jahn's "Hebrew
Commonwealth," (pp. 160-177), a work not written with any reference to
the fulfillment of this prophecy, and which, indeed, in the portion
relating to this period of the world, makes no allusion whatever to
Daniel. The inquiry which it was necessary to settle was, whether under
any of the Persian kings there was any order or command which would
properly correspond with what we have ascertained to be the fair meaning
of the passage. A very brief synopsis of the principal events recorded
by Jahn as bearing on the restoration of the Jews to their own country,
will be all that is needful to add to determine the question before us.

The kings of the Persian universal monarchy, according to Ptolemy, were
ten, and the whole sum of their reign two hundred and seven years - from
the time of Cyaxares II to the time of Alexander the Great. But
Ptolemy's specific object being chronology, he omitted those who
continued not on the throne a full year, and referred the months of
their reign, partly to the preceding, and partly to the succeeding
monarch. The whole number of sovereigns was in reality fourteen, as
appears by the following table:

b.c. Years Months 538 Cyaxares II reigned 2 0 536 Cyrus 7 0 529 Cambyses
7 5 522 Smerdis 0 7 521 Darius Hystaspis 36 0 485 Xerxes I 21 0 464
Artaxerxes Longimanus 40 3 424 Xerxes II 0 2 424 Sogdianus 0 7 423
Darius Nothus 19 0 404 Artaxerxes Mnemon 46 0 358 Darius Ochus 21 0 337
Arses 0 2 335 Darius Codomanus 0 4 Under the reign of this last prince,
331 b.c., the kingdom was entirely subdued by Alexander the Great.

In respect to the question whether any order or command was issued
pertaining to the rebuilding of the city of Jerusalem that corresponds
with the meaning of the prediction as above explained, the following
facts will probably furnish all the knowledge which can be obtained:

\(a\) Cyaxares II Of course there was nothing in the time of Cyaxares
II, the Darius of Daniel [Dan 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#001);
[Dan 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#001), as it was under him that
Babylon was conquered, and there was no movement toward a restoration of
the Jews to their own land commenced by him, the first movement of that
kind being under Cyrus.

\(b\) Cyrus. What was the nature of the order issued by him we have seen
above. It was a command to build the temple, and was limited to that,
and involved no reference to the city. The command, as we have seen
above, did not extend to that, and there were probably good reasons why
it was not contemplated that it should be rebuilt in its former
strength, and fortified as it was before. The purpose to fortify the
city, or to encompass it by a wall or ditch, or even to build it at all,
could not have been brought within the order of Cyrus, as recorded in
Ezra, and that is the only form of the order which we have. The language
of Daniel, therefore, seems to have been chosen of design when he says
that the command would be issued to rebuild the city, not the temple. At
any rate, such is the language, and such was not the order of Cyrus.

\(c\) Cambyses. After the death of Cyrus the Samaritans wrote to
Cambyses (called, by Ezra, Ahasuerus) against the Jews. We are not
informed what effect this letter produced, but we can easily judge from
the character of this degenerate son of Cyrus, as it is represented in
history. He was a "thoughtless, gluttonous, furious warrior, who was
considered as raving mad even by his own subjects." - Jahn. He madly
invaded Egypt, and on his return learned that Smerdis, his brother, had
usurped the throne in his absence; and died of a wound received from the
falling of his sword from its sheath, as he was mounting his horse. No
order is mentioned during his reign pertaining to the rebuilding either
of the city or the temple.

\(d\) Smerdis. He retained the throne about seven months. In the Bible
the has the name of Artaxerxes. Compare, respecting him, Ctesias, x.;
Justin, i. 9; Herod. iii. 61-67. "To this monarch the Samaritans again
addressed themselves, complaining that the Jews were building (that is,
fortifying) the city of Jerusalem, which they had never thought of
doing; and in consequence of this false accusation, Smerdis issued a
positive prohibition of their work." - Jahn. Two things, therefore, may
be remarked respecting this reign:

\(1\) the order or commandment referred to by Daniel could not have been
issued during this reign, since there was an express "prohibition"
against the work of building and fortifying the city; and

\(2\) this confirms what is said above about the improbability that any
order would have been issued by Cyrus to rebuild and fortify the city
itself.

It could not but have been foreseen that such an order would be likely
to excite opposition from the Samaritans, and to cause internal
dissensions and difficulties in Palestine, and it is not probable that
the Persian govenment would allow the rebuilding of a city that would
lead to such collisions.

\(e\) Darius Hystaspis. He reigned thirty-six years. He was a mild and
benevolent ruler. "As Smerdis was a mere usurper, his prohibition of
rebuilding the temple was of no authority." - Jahn. In the second year
of his reign, Haggai and Zechariah appeared, who plied the governor
Zerubbabel, the high priest Joshua, and the whole people, with such
powerful appeals to the Divine commands, that the building of the house
of God was once more resumed. Upon this, Tatnai, the Persian governor on
the west side of the Euphrates, came with his officers to call the Jews
to an account, who referred him to the permission of Cyrus, and the Jews
were suffered to proceed. The whole matter was, however, made known to
Darius, and he caused search to be made among the archives of the state
in reference to the alleged decree of Cyrus. The edict of Cyrus was
found, which directed that a temple should be built at Jerusalem at the
royal expense, and of much larger dimensions than the former. A copy of
this was sent to Tatnai, and he was commanded to see that the work
should be forwarded, and that the expenses should be defrayed from the
royal treasury, and that the priests should be supplied with whatever
was necessary to keep up the daily sacrifice. The work was, therefore,
pressed on with renewed vigour, and in the sixth year of his reign the
temple was completed and consecrated. The remainder of his reign was
spent in unnecessary wars with Scythia, Thrace, India, and Greece. He
suffered an overthrow at Marathon, and was preparing for a more
energetic campaign in Greece when he died, and left his dominion and his
wars to Xerxes. No order was issued during his reign for the rebuilding
of the city of Jerusalem. All his edicts pertain to the original grant
of Cyrus - the permission to build the temple.

\(f\) Xerxes I. The career of Xerxes is well known. He was distinguished
for gluttony, voluptuousness, and cruelty. He is celebrated for his
invasion of Greece, for the check which he met at Thermopylae, and for
the overthrow of his naval forces at Salamis by Themistocles. In the
twenty-first year of his reign he was murdered by Artabanus, commander
of his life-guard. He died in the year 464 b.c. According to Jalm, it is
probable that "the Artaxerxes of Ezra, who is mentioned next after
Darius Hystaspis, and the Ahasuerus of Esther, are names of Xerxes I."
If so, it was under him that the second caravan of Jews went to Judea,
under the direction of Ezra Ezra 7 Xerxes, if he was the prince referred
to, gave Ezra an ample commission in regard to the temple at Jerusalem,
granting him full power to do all that was necessary to maintain public
worship there, and committing to him the vessels of gold and silver in
Babylon, pertaining to the temple, etc. The decree may be found in [Ezr
7:13-26](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#013). This decree, however, relates
wholly to the temple - the "house of God." There was no order for
rebuilding the city, and there is no evidence that anything material was
done in building the city, or the walls. Respecting this reign, John
remarks, "The Hebrew colony in Judea seems never to have been in a very
flourishing condition. The administration of justice was particularly
defective, and neither civil nor religious institutions were firmly
established. Accordingly, the king gave permission anew for all Hebrews
to emigrate to Judea," p. 172. Ezra made the journey with the caravan in
three months; deposited the precious gifts in the temple, caused the
Scriptures to be read and explained; commenced a moral reformation, but
did nothing, so far as appears, in reconstructing the city - for his
commission did not extend to that.

\(g\) Artaxerxes Longimanus. According to Jahn, he began to reign 464
b.c., and reigned forty years and three months. It was during his reign
that Nehemiah lived, and that he acted as governor of Judea. The colony
in Judea, says Jahn, which had been so flourishing in the time of Ezra,
had greatly declined, in consequence of the fact that Syria and
Phoenicia had been the rendezvous of the armies of Artaxerxes.
"Nehemiah, the cup-bearer of Artaxerxes, learned the unhappy state of
the Hebrews, b.c. 444, from a certain Jew named Hanani, who had come
from Judea to Shushan with a caravan. Of the regulations introduced by
Esra b.c. 478 there was little remaining, and, amid the confusions of
war, the condition of the Jews continually grew worse. This information
so affected Nehemiah that the king observed his melancholy, and
inquiring its cause, he appointed him governor of Judea, "with full
power to fortify Jerusalem," and thus to secure it from the disasters to
which unprotected places are always exposed in time of war.

Orders were sent to the royal officers west of the Euphrates to "assist
in the fortification of the city," and to furnish the requisite timber
from the king's forest; probably on Mount Libanus, near the sources of
the river Kadisha, as that was the place celebrated for its cedars. Thus
commissioned, Nehemiah journeyed to Judea, accompanied by military
officers and cavalry," pp. 175, 176. Jahn further adds, "as soon as
Nehemiah, on his arrival in Palestine, had been acknowledged governor of
Judea by the royal officers, he made known his preparations for
fortifying Jerusalem to the elders who composed the Jewish council. All
the heads of houses, and the high priest Eliashib, engaged zealously in
the work. The chiefs of the Samaritans, Sanballat, Tobiah, and Geshem,
endeavored to thwart their undertaking by insults, by malicious
insinuations that it was a preparation for revolt, by plots, and by
threats of a hostile attack. The Jews, notwithstanding, proceeded
earnestly in their business, armed the laborers, protected them still
further by a guard of armed citizens, and at length happily completed
the walls of their city."

We have reached a point, then, in the history of the kings of Persia,
when there was a distinct order to restore and fortify Jerusalem, and
when there was an express expedition undertaken to accomplish this
result. In the history of these kings, as reported by Jahn, this is the
first order that would seem to correspond with the language of Daniel -
"the commandment to restore and rebuild Jerusalem," and the assertion
that "the street should be built again, and the wall, even in troublous
times." It may be well, therefore, to pause here, and to look more
distinctly at this order of Artaxerxes Longimanus, and inquire into its
conformity with the language of Daniel. The circumstances, then, as
stated in the book of Nehemiah, are these:

\(a\) Nehemiah learned from Hanani the state of his brethren in Judea,
and the fact that the "walls of the city were broken down, and that the
gates were burned with fire," and that the people who were at Jerusalem
were in a state of "great affliction and reproach," and gave himself to
weeping, and fasting, and prayer, on that account, [Neh
1:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001).

\(b\) On coming into the presence of Artaxerxes, to perform the usual
duty of presenting the wine to the king, the king saw the sadness and
distress of Nehemiah, and inquired the cause, [Neh
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#001). This, Nehemiah [Neh
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#001) is careful to remark occurred in
the twentieth year of his reign.

\(c\) He states distinctly, that it was because Jerusalem was still in
ruins: "Why should not my countenance be sad, when the city, the place
of my fathers' sepulchres, lieth waste, and the gates thereof are
consumed with fire?" [Neh 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#003).

\(d\) The request of Nehemiah, in accordance with the language in
Daniel, was, that he might be permitted to go to Jerusalem and "rebuild
the city:" "And I said unto the king, If it please the king, and if thy
servant have found favor in thy sight, that thou wouldst send me unto
Judah, unto the city of my fathers' sepulchres, that I may build it,"
[Neh 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#005).

\(e\) The edict of Artaxerxes contemplated the same thing which is
foretold by the angel to Daniel "And a letter unto Asaph the keeper of
the king's forest, that he may give me timber to make beams for the
gates of the palace which pertained to the house, and for the wall of
the city," etc., [Neh 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#008).

\(f\) The work which Nehemiah did, under this edict, was what is
supposed in the prediction in Daniel. His first work was to go forth by
night to survey the state of the city: "And I went out by night by the
gate of the valley, etc., and viewed the walls of Jerusalem, which were
broken down, and the gates thereof were consumed with fire," [Neh
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#013). His next work was to propose to
rebuild these walls again: "Then said I unto them, Ye see the distress
that we are in, how Jerusalem lieth waste, and the gates thereof are
burned with fire: come, and let us build up the wall of Jerusalem, that
we be no more a reproach," [Neh 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#017).
The next work was to rebuild those walls, a full description of which we
have in Neh. 3:1-32; 4:1-23. The city was thus fortified. It was built
again according to the purpose of Nehemiah, and according to the decree
of Artaxerxes. It took its place again as a fortified city, and the
promised work of restoring and rebuilding it was; complete.

\(g\) The building of the city and the walls under Nehemiah occurred in
just such circumstances as are predicted by Daniel. The angel says, "The
wall shall be built again, even in troublous times." Let anyone read the
account of the rebuilding in Nehemiah - the description of the "troubles
"which were produced by the opposition of Sanballat and those associated
with him Neh. 4, and he will see the striking accuracy of this
expression - an accuracy as entire as if it had been employed after the
event in describing it, instead of having been used before in predicting
it.

It may confirm this interpretation to make three remarks:

\(1\) After this decree of Artaxerxes there was no order issued by
Persian kings pertaining to the restoration and rebuilding of the city.
Neither Xerxes II, nor Sogdianus, nor Darius Nothus, nor Artaxerxes
Mnemon, nor Darius Ochus, nor Arses, nor Darius Codomanus, issued any
decree that corresponded at all with this prediction, or any that
related to the rebuilding of Jerusalem. There was no occasion for any,
for the work was done.

\(2\) a second remark is, that, in the language of Hengstenberg, "Until
the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, the new city of Jerusalem was an open,
thinly inhabited village, exposed to all aggressions from its neighbors,
sustaining the same relation to the former and the latter city as the
huts erected after the burning of a city for the first protection front
rain and wind do to those which are still uninjured, or which have been
rebuilt." - Christ. ii. 381. This is quite apparent from the remarks
which have been already made respecting the state of the city. The want
of any permission to rebuild the city and the walls; the fact that the
permission to return extended only to a right-to rebuild the temple; the
improbabilities above stated, that the rebuilding of the city in its
strength would be allowed when they first returned, and the account
which Nehemiah gives of the condition of Jerusalem at the time when he
asked leave to go and "build" it, all tend to confirm this supposition.
See Hengstenberg, as above, pp. 381-386.

\(3\) A third remark is, that a confirmation of this may be found in the
book of Ecclesiasticus, showing how Nehemiah was regarded in respect to
the rebuilding of the city: "And among the elect was Neemias, whose
renown is great, who raised up for us the walls that were fallen, and
set up the gates and the bars, and raised up our ruins again,"
Ecclesiasticus 49:13. On the other hand, Joshua and Zerubbabel are
extolled only as rebuilders of the temple: "How shall we magnify
Zorobabel? even he was as a signet on the right hand:" "so was Jesus the
son of Josedec: who in their time builded "the house" and set up a "holy
temple" to the Lord," Ecclesiasticus 49:11, 12. These considerations
make the case clear, it seems to me, that the time referred to - the
"terminus a quo" - according to the fair interpretation, was the
twentieth year of Artaxerxes. To this we are conducted by the proper and
necessary exposition of the language, and by the orders actually issued
from the Persian court in regard to the temple and city.

If it should be objected - the only objection of importance that has
been alleged against it - that this would not meet the inquiry of
Daniel; that he was seeking for the time when the captivity would cease,
and looking for its termination as predicted by Jeremiah; that it would
not console him to be referred to a period so remote as is here supposed
- the time of the rebuilding of the city; and, still more, that, not
knowing that time, the prophecy would afford him no basis of calculation
as to the appearing of the Messiah, it may be replied:

\(a\) That the prediction contained all the consolation and assurance
which Daniel sought - the assurance that the city "would be rebuilt,"
and that an order "would go forth" for its restoration.

\(b\) That the angel does not profess to answer the precise point of the
inquiry which Daniel had suggested. The prayer of Daniel was the
occasion of uttering a higher prophecy than the one which lie had been
contemplating.

\(c\) It is not necessary to suppose that the design was that "Daniel"
should be able to compute the exact time when the Messiah would appear.
It was sufficient for him if he had the assurance that he would appear,
and if he were furnished with a basis by which it might be calculated
when he would appear, after the order to rebuild the city had gone
forth.

\(d\) At any rate, the prophecy must have appeared to Daniel to have a
much more important meaning than would be implied merely by a direct
answer to his prayer - pertaining to the close of the exile. The
prophecy indubitably stretched far into future years. Daniel must have
seen at once that it contained an important disclosure respecting future
events, and, as it implied that the exile would close, and that the city
would be rebuilt, and as he had already a sufficient intimation when the
exile would close, from the prophecies of Jeremiah, we may suppose that
the mind of Daniel would rest on this as more than he had desired to
know - a revelation far beyond what he anticipated when he set apart
this day for special prayer.

The only remaining difficulty as to the time referred to as the
beginning of the seventy weeks - "the terminus a quo" - is that of
determining the exact chronology of the twentieth year of Artaxerxes -
the point from which we are to reckon. The time, however, varies only a
few years according to the different estimates of chronology, and not so
as materially to affect the result. The following are the principal
estimates:

Jahn 444 b.c. Hengstenberg 454 b.c. Hales 414 b.c. Calmet 449 b.c. Usher
454 b.c. It will be seen from this, that the difference in the
chronology is, at the greatest, but ten years, and in such a matter,
where the ancient records are so indefinite, and so little pains were
taken to make exact-dates, it cannot perhaps be expected that the time
could be determined with exact accuracy. Nor, since the numbers used by
the angel are in a sense "round" numbers - "seventy weeks," "sixty-two
weeks," "one week," is it necessary to suppose that the time could be
made out with the exactness of a year, or a month - though this has been
often attempted. It is sufficient if the prediction were so accurate and
determinate that there could be no doubt, in general, as to the time of
the appearing of the Messiah, and so that when he appeared it should be
manifest that he was referred to. Hengstenberg, however, supposes that
the chronology can be made out with literal accuracy. See Christ. ii.
394-408.

Taking the dates above given as the "terminus a quo" of the prophecy -
the time from which to reckon the beginning of the sixty-nine weeks to
the "Messiah the Prince" - or the four hundred and eighty-three years,
we obtain, respectively, the following resuits:

The period of b.c. 414, the period of Jahn and Hales, would extend to
a.d. 39.

That of b.c. 455, the period od Hentstenberg and Usher, to a.d. 29.

That of b.c. 449, the period of Calmet, to a.d. 31.

It is remarkable how all these periods terminate at about the time when
the Lord Jesus entered on his work, or assumed, at his baptism, the
public office of the Messiah - when he was thirty years of age. It is
undeniable that, whichever reckoning be correct, or whatever computation
we may suppose to have been employed by the Jews, the expectation would
have been excited in the public mind that the Messiah was about to
appear at that time. Perhaps the real truth may be seen in a stronger
light still by supposing that if a sagacious impostor had resolved to
take upon himself the office of the Messiah, and had so shaped his plans
as to meet the national expectations growing out of this prediction of
Daniel, he would have undoubtedly set up his claims at about the time
when the Lord Jesus publicly appeared as the Messiah. According to the
common chronologies, there would not have been a variance of more than
nine years in the calculation, and, perhaps, after all, when we consider
how little the chronology of ancient times has been regarded or settled,
it is much more to be wondered at that there should be so great accuracy
than that the time is not more certainly determined. If, notwithstanding
the confusion of ancient dates, the time is so nearly determined with
accuracy, is it not rather to be presumed that if the facts of ancient
history could be ascertained, the exact period would be found to have
been predicted by the angel?

III\. The next point properly is, what is the time referred to by the
phrase "unto the Messiah the Prince" - the "terminus ad quem." Here
there can be but two opinions - what refers it to his birth, and that
which refers it to his public manifestation as the Messiah, or his
taking the office upon himself. The remarks under the last head have
conducted us to the probability that the latter is intended. Indeed, it
is morally certain that this is so, if we have ascertained the "terminus
a quo" with accuracy. The only question then is, whether this is the
fair construction, or whether the language can properly be so applied.
We have seen, in the interpretation of the phrase above, that the
grammatical construction of the language is such as might, without
impropriety., be applied to either event. It remands only to look at the
probabilities that the latter was the design. It may be admitted,
perhaps, that before the event occurred, there might have been some
uncertainty on the subject, and that with many, on reading the prophecy,
the supposition would be that it referred to the birth of the Messiah.
But a careful consideration of all the circumstances of the passage
might even then have led to different expectation, and might have shown
that the probabilities were that it was the public manifestation of the
Messiah that was intended. Those may be regarded as stronger now, and
may be such as to leave no reasonable doubt on the mind; that is, we may
now see what would not be likely to have been seen then - as in the case
of all the prophecies. Among these considerations are the following:

\(a\) Such an interpretation may be, after all, the most probable. If we
conceive of one who should have predicted the appearance or coming of
Jenghis Khan, or Alaric, or Attila, as conquerors, it would not be
unnatural to refer this to their public appearing in that character, as
to the time when they became known as such, and still more true would
this be of one who should be inaugurated or set apart to a public
office. If, for example, there had been a prophecy of Gregory the Great,
or Leo X, as "Popes," it would be most natural, unless there was a
distinct reference to their birth, to refer this to their election and
consecration as Popes, for that would in fact be the period when they
appeared as such.

\(b\) In the case of this prophecy, there is no allusion to the birth of
the Messiah. It is not "to his birth," or "to his incarnation," but
"unto the Messiah the Prince;" that is, most manifestly, when he
appeared as such, and was in fact such. In many instances in the
prophecies there are allusions to the birth of the Messiah; and so
numerous and accurate had they become, that there was a general
expectation of the event at about the time when he was actually born.
But, in the passage before us, the language is what would be used on the
supposition that the designed reference was to his entering as Messiah
on the functions of his office, and not such as would have been so
naturally employed if the reference had been to his birth.

\(c\) His taking upon himself the office of the Messiah by baptism and
by the descent of the Holy Spirit on him was, in fact, the most
prominent event in his work. Before that, he had passed his life in
obscurity. The work which he did as Messiah was commenced at that time,
and was to be dated from that period. In fact, he was not the Messiah,
as such, until he was set apart to the office - anymore than an heir to
a crown is king until he is crowned, or an elected chief-magistrate is
president before he has taken the oath of office. The position which he
occupied was, that he was designated or destined for the office of the
Messiah, but had not, in fact, entered on it, and could not as yet be
spoken of as such.

\(d\) This is the usual method of recording the reign of a king - not
from his birth, but from his coronation. Thus, in the table above,
respecting the Persian kings, the periods included are those from the
beginning of the reign, not from the birth to the decease. So in all
statutes and laws, as when we say the first of George III, or the second
of Victoria, etc.

\(e\) To these considerations may be added an argument stated by
Hengstenberg, which seems to make the proof irrefragable. It is in the
following words: "After the course of seventy weeks shall the whole work
of salvation, to be performed by the Messiah, be completed; after
sixty-nine weeks, and, as it appears from the more accurate
determination in [Dan 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027), in the
middle of the seventieth, he shall be cut off. As now, according to the
passage before us, sixty-nine weeks shall elapse before the Messiah,
there remains from that event to the completion of salvation only a
period of seven, until his violent death, of three and a half years; a
certain proof that 'unto the Messiah' must refer, not to his birth, but
to the appearance of the Messiah as such." - Christ. ii. 337.

IV\. The next question then is, whether, according to this estimate, the
time can be made out with any degree of accuracy. The date of the
decrees of Artaxerxes are found to be, according to the common reckoning
of chronologists, either 444, or 454, or 449 b.c. The addition of 483
years to them we found also to reach, respectively, to 39 a.d., to 29
a.d., and to 34 a.d. One of these (29) varies scarcely at all from the
time when the Saviour was baptized, at thirty years of age; another (34)
varies scarcely at all from the time when he was put to death; and
either of them is so accurate that the mind of anyone who should have
made the estimate when the command to build the city went forth, would
have been directed with great precision to the expectation of the true
time of his appearance; and to those who lived when he did appear, the
time was so accurate that, in the reckoning of any of the prevailing
methods of chronology, it would have been sufficiently clear to lead
them to the expectation that he was about to come. Two or three remarks,
however, may be made in regard to this point.

\(a\) One is, that it is now, perhaps, impossible to determine with
precise accuracy the historical period of events so remote. Time was not
then measured as accurately as it is now; current events were not as
distinctly recorded; chronological tables were not kept as they are now;
there was no uniform method of determining the length of the year, and
the records were much less safely kept. This is manifest, because, even
in so important an event as the issuing of the commend to rebuild the
city in the time of Artaxerxes - an event which it would be supposed was
one of sufficient moment to have merited an exact record, at least among
the Jews. There is now, among the best chronologists, a difference of
ten years as to the computation of the time.

\(b\) There is a variation arising from the difference of the lunar or
the solar year - some nations reckoning by the one, and some by the
other - and the difference between them, in the period now under
consideration, would be greater than what now occurs in the ordinary
reckonings of chronology.

\(c\) Until the exact length of the year, as then understood, is
ascertained, there can be no hope of fixing the time with the exactness
of a month or a day; and if the usual and general understanding of the
length of the year be adopted, then the time here referred to would be
so intelligible that there would be no difficulty in ascertaining at
about what time the Messiah was to appear, or when he did appear in
determining that it was he. This was all that was really necessary in
regard to the prophecy.

\(d\) Yet it has been supposed that the time can be made out, even under
these disadvantages, with almost entire accuracy. The examination in the
case may be seen at length in Hengstenberg, Chris. ii. 394-408. It is
agreed on all hands that the commencement of the reign of Xerxes
occurred in the year 485 before Christ, and that Ariaxerxes died in 423.
The difference concerns only the beginning of the reign of Ariaxerxes.
If that occurred in the year 464 b.c., then the problem is solved, for
then the decree of the twentieth year of Artaxerxes would occur 444
b.c.; and if 483 be added to that, the result is 29 a.d. - a difference,
then, even in reckoning whole years and round numbers, of only one year
between that and the time when Jesus was baptized by John. The full
proof of this point, about the beginning of the reign of Ariaxerxes, may
be seen in Hengstenberg, as above. The argument, though long, is so
important, and so clear, that it may without impropriety be inserted in
this place:

"According to the prophecy, the "terminus a quo," the twentieth year of
Ariaxerxes, is separated from the "terminus ad quem," the public
appearance of Christ, by a period of sixty-nine weeks of years, or four
hundred and eighty-three years. If, now, we compare history with this,
it must appear, even to the most prejudiced, in the highest degree
remarkable, that, among all the current chronological determinations of
this period, not one differs over ten years from the testimony of the
prophecy. This wonder must rise to the highest pitch, when it appears
from an accurate examination of these determinations, that the only one
among them which is correct makes the prophecy and history correspond
with each other even to a year.

"Happily, to attain this end, we are not compelled to involve ourselves
in a labyrinth of chronological inquiries. We find ourselves, in the
main, on sure ground. All chronologists agree, that the commencement of
the reign of Xerxes falls in the year 485 before Christ, the death of
Artaxerxes, in the year 423. The difference concerns only the year of
the commencement of the reign of Ariaxerxes. Our problem is completely
solved, when we have shown that this falls in the year 474 before
Christ. For then the twentieth year of Ariaxerxes is the year 455 before
Christ, according to the usual reckoning. :

299 U. C. Add to this, 483 years, - - - - - 782 U. C. "We should
probably have been saved the trouble of this investigation, had not the
error of an acute man, and the want of independence in his successors,
darkened what was in itself clear. According to Thucydides, Ariaxerxes
began to reign shortly before the flight of Themistocles to Asia.
Deceived by certain specious arguments, hereafter to be examined,
Dodwell, in the "Annal. Thucydides," placed both events in the year 465
before Christ. The thorough refutation of Vitringa, in the cited
treatise, remained, strange as it may appear, unknown to the
philologians and historians, even as it seems to those of Holland, as
Wesseling. The view of Dodwell, adopted also by Corsini in the "Fasta
Attica," became the prevailing one, at which we cannot wonder, when we
consider how seldom, in modern times, chronological investigations in
general have been fundamental and independent; when e. g., we observe
that Poppo, a generally esteemed recent editor of Thucydides, in a thick
volume, entitled, "In Thucydidem Commentarii politici, geograph.,
chronologici," furnishes, in reference to the last, nothing more than a
reprint of the school edition of the chronological tables collected from
Dodwell, excusing himself with an "odio quodam inveterato totius hujus
disciplince"! Clinton also ("Fasti Hellenici, lat. vert. Kruger,"
Leipz., 1830), though he clearly perceives that Dodwell has confused the
whole chronology of this period (compare, e. g., p. 248-253), has not
been able to free himself from him in the most important points, though
he successfully opposed him in several; and thus the confusion only
becomes still greater, since now neither the actual chronological
succession of events, nor the one ingeniously invented by Dodwell, any
longer remains.

Nevertheless, the truth is advanced by this increased confusion. For now
the harmony introduced by Dodwell into the fictitious history is
destroyed. The honor, however, of having again discovered the true path,
belongs to Kriiger alone, who, after more than a hundred years, as an
entirely independent inquirer, coincides with Vitringa, in the same
result, and in part in the employment of the same arguments. In the
acute treatise, "Ueber den Cimonischen Frieden (in the Archiv f.
Philologie und Padagog. von Seebode," I. 2, p. 205, ff.) he places the
death of Xerxes in the year 474 or 473, and the flight of Themistocles a
year later. This treatise may serve to shame those who reject in the
mass the grounds of our opinion (to the establishment of which we now
proceed), with the remark, that the author has only found what he
sought. Whoever does not feel capable of entering independently upon the
investigation, should at least be prevented from condemning, by the
circumstance, that a learned man, who has no other design in view than
to elucidate a chronologically confused period of Grecian history,
gives, for the event which serves to determine the "terminus a quo" of
our prophecy, the precise year, which places prophecy and fulfillment in
the most exact harmony.

"We examine first the grounds which seem to favor the opinion, that the
reign of Artaxerxes commenced in the year 465.

\(1\) 'The flight of Themistocles must precede the transfer of the
dominion of Greece from Athens to Sparta by several years. For this
happened during the siege of Byzantium, when the treasonable efforts of
Pausanias first commenced; the flight of Themistocles, however, was a
consequence of the complaint, which was raised against him, out of the
documents found after the death of Pausanias. But Isocrates says, in the
"Panathenaikos," that the dominion of the Lacedemonians had endured ten
years. The expedition of Xerxes, taken as the "terminus a quo," this
transfer falls in the year 470.' But we may spare ourselves the labor
which Vitringa takes to invalidate this alleged testimony of Isoerates,
since all recent scholars, in part independent of one another, agree
that Isocrates speaks of a ten years' dominion, not before, but after
that of the Athenians; compare Corny on "Pan." c. 19; Dahlmann,
"Forschungen," I. p. 45; Kruger, p. 221; Clinton, p. 250, ff.

\(2\) That Themistocles in the year 472 was still in Athens, Corsini
infers (Fasti Att. III. p. 180) from AEl. lib. 9, c. 5. According to
this, Themistocles sent back Hiero, who was coming to the O ympic games,
asserting that, whoever had not taken part in the greatest danger, could
not be a sharer of the joy. (The fact is also related by Plutarch.) Now
as Hiere, Ol. 75, 3 (478), began to reign, only the Ol. 77 (472) could
be intended. But who does not at once perceive that the reference to the
games of the Ol. 76 (476) was far more obvious, since the occurrence
pre-supposed that the μέγιστος τῶν κινδύνων megistos tōn kindunōn was
still fresh in remembrance?

\(3\) according to this supposition, Xerxes would reign only eleven
years; Artaxerxes, on the contrary, fifty-one. This is in opposition to
the testimony of the "Can. Ptolem." (compare thereon Ideler, I. p. 109,
ff.), which gives to Xerxes twenty-one, and to Artaxerxes forty-one
years, and of Ctesias, who gives to Artaxerxes forty-two years, and of
some other writers; compare the passages in Bahr on Ctesias, p. 181.
"Ceteris paribus," this argument would be wholly decisive. But when
other weighty authorities are opposed to it, it is not of itself
sufficient to outweigh them. The canon has high authority, only where it
rests on astronomical observations, which is here not the case.
Otherwise it stands on the same ground as all other historical sources.
The whole error was committed, as soon as only an ιά ia in an ancient
authority was confounded with a κά ka; for when a reign of twenty-one
years had thus been attributed to Xerxes, the shortening of the reign of
Artaxerxes to forty-one years necessarily followed. Wesseling (on Diod.
12, 64) attributes forty-five years to Artaxerxes, thus without
hesitation rejecting the authority of the canon. To these arguments,
already adduced by others, we subjoin the following.

\(4\) It seems to be evident from Ctesias, chapter 20, that Artaxerxes
was born a considerable time after the commencement of the reign of
Xerxes. Ctesias, after relating it, proceeds - γαμεῖ δὲ Ξέρξης Ὀνόφα
θυγατέρα Αμιστριν καὶ γίνεται αὐτῷ παῖς Δαρειαῖος, καὶ ἕτερος ματὰ δύο
ἔτη Υ̓στασπης, καὶ ἔτι Ἀρταξέρξης gamei de Xerxēs Onofa thugatera
Amistrin kai ginetai autō pais Dareiaios, kai heteros meta duo etē
Ustaspē, kai eti Artaxerxēs. If he relates the events in the true
chronological order, Artaxerxes in the year 474 b.c. could at most have
been seven years old. On the contrary, however, all accounts agree, that
at the death of Xerxes, although still young (compare Justin, 3, 1), he
was yet of a sufficient age to be capable of reigning himself. We must
not be satisfied with the answer that it is very improbable that Xerxes,
who was born at the beginning of the thirty-sixth year of the reign of
Darius (compare Herod. 7, 2), and was already thirty-four or thirty-five
years old at his death, was not married until so late a period. Ctesias
himself frees us from the embarrassment into which we were thrown by his
inaccuracy. According to chapter 22, Megabyzus was already married,
before the expedition against Greece, with a daughter of Xerxes, who,
already mentioned (chapter 20), if Ctesias is there chronologically
accurate, could not have been born before that time. According to
chapter 28, Megabyzus, immediately after the return of Xerxes from
Greece, complained to him of the shameful conduct of this wife of his.

\(5\) There can be no doubt that the Ahasuerus of the book of Esther is
the same as Xerxes. But the twelfth year of this king is there expressly
mentioned, [Est 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#007), and the events
related in the following context fall, in part, about the end of the
same year. But this difficulty vanishes, as soon as we include the years
of the co-regency of Xerxes with Darius. According to the fall account
in Herodotus 7, chapters 2-4, Xerxes, two years before the death of
Darius, was established by him as king: compare e. g., chapter 4 -
ἀπέδεξε δὲ βασιλῆα Πέρσῃσι Δαρεῖος Ξέρξεα apedexe de basilēa Persēsi
Dareios Xerxea. Of the custom of the Hebrew writers to include the years
of a co-regency, where it existed, we have a remarkable example in the
account concerning Nebuchadnezzar (compare Bietr. I. p. 63). But we find
even in the book of Esther itself plain indications of this mode of
reckoning. The account of the great feast Est. 1 is placed in its true
light by this supposition. The occasion of it was the actual
commencement of the reign of Xerxes, though we need not on this account
exclude, what has hitherto been regarded as the exclusive object,
consultations with the nobles respecting the expeditions about to be
undertaken. What is related [Est 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#016)
then falls precisely in the time of the return of Xerxes from Greece,
while otherwise, and this is attended with difficulty, about two years
after that event.

"We now proceed to lay down the positive grounds for our view; and in
the first place, the immediate, and then the mediate proofs, which
latter are far more numerous and strong, since they show that the flight
of Themistocles, which must precede the reign of Artaxerxes, cannot
possibly be placed later than 473 before Christ.

"To the first class belong the following:

1\. It must appear very strange to those who assume a twenty-one years'
reign of Xerxes, that the whole period from the eleventh year is a
complete "tabula rasa." The Biblical accounts stop short at the close of
the tenth year. Ctesias relates only one inconsiderable event after the
Grecian war (chapter 28), which occurred immediately after its
temination. No later writer has ventured to introduce anything into the
ten years, which, according to our view, the permutation of an ι (i) and
κ (k) adds to his age.

"2. We possess a twofold testimony, which places the return of Xerxes
from Greece, and his death, in so close connection, that, without
rejecting it, we cannot possibly assume a fifteen years' reign after
this return, but are rather compelled to place his death not beyond the
year 474. The first is that of AElian, Var. Hist. 13, 3: εἶτα ἐπανελθὼν,
αἴσχιστα ἀνθρώπων ἀπέθανεν, ἀποσφαγεῖς νύκτωρ ἐν τῇ ἐυνῇ ὑπὸ τοῦ ὑιοῦ
eita epanelthōn, aischista anthrōpōn apethanen, aposphageis nuktōr en tē
eunē hupo tou huiou. The second, that of Justin, 3, 1: 'Xerxes rex
Persarum, terror antea gentium, bello in Graeciam infeliciter gesto,
etiam suis contemtui essecoepit. Quippe Artabanus proefectus ejus,
deficiente quotidie regis majestate, in spem regni adductus, cum septem
robustissimis filiis,' etc.

"3. The testimonies of Justin, I. c., respecting the age of his sons at
his death, are not reconcilable with the twenty-one years' reign of
Xerxes: 'Securior de Artaxerxe, puero admodum, fingit regem a Dario, qui
erat adolescens, quo maturius regno potiretur occisum.' If Xerxes
reigned twenty-one years, his firstborn, Darius, according to a
comparison of Ctesias (chapter 22), could not at his death have been an
adolescens, but at least thirty-one years old. On the contrary, if
eleven years' reign be assumed, these determinations are entirely
suitable. Darius was then toward twenty-one years old; Artaxerxes,
according to Ctesias (chapter 20), near four years younger than Darius,
about seventeen. This determination shows also that it cannot be
objected against a fifty-one years'reign of Artaxerxes that it would
give him too great an age. The suggestion can be refuted by the simple
remark, that the length of his life remains exactly the same, whether he
reigned fifty-one or forty-one years. If he ascended the throne at
seventeen, his life terminated at sixty-eight.

"4. According to the most numerous and weighty testimonies, the peace of
Cimon was probably concluded after the battle of the Eurymedon (before
Christ 470). Now, as all agree that this peace was concluded with
Artaxerxes, the commencement of his reign must, in any event, be placed
before 470. Compare Kruger, 1. c., p. 218.

"5. The history of Nehemiah is scarcely reconcilable with the
supposition that Artaxerxes reigned only forty-seven years. After
Nehemiah had accomplished all that is related in Neh. 1-12, he returned
to Persia to discharge the duties of his office, at court. This
happened, according to [Neh 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#006), in
the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes. The time of his return is not
accurately determined. It says merely, after a considerable time, the
ימים לקץ leqēts yāmı̂ym. That his absence, however, must have continued a
whole series of years, appears from the relation of that which took
place in the meantime. The law against marriage with foreign women, to
the observance of which the people had bound themselves anew, [Neh
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#030), was first violated during his
absence; then again, by a decree of the people, executed in all
severity, [Neh 13:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#001); and then again
broken, as appears from the fact that Nehemiah, at his return, according
to [Neh 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#023), found a great many
foreign women in the colony.

That these marriages had already existed for some time appears from [Neh
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#024), where it is said that the
children of them had spoken half in the language of Ashdod, and could
not speak Hebrew. A long absence is also implied in the other abuses
which Nehemiah, according to [Neh
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#010), following, found on his return.
He saw the fruits of the former labors almost destroyed. The same is
also evident from the prophecies of Malachi, which were delivered
exactly in the time between the two periods of Nehemiah's presence at
Jerusalem: compare Vitringa's excellent Dissert. de AEtate Mal., in his
Obss. ss. vi. 7, t. 2, p. 353, following The condition of the people
appears here, as it could have been only after they had already been
deprived, for a considerable time, of their two faithful leaders, Ezra,
who, having arrived thirteen years earlier, had cooperated for a
considerable time with Nehemiah, and Nehemiah himself.

But, if we consider barely the first-mentioned fact, the marriages with
foreign women, it will be evident that a longer period than nine years
would be required. For each change there will then only three years be
allowed; and as this is undeniably too little for the third, according
to [Neh 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#024), the two first must be
still more shortened, which is inadmissible. Besides, we do not even
have nine years for these events, if the reign of Artaxerxes is fixed at
forty-one years. For the relation of Nehemiah pre-supposes that
Artaxerxes was yet living at the time of its composition. This, however,
cannot be placed in the time immediately after the return of Nehemiah,
since it must have been preceded by the abolition of all these abuses.
If, however, we are conducted by the authority of Nehemiah, which is
liable to no exception, since he was contemporary and closely connected
with Artaxerxes, a few years over forty-one, we have gained much. For
then the only objection to our determination, the testimony of the
canon, is completely set aside.

"We must premise a remark, before we bring forward our indirect proofs,
in order to justify the connection in which we place the commencement of
the reign of Artaxerxes with the flight of Themistocles. This connection
has not, indeed, the unanimous testimony of the ancient writers in its
favor. The vouchers for it are, Thucydides (chapter 137), where it is
said of Themistocles, who had come into Asia, ἐσπέμπει γράμματα ἐς
βασιλέα Ἀρταξέρξην τὸν Ξέρξου, νεωστὶ βασιλεύοντα espemtei grammata, es
basilea Artaxerxēn ton Xerxou, neōsti basileuonta, and Charon of
Lampsacus, who, according to Plutarch (Them. chapter 27), makes him in
like manner fly to Artaxerxes. On the contrary: others, as Ephorus,
Dinon, Klitarch, and Heraclides (compare Plut. 1. c.), represent him as
going to Xerxes. If, now, we examine these testimonies, according to the
authorities of the witnesses the decision will unquestionably be in
favor of that of Thucydides and Charon. Thucydides was contemporary with
Ariaxerxes, and was born about the time of the flight of Themistocles.
This prince of Greek historians gives (chapter 97) as the cause why he
relates the events between the Median and Peloponnesian war, that all
his predecessors had passed over these events in silence, and that the
only one who touched upon them, Hellanicus, βραχέως τε καὶ τοῖς χρὸνοις
οὐκ ἀκριβῶς ἐπεμνήσθη bracheōs te kai tois chronois ouk akribōs
epemnēsthē them, from which it is evident, first, how little certain are
the accounts of this period in later authors, because they can have no
credible contemporary voucher, since he could not have been unknown to
Thucydides; and, secondly, that Thucydides himself claims to be regarded
as a careful and accurate historian of this period, and therefore must
be esteemed such, because so honest a man would assume nothing to
himself which did not belong to him. The other witness, Charon, was the
less liable to err, since, at the very time of this event, he was a
writer of history, and even lived in Asia. On the other hand, the oldest
witnesses for the opposite supposition lived more than a century after
the event. Ephorus (see on his Akrisic, Dahlmann) out-lived the dominion
of Alexander in Asia; Dinon was father of Kiltarch, who accompanied
Alexander.

"In weighing these grounds, the authority of Thucydides and Charon was
unhesitatingly followed in ancient times. Plutarch (1. c.) does this,
with the remark, that the testimony of Thucydides agrees better with the
chronological works. Nepos says: 'Scio plerosque ita scripsisse,
Themistoclem Xerxe regnante in Asiam transiisse: sed ego potissimum
Thucydidi credo, quod aetate proximus de his, qui illorum temporum
historias reliquerunt et ejusdem civitatis fuit.' Suidas, and the
Scholiast on Aristoph. "Equites," from which the former borrowed
verbatim his second article on Themistocles, makes him flee, πρὸς τὸν
Ἀρταξέρξην, τὸν Ξέρξου τοῦ Πέρσον παῖδα pros ton Artaxerxēn, ton Xerxou
tou Persou paida, without even mentioning the other supposition. And in
this respect, we have the less fear of contradiction, since, as far as
we know, all modern critics, without exception, follow Thucydides and
Charon. We only still remark that the opposite view can the more easily
be rejected, since its origin can so readily be explained, either from
the fact that this event fell on the border of the reign of Xerxes and
of Artaxerxes, or from a simple confounding of the two names, the
assumption of which is more easy the more frequently it occurs; we find
it even in Aristotle, the contemporary of those writers, Pol. 5, 8, and
twice in Ctesias, chapter 35, where Bahr would make a change in
opposition to all the manuscripts, and chapter 44. Compare Bahr on the
passage, and Reimarus on Dio Cass. II. p. 1370. Finally, the error might
arise also from the circumstance that the flight of Themistocles was
placed in the right year; but twenty-one years were attributed to
Xerxes, from which it necessarily follows that he took refuge with
Xerxes. This last opinion is favored by the coincidence of several
contemporary writers in the same error, which presupposes some plausible
reason for it.

"We now proceed to lay down our indirect proofs.

\(1\) we begin with the testimony which gives precisely the year of the
flight of Themistocles, that of Cicero, Lael. chapter 12. It is true,
Corsini, 1. c. 3, p. 180, asserts, that Cicero speaks of the year in
which Themistocles was banished from Athens; but we need only examine
the passage to be convinced of the contrary: 'Themistocles - fecit idem,
quod viginti annis ante apud nos fecerat Coriolanus.' The flight of
Coriolanus to the Volci falls in the year 263 u. c., 492 b.c. The flight
of Themistocles is accordingly placed by Cicero in the year 472, a year
later than by us, which is of no importance, since the round number
twenty was the more suitable to the object of Cicero, as the more
accurate nineteen, for the chronologists. If Dodwell's view were
correct, there would be the space of twenty-seven years between the two
events.

"2. Diodorus Siculus, who (11, 55) places the flight of Themistocles in
Ol. 77, 2 (471 b.c.), in any event favors our determination, which
ascends only two years higher, far more than the opposite one. We
remark, however, that he also places in the same year the residence of
Themistocles at Magnesia, and his death; and thus it is evident that,
whether by mistake or design, he compresses the events in the life of
Themistocles, which filled up some years, into the year of his death. If
this took place in the year 471, the flight must be dated at least as
far back as 473. Our determination differs only a single year from that
of Eusebius, who relates the flight of Themistocles in Ol. 77, 1.

"3. But what forms the chief argument, the whole series of transactions,
as they have been recorded in accurate order, especially by Thucydides,
compels us without reserve to place the flight of Themistocles not be.
low the year 473. That the expedition of the allied Greeks under the
direction of Pausanias, against Cyprus and Byzantium, the capture of the
latter city, and the transfer of the supremacy from the Lacedemonians to
the Athenians, occasioned by the insolence of Pausanias, fall in the
year 477, we may regard as established beyond dispute by Clinton, p.
270, following. The view of O. Muller (Dorier, ii. p. 498), who
distributes these events into a period of five years, is contradicted by
the expression ἐν τῇδε τῇ ἡγεμονίᾳ en tēde tē hēgemonia of Thucydides,
chapter 94, whereby the capture of Byzantium is brought into the same
year with the expedition against Cyprus. That these words cannot be
connected with what follows, without a change of the text in opposition
to all critical authority, is shown by Poppo. Moreover, the very last of
these events is placed, by the unanimous testimony of antiquity, in the
year 477.

Clinton shows, p. 249, that all reckonings of the time of the supremacy
of the Athenians, setting out from this, year, differ from one another
only in reference to the assumed termination. Also, Thucydides chapter
128, the expedition against Cyprus, and that against Byzantium, are
connected as immediately succeeding each other. If, however, Dodwell
were compelled by the force of the arguments to acknowledge that these
events, which he compresses into one year, do not, as he assumes (p.
61), belong to the year 470, but to the year 477, he would surely be
compelled, perceiving it to be impossible to lengthen out the thread of
the events until the year 465, to give up the whole hypothesis. The
dissatisfaction of the allies was followed by the recal of Pausanias.
That this belongs still to the same year plainly appears, partly from
the nature of the case itself, since it pre-supposes a continuance of
supremacy, partly from Thucydides, chapter 95: ἐν τούτῳ δε οἱ
Λακεδαιμόνιοι μετεπέμποντο Παυσανίαν ἀνακρινοῦντες ὧν περὶ ἑπυνθάνοντο
en toutō de hoi Lakedaimonioi metepemponto Pausanian anakrinountes hōn
peri epunthanonto.

Pausanias having come to Sparta, and been there set at liberty, now
betook himself privately in a galley to Byzantium. This cannot have
happened long afterward, for Thucydides, chapter 128, immediately
subjoins it, and what is of the most importance, Pausanias finds the
fleet still at Byzantium. That his residence there did not long continue
appears from the account of Thucydides, chapter 131, that he was
forcibly expelled thence by the Athenians. He now retired to the colony
in Troas; from there he was recalled to Sparta, after it had been
reported that he kept up an understanding with the barbarians. The
Ephori threw him into prison, but soon after released him. At this time
his intercourse with Themistocles look place, who, being at the time
already expelled from Athens, resided at Argos, and thence made
excursions into the rest of the Peloponnesus. That Pausanias then for
the first time drew Themistocles into his plan, when the latter had been
driven from Athens, is asserted by Plutarch, and a personal intercourse
between them is rendered certain by all accounts.

That there was no considerable period between this release of Pausanias
and his death is clear. Pausanias was not condemned, because there was
no certain proof against him. It is, however, psychologically improbable
that he did not soon afford it, that he prudently kept himself from
giving open offence for a series of years, when we consider that he was
deprived of all prudence by his haughtiness, arising to madness; that he
himself rendered the execution of his treasonable plan impossible; that,
according to Thucydides, chapter 130, he went about in a Median dress,
and caused himself to be accompanied on a journey through Thrace with
Median and Egyptian satellites, spread a Persian table, made difficult
the access to his person, gave free course to his passions, of whom
Thucydides himself very significantly remarks, καὶ κατέχειν τὴν διάνοιαν
οὐκ ἡδύνατο ἀλλ ̓ ἔργοις βραχέσι προύδήλου, ἅ τῇ γνώμῃ γνώμῃ μειζόνως
ἐρέπειτα ἔμελλε πράξειν kai katechein tēn dianoian ouk ēdunato all'
ergois brachesi proudēlou, ha tē gnōmē meizonōs erepeita emelle praxein,
and of whose senseless arrogance the same historian, chapter 132, gives
an example, even out of the time immediately after the battle of Platea.
The discovery was effected by him who was to bring to Artabazus the last
letters to the king.

With what haste the transactions were carried on, and that by no means a
space of four years was consumed, is evident from the fact that the
king, in order to accelerate them, had expressly sent Artabazus to Asia
Minor. His death immediately followed the discovery (compare Thucydides
133). We surely do not assume too little when we give to these events a
period of three years. That we need not go beyond this is shown by Dio.
dorus, who compresses all these events into the year 477 (Ol. 75, 4).
How could he have done this, or how could such an error have arisen, if
the beginning and end had been separated from each other by a period of
eight or nine years?. How impossible it was for him, with his sources,
to place the destruction of Pausanias far beyond this time appears from
his fiction, which can in no other way be explained, of a twofold
accusation of Themistocles. If, now, we must place the death of
Pausanias about the year 474, and in no event later, the flight of
Themistocles cannot be placed farther back than the year 473.

For Themistocles, at the death of Pausanias, had already been a
considerable time in the Peloponnesus. His accusation followed
immediately after the event (compare Thucydides, I. 135); and the
combined interests of the Lacedemonians, to whom nothing could be more
desirable than to have the Athenians share their disgrace, and of the
enemies of Themistocles at Athens (Plut. Them. c. 23: κατεβόων μὲν αὐτοῦ
Λακεδαιμόνιοι, κατηγόρουν δ ̓ οἱ φθονοῦντες τῶν πολιτῶν kateboōn men
autou Lakedaimonioi, katēgoroun d' hoi phthonountes tōn politōn, would
cause the decision to be hastened as much as possible. Themistocles,
persecuted both by the Athenians and Lacedemonians, now flees from the
Peloponnesus to Corcyra. Being denied a residence there, he retires to
the opposite continent. In danger of being overtaken by his persecutors
(Thucydides chapter 136: καὶ διωκόμενος ὑπὸ τῶν προστεταγμένων κατὰ
πύστιν ᾖ χωροίη kai diōkomenos hupo tōn prostetagmenōn kata pustin ē
chōroiē, he sees himself compelled to flee to Admetus, the king of the
Molossians. Nor can he have long resided there, for, according to
Thucydides, chapter 137, he was sent forward by Admetus, as soon as his
persecutors came. And how can we suppose that they would have been long
behind him? How long could his place of residence have remained a
secret? It is expressly said by Thucydides, that the coming of his
persecutors, and the flight of Themistocles to Asia, very soon happened
(ὕστερον ου ̓ πολλῷ husteron ou pollō). It is true, that if we could
credit the account of Stesimbrotus, in Plut. chapter 24, we must assume
that the residence of Themistocles with Admetus continued some months,
for he related that his friends brought to him there his wife and
children, whom they had secretly conducted out of Athens. But that no
dependence is to be placed upon this is evident from the absurd fiction
of Stesimbrotus that immediately follows, which to the surprise even of
Plutarch (εἶτ ̓ οὐκ οἶδ ̓ ὅπως ἐπιλαθόμενος τούτων, η τὸν Θεμιστοκλέα
ποιῶν ἐπιλαθόμενον, πλεῖσαι φησιν, κ.τ.λ. eit' ouk oid' hopōs
epilathomenos toutōn, ē ton Themistoklea poiōn epilathomenon, pleisai
phēsin, etc.) he brings forward, without observing that the one fable
does away the other - namely, that Themistocles was sent by Admetus to
Sicily, and had desired of Hiero his daughter in marriage, with the
promise to bring Greece under subjection to him.

Plutarch designates Stesimbrotus as a shameless liar, Pericles, chapter
13. That the sons of Themistocles remained in Athens is manifest from a
relation in Suidas, and the testimony of Thucydides, chapter 137, and of
Plutarch, that the gold was first sent to Themistocles by his friends
after his arrival in Asia, to enable him to reward the service of the
captain who brought him to Asia, shows at the same time the
incorrectness of the assertion of Stesimbrotus, and confirms the opinion
that Themistocles remained in no one place of his flight long enough for
his friends to send to him there the necessary gold. Themistocles was
conducted by Admetus to Pidna, and from there he betook himself in a
boat directly to Asia. This, accordingly, since between the death of
Pausanias, and the coming of Themistocles into Asia there could at most
be only a year, can at latest have happened in the year 473, perhaps in
474; and even in the former case we are completely justified in placing
the beginning of the reign of Artaxerxes, which still cannot have
immediately coincided with the coming of Themistocles, in the year 474.

"4. On the supposition that the commencement of the reign of Artaxerxes,
and the flight of Themistocles, fall in 465, an extravagant old age must
be attributed to Charon of Lampsacus. According to Suidas, he was still
flourishing under the first Darius, Ol. 69, 504 b.c. Since now, in his
history, he mentions the flight of Themistocles to Artaxerxes, this
being placed in 465, he must have been employed in writing history at
least forty years. This is not, indeed, absolutely impossible; but, in a
doubtful case, it must be rejected as the more improbable alternative.
'Historice enim, non sunt explicandae - says Vitringa (Proll. in, Zach.
p. 29) - ex raris et insolentibus exemplis, sed ex communi vivendi lege
et ordine. Si res secus se habeat, in ipsa historia ascribitur ne fallat
incautos.' Compare his farther excellent remarks on this subject. That
this argument is not without force, is evident even from the efforts of
some advocates of the false chronology to set it aside by cutting the
knot. Suidas, after he has cited the above-mentioned determination of
the time of Charon, as he found it in his more ancient authorities,
subjoins, μᾶλλον δὲ ἦν ἐπὶ τῶν Περσικῶν mallon de ēn epi tōn Persikōn.
Creuzer, on the Fragm. Historr. Groec., p. 95, rejects this date without
farther examination, because it gives too great an age to Charon.

"5. According to Thucydides 1, 136, Themistocles, on his passage to
Asia, fell in with the Athenian fleet, which was besieging Naxos. This
siege of Naxos, however, according to the testimony of Thucydides,
chapter 100, which makes all other arguments superfluous, happened
before the great victory of the Athenians on the Eurymedon, which,
according to Diodorus, belongs to the year 470, and cannot be placed
later, because this was the first considerable undertaking of the
Athenians against the Persians, the war with whom formed the only ground
for the important requisitions which they made upon their allies.
Compare Thucydides i. 94. Hitherto, since the supremacy had passed over
to the Athenians, scarcely anything had been done against the Persians,
except the taking of the unimportant AEgon. Thucydides also leads us to
about the same year as that given by Diodorus, who connects the
defection of Thasos (467) with χρόνῳ ὕστερον chronō husteron, which
cannot stand where events immediately succeed each other. Even for these
reasons, the siege of Naxos and the flight of Themistocles, do not fall
after 471. If, however, we consider that Naxos was the first confederate
city with which the Athenians were involved in discord (compare
Thucydides, p. 1, 98) - which, from the nature of the case, as is
rendered especially clear by the remarks of Thucydides and a comparison
of the later historians, could scarcely have first happened after seven
years - and if we farther consider the way in which Thucydides (chapter
98) connects the events, from the transfer of the supremacy until the
capture of Naxos, with one another, we shall, without hesitation, place
the latter some years earlier, in the year 474 or 473.

"6. The flight of Themistocles falls at least three years earlier than
the battle on the Eurymedon, because in all probability he was dead
before the latter event. His death, however, must have been some years
subsequent to his coming into Asia (compare Thucydides chapter 138). One
year passed in learning the language, and some time, in any event, was
required for what is implied in ταύτης ἦῤχε τῆς χώρας, δίντος, κ.τ.λ.
tautēs ērche tēs chōras, dontos, etc. Thucydides relates that, according
to the account of some, Themistocles took poison, ἀδύνατον νομίσαντα
εἶναι ἐπιτελέσαι βασιλεῖ α ὑπέεσχετο adunaton nomisanta einai epitelesai
basilei a hupescheto. This pre-supposes that Themistocles was compelled
to fulfill his promises; and had this not been the case at his death,
the report that Thucydides only in this instance relied upon himself
could not have arisen. Plutarch expressly connects the death of
Themistocles with the expedition of Cimon. This is done by several
writers, with the mention of the most special circumstances (compare the
passages in Staveren on Nep. Them. 10) all of which may be regarded, as
they are by Cicero (Brut. chapter 11) and Nepos, as fictitious, and yet
the historical basis on which alone everything depends, "the fact" that
Thucydides died before the battle on the Eurymedon is firmly
established.

"7. Kruger (1. c. p. 218) has shown that the account of Plutarch, that
Themistocles reached an age of sixty-five years, forbids us to place his
death beyond the year 470, and therefore his flight beyond the year 473.
According to an account which has internal evidence of credibility, in
AElian, Var. Hist. iii. 21, Themistocles, as a small boy coming from
school, declined going out of the way of the tyrant Pisistratus.
Assuming that this happened in the last year of Pisistratus, 529 b.c.,
and that Themistocles was at that time six years old, he must have been
born in 535, and died in 470. Nor is it a valid objection that,
according to Plutarch, Themistocles was still living at the time of the
Cyprian expedition of Cimon (449 b.c.), and was still young at the
battle of Marathon. For the former rests on a manifest confounding of
the former event with the victory over the Persian fleet at Cyprus,
which is supposed to have immediately preceded the victory on the
Eurymedon (compare Diodor. 11, 60; Dahlmann, Forschungen, i. p. 69), and
the latter merely on a conclusion drawn from this error. 'Whoever,'
remarks Dahlmann, p. 71, 'reads without prejudice the passage,
Thucydides 1, 138, will perceive that the death of Themistocles followed
pretty soon after his settlement in Persia; probably in the second year,
if Thucydides is worthy of credit.'

"Until all these arguments are refuted, it remains true that the
Messianic interpretation of the prophecy is the only correct one, and
that the alleged pseudo-Daniel, as well as the real Daniel, possessed an
insight into the future, which could have been given only by the Spirit
of God; and hence, as this favor could have been shown to no deceiver,
the genuineness of the book necessarily follows, and the futility of all
objections against it is already manifest."

V. The only remaining point of inquiry on this verse is, as to the
division of the whole period of sixty-nine weeks into two smaller
portions of seven weeks and sixty-two weeks; that is, of the four
hundred and eighty-three years into one period of four hundred and
thirty-four years, and one of forty-nine years. This inquiry resolves
itself into another, Whether, after the issuing of the command in the
twentieth year of Artaxerxes, there was a period of forty-nine years
that was in any manner distinguished from what followed, or any "reason"
why an epoch should be made there? If the command in the twentieth of
Artaxerxes was in the year 454 b.c., then the subtraction of forty-nine
years from this would make the year 405 b.c. the marked period; that is,
about that time some important change would occur, or a new series of
affairs would commence which would properly separate the previous period
from what followed.

Now, the fair interpretation of this passage respecting the seven weeks,
or forty-nine years, undoubtedly is, that that time would be required in
rebuilding the city, and in settling its affairs on a permanent
foundation, and that, from the close of that time, another period of
sixty-two weeks, or four hundred and thirty-four years, would elapse to
the appearing of the Messiah. It is true that this is not distinctly
specified in the text, and true that in the text the phrase "the street
shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous times," is not
limited expressly to either period, but it is also said in the next
verse, that the period of sixty-two weeks would be terminated by the
appearing of the Messiah, or by his being cut off, and, therefore, it is
fair to presume that the previous period of seven weeks was to be
characterized particularly as the "troubleus times" in which the street
and the wall were to be built again. The inquiry now is, Whether that
time was actually occupied in rebuilding and restoring the city? In
regard to this, it may be remarked,

\(1\) That there is a strong "probability" that a considerable time
would be necessary to rebuild the walls of the city, and to restore
Jerusalem to a condition like that in which it was before the captivity.
We are to remember that it had been long lying in ruins; that the land
was desolate; that Jerusalem had no commercial importance to make its
growth rapid; that there were few in the city on whom reliance could be
placed in rebuilding it; that a large portion of the materials for
rebuilding it was to be brought from a distance; that the work was
opposed with much determination by the Samaritans; that it was
necessary, as Nehemiah informs us, in building the walls, that the
workmen should have a weapon of defense in one hand while they labored
with the other, and that those who were engaged on it were mostly poor.
When these things are considered, it is at least not improbable that the
period of forty-nine years would be required before it could be said
that the work was fully completed.

\(2\) a more material question, however, is, whether the facts in the
case confirm this, or whether there was such a termination of the
rebuilding of the city at about that period, that it could be said that
the time occupied was seven weeks rather than, for example, six, or
five, or nine. It may not be necessary so to make this out as to
determine the precise year, or the termination of forty-nine years. but
in a general division of the time, it is necessary, undoubtedly, so to
determine it as to see that that time should have been designated,
rather than one equally general at the close of one week, or two, or
six, or nine, or any other number. Now that that was the period of the
completion of the work contemplated by the decree issued under
Artaxerxes, and the work undertaken by Nehemiah, it is not difficult to
show:

\(a\) It is reasonable to presume that the time referred to in the seven
weeks would be the rebuilding of the city, and the restoration of its
affairs to its former state - or the completion of the arrangements to
restore the nation from the effects of the captivity, and to put it on
its former footing. This was the main inquiry by Daniel; this would be a
marked period; this would be that for which the "commandment would go
forth;" and this would constitute a natural division of the time.

\(b\) As a matter of fact, the completion of the work undertaken by
Nehemiah, under the command of the Persian kings, reached to the period
here designated; and his last act as governor of Judea, in restoring the
people, and placing the affairs of the nation on its former basis,
occurred at just about the period of the forty-nine years after the
issuing of the command by Artaxerxes Longimanus. That event, as is
supposed above, occurred 454 b.c. The close of the seven weeks, or of
the forty-nine years, would therefore be 405 b.c. This would be about
the last year of the reign of Darius Nothus. See the table above.
Nehemiah was twice governor of Judea, and the work of restoration which
he undertook was not completed until his being the second time in that
office. The first time he remained twelve years in office, for he
received his commission in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, and in the
thirty-second year he returned again to him, [Neh
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#006). This, according to the
computation above, would bring it down to 442 b.c. How long he then
remained with the king of Persia he does not definitely state himself,
but says it was "certain days," [Neh
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#006). After this, he again obtained
permission of the king to return to Jerusalem, and went back the second
time as governor of Judea, [Neh
13:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#006). The time from his first return
to Persia, after the twelve years that he spent in Judea to the year 405
b.c., would be thirty-seven years. According to this, the close of the
"seven weeks," and the completion of the enterprise of "rebuilding and
restoring" the city, must have been at the end of that thirty-seven
years. In reference to this, it may be remarked,

\(1\) That Nehemiah is known to have lived to a great age (Josephus);
yet, supposing he was thirty years old when he was first appointed
governor of Judea, and that the time referred to at the close of the
"seven weeks," or forty-nine years, was the completion of his work in
the restoration of the affairs of Jerusalem, the whole period would only
reach to the seventy-ninth year of his age.

\(2\) The last act of Nehemiah in restoring the city occurred in the
fifteenth year of the reign of Darius Notbus - according to Prideaux
(Con. II. 206, following) - that is, 408 b.c. This would make, according
to the common computation of chronology, a difference from the estimate
above of only three years, and, perhaps, considering that the time of
"seven weeks" is a reckoning in round numbers, this would be an estimate
of sufficient accuracy. But, besides this, it is to be remembered that
the exact chronology to a year or a month cannot be made out with
absolute certainty; and taking all the circumstances into consideration,
it is remarkable that the period designated in the prophecy coincides so
nearly with the historical record. The only remaining inquiries,
therefore, are, whether the last act of Nehemiah referred to occurred at
the time mentioned - the 15th of Darius Nothus, or 408 b.c. - and
whether that was of sufficient prominence and importance to divide the
two periods of the prophecies, or to be a proper closing up of the work
of restoring and rebuilding Jerusalem. What he did in his office as
governor of Judea, at his second visitation to Jerusalem, is recorded in
Neh. 13:7-31.

The particular acts which he performed consisted in removing certain
abuses which had been suffered to grow up in his absence respecting the
temple service, by which the temple had become greatly polluted [Neh
13:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#007); in restoring the Sabbath to
its proper observance, which had become greatly disregarded [Neh
13:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#015); and in constraining those
Jews who had contracted unlawful marriages to separate themselves from
their wives [Neh 13:23-31](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#023). These acts
were necessary to put the affairs of the temple, and the condition of
the city, on their former basis. The last of these acts - the separation
of those who had contracted unlawful marriages from their wives, is that
which designates the close of the "seven weeks," and respecting which
the date is to be sought. This is stated in the book of Nehemiah [Neh
13:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#028) to have occurred in the time of
"one of the sons of Joiada, the son of Eliashib the high priest,
son-in-law to Sanballat the Horonite." That is, it occurred when Joiada
was high priest.

But, according to the "Chr. Alexandrinum," Joiada succeeded his father
in the office in the eleventh year of Darius Nothus, and Prideaux
supposes, without improbability, that this event may have occurred as
long as four years after he entered on the office of high priest, which
would bring it to the fifteenth of Darius Nothus, or 408 b.c. Compare
Jahn, Heb. Com. pp. 179-182; and Prideaux, Con. ii. 206-210. The time,
then, if this be the event referred to, is sufficiently accurate to make
it coincide with the prophecy - sufficiently so to divide the previous
period from what succeeded it. The event itself was of sufficient
importance to have a place here. It was, in fact, finishing what was
necessary to be done in order to a completion of the purpose to "restore
and rebuild Jerusalem." It was in fact "the restoration of Jewish
affairs under the Persian edict," or what was accomplished in fact under
that edict in placing the Jewish affairs on the proper basis - the basis
on which they were substantially before the captivity.

This was the termination of that captivity in the fullest sense, and
divided the past from the future - or constituted a "period or epoch" in
the history of the Jewish people. It remains only to add, on this verse
- and the remark will be equally applicable to the exposition of the two
remaining verses of the chapter - that on the supposition that this had
been written after the coming of the Messiah, and it had been designed
to frame what would seem to be a prophecy or prediction of these events,
the language here Would be such as would have been appropriately
employed. From the time of the going forth of the command to rebuild the
city, the whole duration would have been accurately divided into two
great portions - that requisite for the completion of the work of
restoring the city, and that extending to the coming of the Messiah, and
the former would have been made to terminate where it is now supposed
the period of "seven weeks," or forty-nine years, did actually
terminate. If this would have been the correct apportionment in a
"historic" review, it is correct as a "prophetic" review.

[Daniel 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">dan 9:26</span></span>

And after threescore and two weeks - After the completion of the last
period of four hundred and thirty-four years. The angel had shown in the
previous verse what would be the characteristic of the first period of
"seven weeks" - that during that time the wall and the street would be
built in circumstances of general distress and anxiety, and he now
proceeds to state what would occur in relation to the remaining
sixty-two weeks. The particular thing which would characterize that
period would be, that the Messiah would be cut off, and that the series
of events would commence which would terminate in the destruction of the
city and the temple. He does not say that this would be immediately on
the termination of the sixty-two weeks, but he says that it would be
"after" אחרי 'achărēy - "subsequent" to the close of that period. The
word does not mean necessarily immediately, but it denotes what is to
succeed - to follow - and would be well expressed by the word
"afterward:" [Gen 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#014); [Gen
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#019); [Gen
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026), et al. See Gesenius, Lexicon
The natural meaning here would be, that this would be the "next event"
in the order of events to be reckoned; it would be that on which the
prophetic eye would rest subsequent to the close of the period of
sixty-two weeks. There are two circumstances in the prophecy itself
which go to show that it is not meant that this would immediately
follow:

\(a\) One is, that in the previous verse it is said that the "sixty-two
weeks" would extend "unto the Messiah;" that is, either to his birth or
to his manifestation as such; and it is not implied anywhere that he
would be "cut off" at once on his appearing, nor is such a supposition
reasonable, or one that would have been embraced by an ancient student
of the prophecies;

\(b\) the other is, that, in the subsequent verse, it is expressly said
that what he would accomplish in causing the oblation to cease would
occur "in the midst of the week;" that is, of the remaining one week
that would complete the seventy. This could not occur if he were to be
"cut off" immediately at the close of the sixty-two weeks.

The careful student of this prophecy, therefore, would anticipate that
the Messiah would appear at the close of the sixty-two weeks, and that
he would continue during a part, at least, of the remaining one week
before he would be cut off. This point could have been clearly made out
from the prophecy before the Messiah came.

Shall Messiah - Notes, [Dan 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025).

Be cut off - The word used here (כרת kârath) means, properly, to cut, to
cut off, as a part of a garment, [Sa1
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#005) (6), 11 (12); a branch of a tree,
[Num 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#023); the prepuce, [Exo
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#025); the head, [Sa1
17:51](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#051); [Sa1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#004); to cut down trees, [Deu
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#005); [Isa
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#008); [Isa
44:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#014); [Jer
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#003); [Jer
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#007). Then it means to cut off
persons, to destroy, [Deu 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#020); [Jer
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#019); [Gen
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#011); [Psa
37:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#009); [Pro
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#022); [Pro
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#031), et al. scepe. The phrase, "that
soul shall be cut off from his people," "from the midst of the people,"
"from Israel," "from the congregation," etc., occurs frequently in the
Scriptures (compare [Gen 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#014); [Lev
7:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#020); [Num
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#030); [Num
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#013), [Num
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#020); [Exo
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#019), et al.), and denotes the
punishment of death in general, without defining the manner. "It is
never the punishment of exile." - Gesenius, Lexicon The proper notion or
meaning here is, undoubtedly, that of being cut off by death, and would
suggest the idea of a "violent" death, or a death by the agency of
others.

It would apply to one who was assassinated, or murdered by a mob, or who
was appointed to death by a judicial decree; or it might be applied to
one who was cut down in battle, or by the pestilence, or by lightning,
or by shipwreck, but it would not naturally or properly be applied to
one who had lived out his days, and died a peaceful death. We always now
connect with the word the idea of some unusual interposition, as when we
speak of one who is cut down in middle life. The ancient translators
understood it of a violent death. So the Latin "Vulgate, occidetur
Christus;" Syriac, "the Messiah shall be slain," or put to death. It
need not be here said that this phrase would find a complete fulfillment
in the manner in which the Lord Jesus was put to death, nor that this is
the very language in which it is proper now to describe the manner in
which he was removed. He was cut off by violence; by a judicial decree:
by a mob; in the midst of his way, etc. If it should be admitted that
the angel meant to describe the manner of his death, he could not have
found a single word that would have better expressed it.

But not for himself - Margin, "and shall have nothing." This phrase has
given rise to not a little discussion, and not a little diversity of
opinion. The Latin Vulgate is, "et non erit ejus populus, qui eum
negaturus est" - "and they shall not be his people who shall deny him."
Theodotion (in the Septuagint), καὶ κρίμα οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν ἀυτῷ kai krima
ouk estin en autō - "and there is no crime in him." Syriac, "And it is
not with him." The Hebrew is לו ואין ve'ēyn lô - and the interpretation
turns on the meaning of the word אין 'ēyn. Hengstenberg maintains that
it is never used in the sense of לא lo' (not), but that it always
conveys the idea of "nothing," or "non-existence," and that the meaning
here is, that, then, "there was nothing to him;" that is, that he ceased
to have authority and power, as in the cutting off of a prince or ruler
whose power comes to an end.

Accordingly he renders it, "and is not to him;" that is, his dominion,
authority, or power over the covenant people as an anointed prince,
would cease when he was cut off, and another one would come and desolate
the sanctuary, and take possession. Bertholdt renders it, Ohne
Nachfolger von den Seinigen zu haben - "without any successors of his
own " - meaning that his family, or that the dynasty would be cut off,
or would end with him. He maintains that the whole phrase denotes "a
sudden and an unexpected death," and that it here means that he would
have no successor of his own family. He applies it to Alexander the
Great. Lengerke renders it, Und nicht ist vorhanden, der ihm, angehoret
- and explains the whole to mean, "The anointed one (as the lawful king)
shall be cut off, but it shall not then be one who belongs to his family
(to wit, upon the throne), but a Prince shall come to whom the crown did
not belong, to whom the name anointed could not properly belong."

Maurer explains it, "There shall be to him no successor or lawful heir."
Prof. Stuart renders it, "One shall be cut off, and there shall be none
for it" (the people). C. B. Michaelis, "and not to be will be his lot."
Jacch. and Hitzig, "and no one remained to him." Rosch, "and no one was
present for him." Our translation - "but not for himself" - was
undoubtedly adopted from the common view of the atonement - that the
Messiah did not die for himself, but that his life was given as a ransom
for others. There can be no doubt of that fact to those who hold the
common doctrine of the atonement, and yet it maybe doubted whether the
translators did not undesignedly allow their views of the atonement to
shape the interpretation of this passage, and whether it can be fairly
made out from the Hebrew. The ordinary meaning of the Hebrew word אין
'ēyn is, undoubtedly, "nothing, emptiness" - in the sense of there being
nothing (see Gesenius, Lexicon); and, thus applied, the sense here would
be, that after he was cut off, or in consequence of his being cut off,
what he before possessed would cease, or there would be "nothing" to
him; that is, either his life would cease, or his dominion would cease,
or he would be cut off as the Prince - the Messiah. This interpretation
appears to be confirmed by what is immediately said, that another would
come and would destroy the city and the sanctuary, or that the
possession would pass into his bands.

It seems probable to me that this is the fair interpretation. The
Messiah would come as a "Prince." It might be expected that he would
come to rule - to set up a kingdom. But he would be suddenly cut off by
a violent death. The anticipated dominion over the people as a prince
would not be set up. It would not pertain to him. Thus suddenly cut off,
the expectations of such a rule would be disappointed and blasted. He
would in fact set up no such dominion as might naturally be expected of
an anointed prince; he would have no successor; the dynasty would not
remain in his hands or his family, and soon the people of a foreign
prince would come and would sweep all away. This interpretation does not
suppose that the real object of his coming would be thwarted, or that he
would not set up a kingdom in accordance with the prediction properly
explained, but that such a kingdom as would be expected by the people
would not be set up.

He would be cut off soon after he came, and the anticipated dominion
would not pertain to him, or there would be "nothing" of it found in
him, and soon after a foreign prince would come and destroy the city and
the sanctuary. This interpretation, indeed, will take this passage away
as a proof-text of the doctrine of the atonement, or as affirming the
design of the death of the Messiah, but it furnishes a meaning as much
in accordance with the general strain of the prophecy, and with the
facts in the work of the Messiah. For it was a natural expectation that
when he came he would set up a kingdom - a temporal reign - and this
expectation was extensively cherished among the people. He was, however,
soon cut off, and all such hopes at once perished in the minds of his
true followers (compare [Luk 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#021)),
and in the minds of the multitudes who, though not his true followers,
began to inquire whether he might not be the predicted Messiah - the
Prince to sit on the throne of David. But of such an anticipated
dominion or rule, there was "nothing" to him.

All these expectations were blighted by his sudden death, and soon,
instead of his delivering the nation from bondage and setting up a
visible kingdom, a foreign prince would come with his forces and would
sweep away everything. Whether this would be the interpretation affixed
to these words before the advent of the Messiah cannot now be
determined. We have few remains of the methods in which the Hebrews
interpreted the ancient prophecies, and we may readily suppose that they
would not be disposed to embrace an exposition which would show them
that the reign of the Messiah, as they anticipated it, would not occur,
but that almost as soon as he appeared, he would be put to death, and
the dominion pass away, and the nation be subjected to the ravages of a
foreign power. "And the people of the prince that shall come." Margin,
"And they (the Jews) shall be no more his people; or, the Prince's
(Messiah's) future people." This seems to be rather an explanation of
the meaning, than a translation of the Hebrew. The literal rendering
would be, "and the city, and the sanctuary, the people of a prince that
comes, shall lay waste." On the general supposition that this whole
passage refers to the Messiah and his time, the language used here is
not difficult of interpretation, and denotes with undoubted accuracy the
events that soon followed the "cutting off" of the Messiah. The word
"people" (עם ‛am) is a word that may well be applied to subjects or
armies - such a people as an invading prince or warrior would lead with
him for purposes of conquest. It denotes properly

\(a\) a people, or tribe, or race in general; and then

\(b\) the people as opposed to kings, princes, rulers (compare λαός
laos, the people as opposed to chiefs in Homer, Iliad ii. 365, xiii.
108, xxiv. 28): and then as soldiers, [Jdg
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#002). Hence, it may be applied, as it
would be understood to be here, to the soldiers of the prince that
should come.

Of the prince that shall come - The word "prince" here (נגיד nāgı̂yd) is
the same which occurs in [Dan 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025),
"Messiah the prince." It is clear, however, that another prince is meant
here, for

\(a\) it is just said that that prince - the Messiah - would be "cut
off," and this clearly refers to one that was to follow;

\(b\) the phrase "that is to come" (הבא habbâ') would also imply this.

It would naturally suggest the idea that he would come from abroad, or
that he would be a foreign prince - for he would "come" for the purposes
of destruction. No one can fail to see the applicability of this to the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Roman power, after the Lord Jesus was
put to death. If that was the design of the prophecy, or if it be
admitted that the prophecy contemplated that, the language could not
have been better chosen, or the prediction more exact. No one can
reasonably doubt that, if the ancient Hebrews had understood the former
part of the prophecy, as meaning that the true Messiah would be put to
death soon after his appearing, they could not fail to anticipate that a
foreign prince would soon come and lay waste their city and sanctuary.

Shall destroy the city and the sanctuary - The "holy place" - the
temple. This is the termination of the prophecy. It begins with the
command to "rebuild and restore" the city, and ends with its
destruction. The time is not fixed, nor is there in the prophecy any
direct intimation when it would occur, unless it be found in the general
declaration in [Dan 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024), that
"seventy weeks were determined upon the people and the city." The whole
scope of the prophecy, however, would lead to the supposition that this
was soon to occur after the Messiah should be "cut off." The series of
events under the Romans which led to the destruction of the city and
temple, in fact, began very soon after the death of the Lord Jesus, and
ceased only when the temple was wholly demolished, and the city was
rased to its foundations.

And the end thereof - Hebrew, "its end," or "his end" - קצו qı̂tsô. It is
not certain as to what the word "it" (ו ô) here refers. It may be either
the end of the city, or of the prince, or of the prophecy, so far as the
grammatical construction is concerned. As the principal and immediate
subject of the prophecy, however, is the city, it is more natural to
refer it to that. Hengstenberg renders it, "it will end," supposing,
with Vitringa, that it refers to the subject of the discourse: "the
thing - the whole affair - all that is here predicted in this series of
events - will end with a flood." This accords well with the whole design
of the prophecy.

With a flood - בשׁטף basheṭeph. That is, it shall be like an overflowing
flood. The word used here means a "gushing, outpouring," as of rain,
[Job 38:25](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#025); of a torrent, [Pro
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#004); an overflowing, inundation,
flood, [Psa 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#006); [Nah
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#008). Hence, it would appropriately
denote the ravages of an army, sweeping everything away. It would be
like a sudden inundation, carrying everything before it. No one can
doubt that this language is applicable in every respect to the
desolations brought upon Jerusalem by the Roman armies.

And unto the end of the war desolations are determined - Margin, "it
shall be cut off by desolations." Hengstenberg renders this, "and unto
the end is war, a decree of ruins." So Lengerke - and his aufs Ende
Krieg und Beschluss der Wusten. Bertholdt renders it, "and the great
desolations shall continue unto the end of the war." The Latin Vulgate
renders it, et post finem belli statuta desolatio - "and after the end
of the war desolation is determined." Prof. Stuart translates it, "and
unto the end shall be war, a decreed measure of desolations." The
literal meaning of the passage is, "and unto the end of the war
desolations are decreed," or determined. The word rendered "determined"
(חרץ chârats) means, properly, to cut, cut in, engrave; then to decide,
to determine, to decree, to pass sentence. See the notes at [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024). Here the meaning naturally is,
that such desolations were settled or determined as by a decree or
purpose. There was something which made them certain; that is, it was a
part of the great plan here referred to in the vision of the seventy
weeks, that there should be such desolations extending through the war.
The things which would, therefore, be anticipated from this passage
would be,

\(a\) that there would be war. This is implied also in the assurance
that the people of a foreign prince would come and take the city.

\(b\) That this war would be of a "desolating" character, or that it
would in a remarkable manner extend and spread ruin over the land. All
wars are thus characterized; but it would seem that this would do it in
a remarkable manner.

\(c\) That these desolations would extend through the war, or to its
close. There would be no intermission; no cessation. It is hardly
necessary to say that this was, in fact, precisely the character of the
war which the Romans waged with the Jews after the death of the Saviour,
and which ended in the destruction of the city and temple; the overthrow
of the whole Hebrew polity; and the removal of great numbers of the
people to a distant and perpetual captivity. No war, perhaps, has been
in its progress more marked by desolation; in none has the purpose of
destruction been more perseveringly manifested to its very close. The
"language" here, indeed, might apply to many wars - in a certain sense
to all wars; to none, however, would it be more appropriate than to the
wars of the Romans with the Jews.

[Daniel 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">dan 9:27</span></span>

And he shall confirm the covenant - literally, "he shall make strong" -
והגביר vehı̂gebı̂yr. The idea is that of giving strength, or stability; of
making firm and sure. The Hebrew word here evidently refers to the
"covenant" which God is said to establish with his people - so often
referred to in the Scriptures as expressing the relation between Him and
them, and hence used, in general, to denote the laws and institutions of
the true religion - the laws which God has made for his church; his
promises to be their protector, etc., and the institutions which grow
out of that relation. The margin reads it, more in accordance with the
Hebrew, "a," meaning that he would confirm or establish "a covenant"
with the many. According to this, it is not necessary to suppose that it
was any existing covenant that it referred to, but that he would ratify
what was understood by the word "covenant;" that is, that he would lead
many to enter into a true and real covenant with God. This would be
fulfilled if he should perform such a work as would bring the "many"
into a relation to God corresponding to what was sustained to him by his
ancient people; that is, bring them to be his true friends and
worshippers.

The meaning of the expression here cannot be mistaken, that during the
time specified, "he" (whoever may be referred to) would, for "one week"
- pursue such a course as would tend to establish the true religion; to
render it more stable and firm; to give it higher sanctions in the
approbation of the "many," and to bring it to bear more decidedly and
powerfully on the heart. Whether this would be by some law enacted in
its favor; or by protection extended over the nation; or by present
example; or by instruction; or by some work of a new kind, and new
influences which he would set forth, is not mentioned, and beforehand
perhaps it could not have been well anticipated in what way this would
be. There has been a difference of opinion, however, as to the proper
nominative to the verb "confirm" - הגביר hı̂gebı̂yr - whether it is the
Messiah, or the foreign prince, or the "one week." Hengstenberg prefers
the latter, and renders it, "And one week shall confirm the covenant;
with many."

So also Lengerke renders it. Bertholdt renders it "he," that is, "he
shall unite himself firmly with many for one week" - or, a period of
seven years, ein Jahrsiebend lang. It seems to me that it is an
unnatural construction to make the word "week" the nominative to the
verb, and that the more obvious interpretation is to refer it to some
person to whom the whole subject relates. It is not usual to represent
time as an agent in accomplishing a work. In poetic and metaphorical
language, indeed, we personate time as cutting down men, as a destroyer,
&e., but this usage would not justify the expression that "time would
confirm a covenant with many." That is, evidently, the work of
conscious, intelligent agent; and it is most natural, therefore, to
understand this as of one of the two agents who are spoken of in the
passage. These two agents are the "Messiah," and the "prince that should
come."

But it is not reasonable to suppose that the latter is referred to,
because it is said [Dan 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026) that the
effect and the purpose of his coming would be to "destroy the city and
the sanctuary." He was to come "with a flood," and the effect of his
coming would be only desolation. The more correct interpretation,
therefore, is to refer it to the Messiah, who is the principal subject
of the prophecy; and the work which, according to this, he was to
perform was, during that "one week," to exert such an influence as would
tend to establish a covenant between the people and God. The effect of
his work during that one week would be to secure their adhesion to the
"true religion;" to confirm to them the Divine promises, and to
establish the principles of that religion which would lead them to God.
Nothing is said of the mode by which that would be done; and anything,
therefore, which would secure this would be a fulfillment of the
prophecy. As a matter of fact, if it refers to the Lord Jesus, this was
done by his personal instructions, his example, his sufferings and
death, and the arrangements which he made to secure the proper effect of
his work on the minds of the people - all designed to procure for them
the friendship and favor of God, and to unite them to him in the bonds
of an enduring covenant.

With many - לרבים lârabı̂ym. Or, for many; or, unto many. He would
perform a work which would pertain to many, or which would bear on many,
leading them to God. There is nothing in the word here which would
indicate who they were, whether his own immediate followers, or those
who already were in the covenant. The simple idea is, that this would
pertain to "many" persons, and it would be fulfilled if the effect of
his work were to confirm "many" who were already in the covenant, or if
he should bring "many" others into a covenant relation with God. Nothing
could be determined from the meaning of the word used here as to which
of these things was designed, and consequently a fair fulfillment would
be found if either of them occurred. If it refers to the Messiah, it
would be fulfilled if in fact the effect of his coming should be either
by statute or by instructions to confirm and establish those who already
sustained this relation to God, or if he gathered other followers, and
confirmed them in their allegiance to God.

For one week - The fair interpretation of this, according to the
principles adopted throughout this exposition, is, that this includes
the space of seven years. See the notes at [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024). This is the one week that makes
up the seventy - seven of them, or forty-nine years, embracing the
period from the command to rebuild the city and temple to its completion
under Nehemiah; sixty-two, or four hundred and thirty-four years, to the
public appearing of the Messiah, and this one week to complete the whole
seventy, or four hundred and ninety years "to finish the transgression,
and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and
to bring in everlasting righteousness," etc., [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024). It is essential, therefore, to
find something done, occupying these seven years, that would go to
"confirm the covenant" in the sense above explained. In the
consideration of this, the attention is arrested by the announcement of
an important event which was to occur "in the midst of the week," to
wit, in causing the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, showing that
there was to be an important change occurring during the "week," or that
while he would be, in fact, confirming the covenant through the week in
some proper sense, the sacrifice and oblation would cease, and therefore
the confirming of the many in the covenant must depend on something else
than the continuation of the sacrifice and oblation. In regard to this
language, as in respect to all the rest of the prophecy, there are, in
fact, just two questions: one is, what is fairly to be understood by the
words, or what is the proper interpretation, independent of anything in
the result; the other is, whether anything occurred in what is regarded
as the fulfillment which corresponds with the language so interpreted.

\(1\) The first inquiry then, is, What is the fair meaning of the
language? Or what would one who had a correct knowledge of the proper
principles of interpretation understand by this? Now, in regard to this,
while it may be admitted, perhaps, that there would be some liability to
a difference of view in interpreting it with no reference to the event,
or no shaping of its meaning by the event, the following things seem to
be clear:

\(a\) that the "one week," would comprise seven years, immediately
succeeding the appearance of the Messiah, or the sixty-two weeks, and
that there was something which he would do in "confirming the covenant,"
or in establishing the principles of religion, which would extend
through that period of seven years, or that that would be, in some
proper sense, "a period" of time, having a beginning - to wit, his
appearing, and some proper close or termination at the end of the seven
years: that is, that there would be some reason why that should be a
marked period, or why the whole should terminate there, and not at some
other time.

\(b\) That in the middle of that period of seven years, another
important event would occur, serving to divide that time into two
portions, and especially to be known as causing the sacrifice and
oblation to cease; in some way affecting the public offering of
sacrifice, so that from that time there would be in fact a cessation.

\(c\) And that this would be succeeded by the consummation of the whole
matter expressed in the words, "and for the overspreading of abomination
he shall make it desolate," etc. It is not said, however, that this
latter would immediately occur, but this would be one of the events that
would pertain to the fulfillment of the prophecy. There is nothing,
indeed, in the prediction to forbid the expectation that this would
occur at once, nor is there anything in the words which makes it
imperative that we should so understand it. It may be admitted that this
would be the most natural interpretation, but it cannot be shown that
that is required. It may be added, also, that this may not have
pertained to the direct design of the prophecy - which was to foretell
the coming of the Messiah, but that this was appended to show the end of
the whole thing. When the Messiah should have come, and should have made
an atonement for sin, the great design of rebuilding Jerusalem and the
temple would have been accomplished, and both might pass away. Whether
that would occur immediately or not might be in itself a matter of
indifference; but it was important to state here that it would occur,
for that was properly a completion of the design of rebuilding the city,
and of the purpose for which it had ever been set apart as a holy city.

\(2\) The other inquiry is whether there was that in what is regarded as
the fulfillment of this, which fairly corresponds with the prediction. I
have attempted above (on [Dan 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025)) to
show that this refers to the Messiah properly so called - the Lord Jesus
Christ. The inquiry now is, therefore, whether we can find in his life
and death what is a fair fulfillment of these reasonable expectations.
In order to see this, it is proper to review these points in their
order:

\(a\) The period, then, which is embraced in the prophecy, is seven
years, and it is necessary to find in his life and work something which
would be accomplished during these seven years which could be properly
referred to as "confirming the covenant with many." The main difficulty
in the case is on this point, and I acknowledge that this seems to me to
be the most embarrassing portion of the prophecy, and that the solutions
which can be given of this are less satisfactory than those that pertain
to any other part. Were it not that the remarkable clause "in the midst
of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease," were
added, I admit that the natural interpretation would be, that he would
do this personally, and that we might look for something which he would
himself accomplish during the whole period of seven years. That clause,
however, looks as if some remarkable event were to occur in the middle
of that period, for the fact that he would tense the sacrifice and
oblation to cease - that is, would bring the rites of the temple to a
close - shows that what is meant by "confirming the covenant" is
different from the ordinary worship under the ancient economy. No Jew
would think of expressing himself thus, or would see how it was
practicable to "confirm the covenant" at the same time that all his
sacrifices were to cease. The confirming of the covenant, therefore,
during that "one week," must be consistent with some work or event that
would cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease in the middle of that
period.

\(b\) The true fulfillment, it seems to me, is to be found in the
bearing of the work of the Saviour on the Hebrew people - the ancient
covenant people of God - for about the period of seven years after he
entered on his work. Then the particular relation of his work to the
Jewish people ceased. It may not be practicable to make out the exact
time of "seven years" in reference to this, and it may be admitted that
this would not be understood from the prophecy before the things
occurred; but still there are a number of circumstances which will show
that this interpretation is not only plausibIe, but that it has in its
very nature strong probability in its favor. They are such as these:

\(1\) The ministry of the Saviour himself was wholly among the Jews, and
his work was what would, in their common language, be spoken of as
"confirming the covenant; "that is, it would be strengthening the
principles of religion, bringing the Divine promises to bear on the
mind, and leading men to God, etc.

\(2\) This same work was continued by the apostles as they labored among
the Jews. They endeavored to do the same thing that their Lord and
Master had done, with all the additional sanctions, now derived from his
life and death. The whole tendency of their ministry would have been
properly expressed in this language: that they endeavored to "confirm
the covenant" with the Hebrew people; that is, to bring them to just
views of the character of their natural covenant with God; to show them
how it was confirmed in the Messiah; to establish the ancient promises;
and to bring to bear upon them the sanctions of their law as it was now
fulfilled, and ratified, and enlarged through the Messiah. Had the
Saviour himself succeeded in this, or had his apostles, it would have
been, in fact, only "confirming the ancient covenant" - the covenant
made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; the covenant established under
Moses, and ratified by so many laws and customs among the people. The
whole bearing of the Saviour's instructions, and of his followers, was
to carry out and fulfill the real design of that ancient institution -
to show its true nature and meaning, and to impress it on the hearts of
men

\(3\) This was continued for about the period here referred to; at least
for a period so long that it could properly be represented in round
numbers as "one week," or seven years. The Saviour's own ministry
continued about half that time; and then the apostles prosecuted the
same work, laboring with the Jews for about the other portion, before
they turned their attention to the Gentiles, and before the purpose to
endearour to bring in the Jewish people was abandoned. They remained in
Jerusalem; they preached in the synagogues; they observed the rites of
the temple service; they directed their first attention everywhere to
the Hebrew people; they had not yet learned that they were to turn away
from the "covenant people," and to go to the Gentiles. It was a slow
process by which they were led to this. It required a miracle to
convince Peter of it, and to show him that it was right to go to
Cornelius Acts 10, as a representative of the Gentile people, and it
required another miracle to convert Saul of Tarsus, "the apostle of the
Gentiles," and to prepare him for the work of carrying the gospel to the
pagan world, and a succession of severe persecutions was demanded to
induce the apostles to leave Jerusalem, and to go abroad upon the face
of the earth to convey the message of salvation.

Their first work was among the Jewish people, and they would have
remained among them if they had not been driven away by these
persecutions, and been thus constrained to go to other lands. It is true
that it cannot be shown that this was a period of exactly "half a week,"
or three years and a half after the ascension of the Saviour, but, in a
prophecy of this nature, it was a period that might, in round numbers,
be well expressed by that; or the whole might be properly described by
"seventy weeks," or four hundred and ninety years, and the last portion
after the appearing of the Messiah as one of these weeks. There has been
much needless anxiety to make out the exact time to a month or a day in
regard to this prophecy - not remembering its general design, and not
reflecting how uncertain are all the questions in ancient chronology.
Compare the sensible remarks of Calvin on [Dan
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025).

\(4\) When this occurred; when the apostles turned away from the Hebrew
people, and gave themselves to their labors among the Gentiles, the work
of "confirming the covenant" with those to whom the promises had been
made, and to whom the law was given, ceased. They were regarded as
"broken off" and left, and the hope of success was in the Gentile world.
See the reasoning of the apostle Paul in Rom. 11. Jerusalem was given up
soon after to destruction, and the whole work, as contemplated in this
prophecy, ceased. The object for which the city and temple were rebuilt
was accomplished, and here was a proper termination of the "prophecy."
It was not necessary, indeed, that these should be at once destroyed,
but they were henceforth regarded as having fulfilled the work designed,
and as being now left to ruin. The ruin did not at once occur, but the
sacrifices thenceforward offered were without meaning, and the train of
events was constantly preparing that would sweep away city and temple
together. I suppose, therefore, that this last "one week" embraced the
period from the beginning of the ministry of the Saviour to that when
the direct and exclusive efforts to bring the principles of his religion
to bear on the Hebrew people, as carrying out the design of the covenant
made by God with their fathers, and confirmed with so many promises,
ceased, and the great effort was commenced to evangelize the pagan
world. Then was the proper close of the seventy weeks; what is added is
merely a statement of the winding up of the whole affair in the
destruction of the city and temple. That occurred, indeed, some years
after; but at this period all that was material in regard to that city
had taken place, and consequently that was all that was necessary to
specify as to the proper termination of the design of rebuilding the
city and the temple.

And in the midst of the week - The word here rendered "in the midst" -
חצי chētsı̂y - means, properly, half, the half part, [Exo
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#006); [Num
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#012); then the middle, or the midst,
[Jdg 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#003). The Vulgate renders it, in
dimidio; the Greek, ἐν τῳ ἡμίσει en tō hēmisei. Hengstenberg, "the
half." So Lengerke, die Halfte; Luther, mitten. The natural and obvious
interpretation is what is expressed in our translation, and that will
convey the essential idea in the original. It refers to something which
was to occur at about the middle portion of this time, or when about
half of this period was elapsed, or to something which it would require
half of the "one week," or seven years, to accomplish. The meaning of
the passage is fully met by the supposition that it refers to the Lord
Jesus and his work, and that the exact thing that was intended by the
prophecy was his death, or his being "cut off," and thus causing the
sacrifice and oblation to cease.

Whatever difficulties there may be about the "precise" time of our
Lord's ministry, and whether he celebrated three passovers or four after
he entered on his public work, it is agreed on all hands that it lasted
about three years and a half - the time referred to here. Though a few
have supposed that a longer period was occupied, yet the general belief
of the church has coincided in that, and there are few points in history
better settled. On the supposition that this pertains to the death of
the Lord Jesus, and that it was the design of the prophecy here to refer
to the effects of that death, this is the very language which would have
been used. If the period of "a week" were for any purpose mentioned,
then it would be indispensable to suppose that there would be an
allusion to the important event - in fact, the great event which was to
occur in the middle of that period, when the ends of the types and
ceremonies of the Hebrew people would be accomplished, and a sacrifice
made for the sins of the whole world.

He shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease - The word "he,"
in this place, refers to the Messiah, if the interpretation of the
former part of the verse is correct, for there can be no doubt that it
is the same person who is mentioned in the phrase "he shall confirm the
covenant with many." The words "sacrifice" and "oblation" refer to the
offerings made in the temple. The former word more properly denotes
"bloody" offerings; the latter "offerings" of any kind - whether of
flour, fruits, grain, etc. See these words explained in the notes at
[Isa 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011), [Isa
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013). The word rendered "cease"
(ישׁבית yashebı̂yt) means, properly, to rest (from the word Sabbath), and
then in Hiphil, to cause to rest, or to cause to cease. It conveys the
idea of "putting an end to" - as, for example, "war," [Psa
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#009); "contention," [Pro
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#018); "exultation," [Isa
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#010). - Gesenius. The literal
signification here would be met by the supposition that an end would be
made of these sacrifices, and this would occur either by their being
made wholly to cease to be offered at that time, or by the fact that the
object of their appointment was accomplished, and that henceforward they
would be useless and would die away.

As a matter of fact, so far as the Divine intention in the appointment
of these sacrifices and offerings was concerned, they "ceased" at the
death of Christ - in the middle of the "week." Then the great sacrifice
which they had adumbrated was offered. Then they ceased to have any
significancy, no reason existing for their longer continuance. Then, as
they never had had any efficacy in themselves, they ceased also to have
any propriety as types - for the thing which they had prefigured had
been accomplished. Then, too, began a series of events and influences
which led to their abolition, for soon they were interrupted by the
Romans, and the temple and the altars were swept away to be rebuilt no
more. The death of Christ was, in fact, the thing which made them to
cease, and the fact that the great atonement has been made, and that
there is now no further need of those offerings, is the only
philosophical reason which can be given why the Jews have never been
able again to rebuild the temple, and why for eighteen hundred years
they have found no place where they could again offer a bloody
sacrifice. The "sacrifice and the oblation" were made, as the result of
the coming of the Messiah, to "cease" for ever, and no power of man will
be able to restore them again in Jerusalem. Compare Gibbon's account of
the attempt of Julian to rebuild the temple at Jerusalem: Dec. and Fall,
ii. 35-37.

And for the overspreading of abominations he shall make it desolate -
The marginal reading here is very different, showing clearly the
perplexity of the translators: "Upon the battlements shall be the idols
of the desolator." There is great variety, also, in the ancient versions
in rendering this passage. The Latin Vulgate is, "And there shall be in
the temple the abomination of desolation." The Greek, "And upon the
temple shall be an abomination of desolations." The Syriac. "And upon
the extremities of the abomination shall rest desolation." The Arabic,
"And over the sanctuary shall there be the abomination of ruin." Luther
renders it, "And upon the wings shall stand the abomination of
desolation." Lengerke and Hengstenberg render it, "And upon the summit
of abomination comes the destroyer." Prof. Stuart, "And the water shall
be over a winged fowl of abominations." These different translations
show that there is great obscurity in the original, and perhaps exclude
the hope of being able entirely to free the passage from all
difficulties. An examination of the words, however, may perhaps enable
us to form a judgment of its meaning. The "literal" and "obvious" sense
of the original, as I understand it, is, "And upon the wing of the
abominations one causing desolation" - משׁמם שׁקיצים כנף ועל ve‛al kenap
shı̂qqytsı̂ym meshomēm. The word rendered "overspreading" (כנף kânâp)
means, properly, a "wing;" so called as "covering," or because it
"covers" - from כנף kânap), to cover, to hide. Then it denotes anything
having a resemblance to a wing, as an extremity, a corner, as

\(a\) of a garment, the skirt, or flap, [Sa1
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#004) (5), 11 (12); [Num
15:38](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#038), and hence, as the outer garment
was used by the Orientals to wrap themselves in at night, the word is
used for the extremity or border of a bed-covering, [Deu
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#030) [Deu
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#001); [Rut
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#009).

\(b\) It is applied to land, or to the earth - as the earth is compared
with a garment spread out, [Isa 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#016);
[Job 37:3](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#003); [Job
38:13](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#013).

\(c\) It is used to denote the highest point, or a battlement, a
pinnacle - as having a resemblance to a wing spread out.

So the word πτερύγιον pterugion is used in [Mat
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#005). See the notes at that passage. It
would seem most probable that the allusion by the word as applied to a
building would not be, as supposed by Gesenius (Lexicon), and by
Hengstenberg and Lengerke, to the "pinnacle or summit," but to some
roof, porch, or piazza that had a resemblance to the wings of a bird as
spread out - a use of the word that would be very natural and obvious.
The extended porch that Solomon built on the eastern side of the temple
would, not improbably, have, to one standing on the opposite Mount of
Olives, much the appearance of the wings of a bird spread out. Nothing
certain can be determined about the allusion here from the use of this
word, but the connection would lead us to suppose that the reference was
to something pertaining to the city or temple, for the whole prophecy
has a reference to the city and temple, and it is natural to suppose
that in its close there would be an allusion to it.

The use of the word "wing" here would lead to the supposition that what
is said would pertain to something in connection with the temple having
a resemblance to the wings of a bird, and the word "upon" (על ‛al) would
lead us to suppose that what was to occur would be somehow upon that.
The word rendered "abominations" (שׁקוּצים shı̂qqûtsı̂ym) means
"abominable" things, things to be held in detestation, as things
unclean, filthy garments, etc., and then idols, as things that are to be
held in abhorrence. The word שׁקוּץ shı̂qûts, is rendered abomination in
[Deu 29:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#017); [Kg1
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005), [Kg1
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007); [Kg2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#013), [Kg2
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#024); [Isa
66:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003); [Jer
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#001); [Jer
7:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#030); [Jer
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#027); [Jer
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#034); [Eze
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#011); [Eze
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#020); [Eze
20:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#007), [Eze
20:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#030); [Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027); [Dan
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#031); [Dan
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011); [Hos
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#010); [Zac
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#007); abominable idols in [Ch2
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#008) (in the margin abominations);
"detestable" in [Jer 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#018); [Eze
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#018), [Eze
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#021); [Eze
37:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#023); and "abominable filth" in [Nah
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#006). It does not occur elsewhere.

In most of these places it is applied to "idols," and the current usage
would lead us so to apply it, if there were nothing in the connection to
demand a different interpretation. It might refer to anything that was
held in abomination, or that was detestable and offensive. The word is
one that might be used of an idol god, or of anything that would pollute
or defile, or that was from any cause offensive. It is not used in the
Old Testament with reference to a "banner or military standard," but
there can be no doubt that it might be so applied as denoting the
standard of a foe - of a pagan - planted on any part of the temple - a
thing which would be particularly detestable and abominable in the sight
of the Jews. The word rendered "he shall make IT desolate" - משׁמם
meshomēm - is "he making desolate;" that is, "a desolator." It is a Poel
participle from שׁמם shâmēm - to be astonished, to be laid waste; and
then, in an active sense, to lay waste, to make desolate. - Gesenius.
The same word, and the same phrase, occur in [Dan
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#031) : "And they shall place the
abomination that maketh desolate," or, as it is in the margin,
"astonisheth."

There, also, the expression is used in connection with "taking away the
daily sacrifices." The word would be more properly rendered in this
place "desolator," referring to some one who would produce desolation.
There is great abruptness in the entire expression, and it is evident
that it was not the intention to give so clear a prediction in this that
it could be fully understood beforehand. The other portions of the
prophecy respecting the building of the city, and the coming of the
Messiah, and the work that he would accomplish, are much more clear, and
their meaning could have been made out with much more certainty. But, in
reference to this, it would seem, perhaps, that all that was designed
was to throw out suggestions - fragments of thought, that would rather
hint at the subject than give any continuous idea. Perhaps a much more
"abrupt" method of translation than what attempts to express it in a
continuous grammatical construction capable of being parsed easily,
would better express the state of the mind of the speaker, and the
language which he uses, than the ordinary versions.

The Masoretic pointing, also, may be disregarded, and then the real idea
would be better expressed by some such translation as the following: "He
shall cause the sacrifice and the offering to cease. And - upon the wing
- the porch of the temple - abominations! And a desolator!" That is,
after the ceasing of the sacrifice and the oblation, the mind is fixed
upon the temple where they had been offered. The first thing that
arrests the eye is some portion of the temple, here denoted by the word
"wing." The next is something abominable or detestable - an object to be
hated and loathed in the very temple itself. The next is a desolator -
one who had come to carry desolation to that very temple. Whether the
"abomination" is connected with the "desolator" or not is not intimated
by the language. It might or might not be. The angel uses language as
these objects strike the eye, and he expresses himself in this abrupt
manner as the eye rests on one or the other. The question then arises,
What does this mean? Or what is to be regarded as the proper
fulfillment? It seems to me that there can be no doubt that there is a
reference to the Roman standard or banners planted on some part of the
temple, or to the Roman army, or to some idols set up by the Romans -
objects of abomination to the Jews - as attracting the eye of the angel
in the distant future, and as indicating the close of the series of
events here referred to in the prophecy. The reasons for this opinion
are, summarily, the following:

\(a\) The "place or order" in which the passage stands in the prophecy.
It is "after" the coming of the Messiah; "after" the proper cessation of
the sacrifice and oblation, and at the close of the whole series of
events - the termination of the whole design about rebuilding the city
and the temple.

\(b\) The "language" is such as would properly represent that. Nothing
could be more appropriate, in the common estimation of the Jews, than to
speak of such an object as a Roman military standard planted in any part
of the temple, as an "abomination,;" and no word would better denote the
character of the Roman conqueror than the word "desolator" - for the
effect of his coming, was to lay the whole city and temple in ruins.

\(c\) The language of the Saviour in his reference to this would seem to
demand such an interpretation, [Mat
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015) : "When ye, therefore, shall see
the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the prophet stand in
the holy place," etc. There can be no reasonable doubt. that the Saviour
refers to this passage in Daniel (see the notes at [Mat
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015)), or that events occurred in the
attack on Jerusalem and the temple that would fully correspond with the
language used here. Josephus, for instance, says, that when the city was
taken, the Romans brought their ensigns into the temple, and placed them
over the eastern gate, and sacrificed to them there. "And now the
Romans," says he, "upon the flight of the seditious into the city, and
upon the burning of the holy house itself, and all the buildings round
about it, brought their ensigns into the temple, and set them over
against its eastern gate; and there they did offer sacrifices to them,
and there did they make Titus "Imperator" with the greatest acclamations
of joy." - "Jewish Wars," b. vi. ch. vi. Section 1. This fact fully
accords with the meaning of the language as above explained, and the
reference to it was demanded in order that the purpose of the prophecy
should be complete. Its proper termination is the destruction of the
city and temple - as its beginning is the order to rebuild them.

Even until the consummation - Until the completion - ועד־כלה
ye‛ad-kâlâh. That is, the series of events in the prophecy shall in fact
reach to the completion of everything pertaining to the city and temple.
The whole purpose in regard to that shall be completed. The design for
which it is robe rebuilt shall be consummated; the sacrifices to be
offered there shall be finished, and they shall be no longer efficacious
or proper; the whole civil and religious polity connected with the city
and temple shall pass away.

And that determined - ונחרצה venechĕrâtsâh. See this word explained in
the notes at [Dan 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024), [Dan
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026). See also the notes at [Isa
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#023). There seems to be an allusion
in the word here to its former use, as denoting that this is the
fulfillment of the determination in regard to the city and temple. The
idea is, that what was determined, or decided on, to wit, with reference
to the closing scenes of the city and temple, would be accomplished.

Shall be poured - תתך tı̂ttak. The word used here means to pour, to pour
out, to overflow - as rain, water, curses, anger, etc. It may be
properly applied to calamity or desolation, as these things may be
represented as "poured down" upon a people, in the manner of a storm.
Compare [Sa2 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#010); [Exo
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#033); [Psa
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006); [Eze
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#022); [Ch2
34:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#021); [Ch2
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#007); [Jer
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#020); [Jer
42:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#018); [Jer
44:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#006).

Upon the desolate - Margin, desolator. The Hebrew word (שׁומם shômēm) is
the same, though in another form (כל kal instead of פל pēl) which is
used in the previous part of the verse, and rendered "he shall make it
desolate," but which is proposed above to be rendered "desolator." The
verb שׁמם shâmēm is an intransitive verb, and means, in "Kal," the form
used here, to be astonished or amazed; then "to be laid waste, to be
made desolate" (Gesenius); and the meaning in this place, therefore, is
that which is desolate or laid waste - the wasted, the perishing, the
solitary. The reference is to Jerusalem viewed as desolate or reduced to
ruins. The angel perhaps contemplates it, as he is speaking, in ruins or
as desolate, and he sees this also as the termination of the entire
series of predictions, and, in view of the whole, speaks of Jerusalem
appropriately as "the desolate."

Though it would be rebuilt, yet it would be again reduced to desolation,
for the purpose of the rebuilding - the coming of the Messiah - would be
accomplished. As the prophecy finds Jerusalem a scene of ruins, so it
leaves it, and the last word in the prophecy, therefore, is
appropriately the word "desolate." The intermediate state indeed between
the condition of the city as seen at first and at the close is glorious
- for it embraces the whole work of the Messiah; but the beginning is a
scene of ruins, and so is the close. The sum of the whole in the latter
part of the verse may be expressed in a free paraphrase: "He, the
Messiah, shall cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease," by having
fulfilled in his own dcath the design of the ancient offerings, thus
rendering them now useless, and upon the outspreading - upon the temple
regarded as spread out, or some wing or portico, there are seen
abominable things - idolatrous ensigns, and the worship of foreigners. A
desolator is there, also, come to spread destruction - a foreign army or
leader. And this shall continue even to the end of the whole matter -
the end of the events contemplated by the prophecy - the end of the city
and the temple. And what is determined on - the destruction decreed -
shall be poured out like a tempest on the city doomed to desolation -
desolate as surveyed at the beginning of the prophecy - desolate at the
close, and therefore appropriately called "the desolate."

After this protracted examination of the meaning of this prophecy, all
the remark which it seems proper to make is, that this prediction could
have been the result only of inspiration. There is the clearest evidence
that the prophecy was recorded long before the time of the Messiah, and
it is manifest that it could not have been the result of any natural
sagacity. There is not the slightest proof that it was uttered as late
as the coming of Christ, and there is nothing better determined in
relation to any ancient matter than that it was recorded long before the
birth of the Lord Jesus. But it is equally clear that it could have been
the result of no mere natural sagacity. How could such events have been
foreseen except by Him who knows all things? How could the order have
been determined? How could the time have been fixed? How could it have
been anticipated that the Messiah, the Prince, would be cut off? How
could it have been known that he would cause the sacrifice and oblation
to cease? How could it have been ascertained that the period during
which he would be engaged in this would be one week - or about seven
years? How could it be predicted that a remarkable event would occur in
the middle of that period that would in fact cause the sacrifice and
oblation ultimately to cease? And how could it be conjectured that a
foreign prince would come, and plant the standard of abomination in the
holy city, and sweep all away - laying the city and the temple in ruins,
and bringing the whole polity to an end? These things lie beyond the
range of natural sagacity, and if they are fairly implied in this
prophecy, they demonstrate that this portion of the book is from God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 10](dan010)

</div>
