<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Daniel Index](dan.md)  
  [Previous](dan006)  [Next](dan008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001.md)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 7:0</span></span>

Section I. - Analysis of the Chapter

This chapter contains an account of a remarkable prophetic dream which
Daniel had in the first year of the reign of Belshazzar, and of the
interpretation of the dream. After a brief statement of the contents of
the chapter, it will be proper, in order to its more clear exposition,
to state the different methods which have been proposed for interpreting
it, or the different views of its application which have been adopted.
The chapter comprises the following main points: the vision, [Dan
7:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001.md); and the explanation, [Dan
7:15-28](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#015.md).

I. The vision, [Dan 7:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001.md). The dream
occurred in the first year of the reign of Belshazzar, and was
immediately written out. Daniel is represented as standing near the sea,
and a violent wind rages upon the sea, tossing the waves in wild
commotion. Suddenly he sees four monsters emerge from the agitated
waves, each one apparently remaining for a little time, and then
disappearing. The first, in its general form, resembled a lion, but had
wings like an eagle. On this he attentively gazed, until the wings were
plucked away, and the beast was made to stand upright as a man, and the
heart of a man was given to it.

Nothing is said as to what became of the beast after this. Then there
appeared a second beast, resembling a bear, raising itself up on one
side, and having three ribs in its mouth, and a command was given to it
to arise and devour much flesh. Nothing is said further of what became
of this beast. Then there arose another beast like a leopard, with four
wings, and four heads, and to this beast was given wide dominion.
Nothing is said as to what became of this animal. Then there arose a
fourth beast more remarkable still. Its form is not mentioned, but it
was fierce and strong. It had great iron teeth. It trampled down
everything before it, and devoured and brake in pieces. This beast had
at first ten horns, but soon there sprang up in the midst of them
another - a smaller horn at first, but as this increased three of the
ten horns were plucked up by the roots - apparently either by this, or
in order to give place to it. What was more remarkable still, in this
smaller horn there appeared the eyes of a man - emblematic of
intelligence and vigilance; and a mouth speaking great things -
indicative of pride and arrogance. Daniel looked on this singular vision
until a throne was set up or established, and then the Ancient of days
did sit - until the old forms of dominations ceased, and the reign of
God was introduced and established. He contemplated it until, on account
of the great words which the "horn spake," the beast was slain, and his
body was destroyed, and given to the burning flame. In the meantime the
dominion was taken away from the other beasts; though their existence
was prolonged for a little time. Then appeared in vision one in the form
of man, who came to the Ancient of days, and there was given to him
universal dominion over all people a kingdom that should never be
destroyed.

II\. The interpretation of the vision [Dan
7:15-28](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#015.md). Daniel was greatly troubled
at the vision which he had seen, and he approached one who stood near,
and asked him the meaning of it, [Dan
7:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#015.md). The explanation with which he
was favored was, in general, the following: That those four beasts which
he had seen represented four kings or kingdoms which would exist on the
earth, and that the great design of the vision was to state the fact
that the saints of tho Most High would ultimately possess the kingdom,
and would reign forever, [Dan 7:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#017.md).
The grand purpose of the vision was to represent the succession of
dynasties, and the particular character of each one, until the
government over the world should pass into the hands of the people of
God, or until the actual rule on the earth should be in the hands of the
righteous. The ultimate object, the thing to which all revolutions
tended, and which was designed to be indicated in the vision, was the
final reign of the saints on the earth. There was to be a time when the
kingdom under the whole heaven was to be given to the people of the
saints of the Most High; or, in other words, there would be a state of
things on the earth, when "all dominions," or all "rulers" (margin, [Dan
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027).md), would obey him. This general
announcement in reference to the ultimate thing contemplated, and to the
three first kingdoms, represented by the three first beasts, was
satisfactory to Daniel, but he was still perplexed in regard to the
particular thing designed to be represented by the fourth beast, so
remarkable in its structure, so unlike all the others, and undergoing so
surprising a transformation, [Dan
7:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#019.md). The sum of what was stated to
him, in regard to the events represented by the fourth beast, is as
follows:

\(1\) That this was designed to represent a fourth kingdom or dynasty
which would arise upon the earth, in many respects, different from the
three which would precede it. It was to be a kingdom which would be
distinguished for oppressive conquests. It would subdue the whole earth,
and it would crush, and prostrate, and trample down those whom it
invaded. The description would characterize a dominion that would be
stern, and mighty, and cruel, and successful; that would keep the
nations which it subdued under its control by the terror of arms rather
than by the administration of just laws; [Dan
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#023.md).

\(2\) The ten horns that Daniel saw spring out of its head denoted ten
kings that would arise, or a succession of rulers that would sway the
authority of the kingdom, [Dan 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024.md).

\(3\) The other horn that sprang up among the ten, and after them,
denoted another dynasty that would arise, and this would have peculiar
characteristics. It would so far have connection with the former that it
would spring out of them. But in most important respects it would differ
from them. Its characteristics may be summed up as follows:

\(a\) It would spring from their midst, or be somehow attached, or
connected with them - as the horn sprang from the head of the beast -
and this would properly denote that the new power somehow sprang from
the dynasty denoted by the fourth beast - as the horn sprang from the
head of that beast;

\(b\) though springing from that, it would be "diverse" from it, having
a character to be determined, not from the mere fact of its origin, but
from something else.

\(c\) It would "subdue three of these kings;" that is, it would evercome
and prostrate a certain portion of the power and authority denoted by
the ten horns perhaps meaning that it would usurp something like
one-third of the power of the kingdom denoted by the fourth beast.

\(d\) It would be characterized by arrogance and haughtiness - so much
so that the fair construction of its claims would be that of "speaking
against the Most High."

\(e\) It would "wear out the saints of the Most High" - evidently
referring to persecution.

\(f\) It would claim legislative authority so as to "change times and
laws" - clearly referring to some claim set up over established laws, or
to unusual authority, [Dan 7:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024.md).

\(4\) Into the hand of this new power, all these things would be given
for "a time, and times, and half a time:" implying that it would not be
permanent, but would come to an end, [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025.md).

\(5\) After that there would be a judgment - a judicial determination in
regard to this new power, and the dominion would be taken away, to be
utterly destroyed, [Dan 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#026.md).

\(6\) There would come a period when the whole dominion of the earth
would pass into the hands of the saints; or, in other words, there would
be a universal reign of the principles of truth and righteousness, [Dan
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027.md).

In the conclusion of the chapter [Dan
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#028.md), Daniel says that these
communications deeply affected his heart. He had been permitted to look
far into futurity, and to contemplate vast changes in the progress of
human affairs, and even to look forward to a period when all the nations
would be brought under the dominion of the law of God, and the friends
of the Most High would be put in possession of all power. Such events
were fitted to fill the mind with solemn thought, and it is not
wonderful that he contemplated them with deep emotion.

Section II. - Various Methods of Interpreting This Chapter

It is hardly necessary to say that there have been very different
methods of interpreting this chapter, and that the views of its proper
interpretation are by no means agreed on by expositors. It may be useful
to refer to some of those methods before we advance to its exposition,
that they may be before the mind in its consideration. We shall be the
better able to ascertain what is the true interpretation by inquiring
which of them, if any, accords with the fair exposition of the language
employed by the sacred writer. The opinions entertained may be reduced
to the following classes:

I. Hardt supposes that the four beasts here denote four particular kings
- Nebuchadnezzar, Evil-Merodach, Belshazzar, and Cyrus.

II\. Ephraem, who is followed by Eichhorn, supposes that the first beast
referred to the Babylonian-Chaldean kingdom; the second, the Medish
empire under Cyaxares II, the three "ribs" of which denote the Medish,
Persian, and Chaldean portions of that empire; the third, the Persian
empire, the four heads and wings of which denote the spread of the
Persian empire toward the four regions under heaven, or to all parts of
the world; the fourth, to the Grecian empire under Alexander and his
successors, the ten horns of which denote ten eminent kings among the
successors of Alexander, and the "little horn," that sprang up among
them, Antiochus Epiphanes. The succeeding state of things, according to
Ephraem and Eichhorn, refers to the kingdom of the Messiah.

III\. Grotius, representing another class of interpreters, whom Hetzel
follows, supposes that the succession of the kingdoms here referred to
is the Babylonian-Chaldean; the Persian; the kingdom of Alexander, and
his successors. The fifth is the Roman empire.

IV\. The most common interpretation which has prevailed in the church is
what supposes that the first beast denotes the Chaldean kingdom; the
second, the Medo-Persian; the third, the Greek empire under Alexander
and his successors; the fourth, the Roman empire. The dominion of the
saints is the reign of the Messiah and his laws. But this opinion,
particularly as far as pertains to the fourth and fifth of these
kingdoms, has had a great variety of modifications, especially in
reference to the signification of the ten horns, and the little horn
that sprang up among them. Some who, under the fifth kingdom, suppose
that the reign of Christ is referred to, regard the fourth kingdom as
relating to Rome under the Caesars, and that the ten horns refer to a
succession of ten regents, and the little horn to Julius Caesar. Others,
who refer the last empire to the personal reign of Christ on the earth,
and the kingdom which he would set up, suppose that the ten horns refer
to ten kings or dynasties that sprang out of the Roman power - either a
succession of the emperors, or those who came in after the invasion of
the northern hordes, or certain kingdoms of Europe which succeeded the
Roman power after it fell; and by the little horn, they suppose that
either the Turkish power with its various branches is designated, or
Mahomet, or the Papacy, or Anti-christ.

V. The Jews, in general, suppose that the fifth kingdom refers to the
reign of the Messiah; but still there has been great diversity of views
among them in regard to the application of particular parts of the
prophecy. Many of the older interpreters among them supposed that the
ten horns denoted ten Roman Caesars, and that the last horn referred to
Titus Vespasian. Most of the later Jewish interpreters refer this to
their fabulous Gog and Magog.

VI\. Another interpretation which has had its advocates is what supposes
that the first kingdom was the Chaldean; the second, the Persian; the
third, that of Alexander; the fourth, that of his successors; and the
fifth, that of the Asmonean princes who rose up to deliver the Jewish
nation from the despotism of the Syrian kings.

VII\. As a specimen of one mode of interpretation which has prevailed to
some extent in the church, the opinion of Cocceius may be referred to.
He supposes that the first beast, with the eagle's wings, denoted the
reign of the Christian emperors in Rome, and the spread of Christianity
under them into remote regions of the East and West; the second, with
the three ribs in his mouth, the Arian Goths, Vandals, and Lombards; the
third, with the four heads and four wings, the Mahometan kingdom with
the four Caliphates; the fourth, the kingdom of Charlemagne, and the ten
horns in this kingdom, the Carlovingians, Saxons, Salle, Swedish,
Hollandish, English, etc., princes and dynasties or people; and the
little horn, the Papacy as the actual Anti-christ.

The statement of these various opinions, and methods of interpretation,
I have translated from Bertholdt, Daniel, pp. 419-426. To these should
be added the opinion which Bertholdt himself maintains, and which has
been held by many others, and which Bertholdt has explained and defended
at length, pp. 426-446. That opinion is, substantially, that the first
kingdom is the Babylonian kingdom under Nebuchadnezzar, and that the
wings of the first beast denote the extended spread of that empire. The
second beast, with the three "ribs," or fangs, denotes the Median,
Lydian, and Babylonian kingdoms, which were erected under one scepter,
the Persian. The third beast, with the four wings and four heads,
denotes the Grecian dynasty under Alexander, and the spread of that
kingdom throughout the four parts of the world. The fourth beast denotes
the kingdom of the Lagidae and Seleucidae, under which the Hebrews
suffered so much. The statement respecting this kingdom [Dan
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007.md), that "it was diverse from all
that went before it," refers to the "plurality of the fourth kingdom."
or the fact that it was an aggregate made up of many others - a kingdom
in a collective sense. The "ten horns" denote ten successive princes or
kings in that kingdom, and Bertholdt enumerates them in the following
order:

1\. Seleucus Nicator;

2\. Antiochus Soter;

3\. Antiochus Theos;

4\. Seleucus Kallinicus;

5\. Seleucus Keraunus;

6\. Antiochus the Great;

7\. Seleucus Philopater;

8\. Heliodorus;

9\. Ptolemy Philometer;

10\. Demetrius.

The eleventh - denoted by the little horn - was Antiochus Epiphanes, who
brought so many calamitities upon the Hebrew people. His reign lasted,
according to Bertholdt, "a time, and times, and half a time" - or three
years and a half; and then the kingdom was restored to the people of God
to be a permanent reign, and, ultimately, under the Messiah, to fill the
world and endure to the end of time.

The interpretation thus stated, supposing that the "little horn" refers
to Antiochus Epiphanes, is also maintained by Prof. Stuart. - Hints on
Prophecy, 2nd ed., pp. 85-98. Compare also Commentary on Daniel, pp.
173-194, and 205-211.

Amidst such a variety of views, the only hope of arriving at any
satisfactory conclusion respecting the meaning of this chapter is by a
careful examination of the text, and the fair meaning of the symbols
employed by Daniel.

[Daniel 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 7:1</span></span>

In the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon - On the character and
reign of Belshazzar, see Introduction to Dan. 5 Section II. He was the
last of the kings of Babylon, and this fact may cast some light on the
disclosures made in the dream.

Daniel had a dream - Margin, as in Hebrew, saw. He saw a series of
events in vision when he was asleep. The dream refers to that
representation, and was of such a nature that it was proper to speak of
it as if he saw it. Compare the notes at [Dan
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001.md).

And visions of his head upon his bed - See the notes at [Dan
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#005.md).

Then he wrote the dream - He made a record of it at the time. He did not
commit it to tradition, or wait for its fulfillment before it was
recorded, but long before the events referred to occurred he committed
the prediction to writing, that when the prophecy was fulfilled they
might be compared with it. It was customary among the prophets to record
their predictions, whether communicated in a dream, in a vision, or by
words to them, that there might be no doubt when the event occurred that
there had been an inspired prediction of it, and that there might be an
opportunity of a careful comparison of the prediction with the event.
Often the prophets were commanded to record their predictions. See [Isa
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001.md), [Isa
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016.md); [Isa
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#008.md); [Hab
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#002.md). Compare [Rev
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#019.md); [Rev
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013.md); [Rev
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#005.md). In many instances, as in the
case before us, the record was made hundreds of years before the event
occurred, and as there is all the evidence that there could be in a case
that the record has not been altered to adapt it to the event, the
highest proof is thus furnished of the inspiration of the prophets. The
meaning here is, that Daniel wrote out the dream as soon as it occurred.

And told the sum of the matters - Chaldee, "And spake the head of the
words." That is, he spake or told them by writing. He made a
communication of them in this manner to the world. It is not implied
that he made any oral communication of them to anyone, but that he
communicated them - to wit, in the way specified. The word "sum" here -
ראשׁ rē'sh - means "head"; and would properly denote such a record as
would be a heading up, or a summary - as stating in a brief way the
contents of a book, or the chief points of a thing without going into
detail. The meaning here seems to be that he did not go into detail - as
by writing names, and dates, and places; or, perhaps, that he did not
enter into a minute description of all that he saw in regard to the
beasts that came up from the sea, but that he recorded what might be
considered as peculiar, and as having special significancy.

The Codex Chisianus renders this, ἔγραψεν ἐις κεφάλαια λόγων egrapsen
eis kephalaia logōn - "He wrote in heads of words," that is, he reduced
it to a summary description. It is well remarked by Lengerke, on this
place, that the prophets, when they described what was to occur to
tyrants in future times, conveyed their oracles in a comparatively dark
and obscure manner, yet so as to be clear when the events should occur.
The reason of this is obvious. If the meaning of many of the predictions
had been understood by those to whom they referred, that fact would have
been a motive to them to induce them to defeat them; and as the
fulfillment depended on their voluntary agency, the prophecy would have
been void. It was necessary, therefore, in general, to avoid direct
predictions, and the mention of names, dates, and places, and to make
use of symbols whose meaning would be obscure at the time when the
prediction was made, but which would be plain when the event should
occur. A comparison of [Dan 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#004.md), [Dan
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009.md), [Dan
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#011.md), [Dan
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014.md), will show that only a sumptuary
of what was to occur was recorded.

Matters - Margin, as in Chaldee, words. The term words, however; is
often used to denote things.

[Daniel 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 7:2</span></span>

Daniel spake and said - That is, he spake and said in the manner
intimated in the previous verse. It was by a record made at the time,
and thus he might be said to speak to his own generation and to all
future times.

I saw in my vision by night - I beheld in the vision; that is, he saw
represented to him the scene which he proceeds to describe. He seemed to
see the sea in a tempest, and these monsters come up from it, and the
strange succession of events which followed.

And behold, the four winds of the heaven - The winds that blow under the
heaven, or that seem to come from the heaven - or the air. Compare [Jer
49:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#036.md). The number of the winds is here
referred to as four as they are now, as blowing mainly from the four
quarters of the earth. Nothing is more common now than to designate them
in this manner - as the east, the south, the west, the north wind. So
the Latins - Eurus, Auster, Zephyrus, Boreas.

Strove - מגיחן megı̂ychân. Burst, or rushed forth; seemed to conflict
together. The winds burst, rushed from all quarters, and seemed to meet
on the sea, throwing it into wild commotion. The Hebrew word (גיח
gı̂yach) means to break or burst forth, as a fountain or stream of
waters, [Job 40:23](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#023.md); an infant breaking
forth from the womb, [Job 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#008.md); a
warrior rushing forth to battle, [Eze
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#002.md). Hence, the Chaldean to break
forth; to rush forth as the winds. The symbol here would naturally
denote some wild commotion among the nations, as if the winds of heaven
should rush together in confusion.

Upon the great sea - This expression would properly apply to any great
sea or ocean, but it is probable that the one that would occur to Daniel
would be the Mediterranean Sea, as that was best known to him and his
contemporaries. A heaving ocean - or an ocean tossed with storms - would
be a natural emblem to denote a nation, or nations, agitated with
internal conflicts, or nations in the midst of revolutions. Among the
sacred poets and the prophets, hosts of armies invading a land are
compared to overflowing waters, and mighty changes among the nations to
the heaving billows of the ocean in a storm. Compare [Jer
46:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#007.md); [Jer
47:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#002.md); [Isa
8:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007.md); [Isa
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#012.md); [Isa
59:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#019.md); [Dan
11:40](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#040.md); [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001.md). The classic reader will be
reminded in the description here of the words of Virgil, AEn. I. 82,
following:

"Ac venti, velut agmine facto

Qua data porta ruunt, et terras turbine perflant.

Incubuere mari, totumque a sedibus imis

Una Eurusque, Notusque ruunt, creberquc procellis.

Africus, et vastos volvunt ad littora fluctus."

Compare also Ovid, Trist. I. 2, 25, following. It was from this agitated
sea that the beasts that Daniel saw, representing successive kingdoms,
seemed to rise; and the fair interpretation of this part of the symbol
is, that there was, or would be, as it appeared in vision to Daniel,
commotions among the nations resembling the sea driven by storms, and
that from these commotions there would arise successive kingdoms having
the characteristics specified by the appearance of the four beasts. We
naturally look, in the fulfillment of this, to some state of things in
which the nations were agitated and convulsed; in which they struggled
against each other, as the winds strove upon the sea; a state of things
which preceded the rise of these four successive kingdoms. Without now
pretending to determine whether that was the time denoted by this, it is
certain that all that is here said would find a counterpart in the
period which immediately preceded the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, or the
kingdom which he founded and adorned. His rapid and extensive conquests;
the agitation of the nations in self-defense, and their wars against one
another, would be well denoted by the agitation of the ocean as seen in
vision by Daniel. It is true that there have been many other periods of
the world to which the image would be applicable, but no one can doubt
that it was applicable to this period, and that would be all that would
be necessary if the design was to represent a series of kingdoms
commencing with that of Nebuchadnezzar.

[Daniel 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 7:3</span></span>

And four great beasts came up from the sea - Not at once, but in
succession. See the following verses. Their particular form is described
in the subsequent verses. The design of mentioning them here, as coming
up from, the sea, seems to have been to show that this succession of
kingdoms sprang from the agitations and commotions among the nations
represented by the heaving ocean. It is not uncommon for the prophets to
make use of animals to represent or symbolize kingdoms and nations -
usually by some animal which was in a manner peculiar to the land that
was symbolized, or which abounded there. Thus in [Isa
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001.md), leviathan, or the dragon, or
crocodile, is used to represent Babylon. See the note at that passage.
In [Eze 29:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#003.md), the dragon or the
crocodile of the Nile is put for Pharaoh; in [Eze
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#002.md), Pharaoh is compared to a young
lion, and to a whale in the seas. In [Psa
74:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#013.md), the kingdom of Egypt is
compared to the dragon and the leviathan.

So on ancient coins, animals are often used as emblems of kingdoms, as
it may be added, the lion and the unicorn represent Great Britain now,
and the eagle the United States. It is well remarked by Lengerke (in
loc.), that when the prophets design to represent kingdoms that are made
up of other kingdoms, or that are combined by being brought by conquest
under the power of others, they do this, not by any single animal as
actually found in nature, but by monsters - fabulous beings that are
compounded of others, in which the peculiar qualities of different
animals are brought together - as in the case of the lion with eagle's
wings. Thus in [Rev 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001.md), the Romish
power is represented by a beast coming out of the sea, having seven
heads and ten horns, Compare it. Ezra (Apocry.) 11:1, where an eagle is
represented as coming from the sea with twelve feathered wings and three
heads. As an illustration of the attempts made in the apocryphal
writings to imitate the prophets, the whole of chapter 11 and chapter 12
of the second book of Ezra may be referred to.

Diverse one from another - Though they all came up from the same abyss,
yet they differed from each other - denoting, doubtless, that though the
successive kingdoms referred to would all rise out of the nations
represented by the agitated sea, yet that in important respects they
would differ from each other.

[Daniel 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 7:4</span></span>

The first was like a lion - It is to be assumed, in explaining and
applying these symbols, that they are significant - that is, that there
was some adaptedness or propriety in using these symbols to denote the
kingdoms referred to; or that in each case there was a reason why the
particular animal was selected for a symbol rather than one of the
others; that is, there was something in the lion that was better fitted
to symbolize the kingdom referred to than there was in the bear or the
leopard, and this was the reason why this particular symbol was chosen
in the case. It is to be further assumed that all the characteristics in
the symbol were significant, and we are to expect to find them all in
the kingdom which they were designed to represent; nor can the symbol be
fairly applied to any kingdom, unless something shall be found in its
character or history that shall correspond alike to the particular
circumstances referred to in the symbol, and to the grouping or
succession. In regard to the first beast, there were five things that
entered into the symbol, all of which it is to be presumed were
significant: the lion, the eagle's wings - the fact that the wings were
plucked - the fact that the beast was lifted up so as to stand up as a
man - and the fact that the heart of a man was given to it. It is proper
to consider these in their order, and then to inquire whether they found
a fulfillment in any known state of things.

\(a\) The animal that was seen: "the lion." The lion, "the king of
beasts," is the symbol of strength and courage, and becomes the proper
emblem of a king - as when the Mussulmans call Ali, Mahomet's
son-in-law, "The Lion of God, always victorious." Thus it is often used
in the Scriptures. [Gen 49:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#009.md), "Judah
is a lion's whelp: from the prey, my son, thou art gone up: he stooped
down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall rouse him up?"
The warlike character, the conquest, the supremacy of that tribe are
here undoubtedly denoted. So in [Eze
19:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#002.md). "What is thy mother? A
lioness: she lay down among lions, she nourished her whelps among young
lions." Here is an allusion, says Grotius, to [Gen
49:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#009.md). Judea was among the nations like
a lioness among the beasts of the forest; she had strength and
sovereignty. The lion is an emblem of a hero: [Sa2
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#020.md), "He slew two lion-like men of
Moab." Compare Gesenius zu Isa. i. 851. So Hercules and Achilles are
called by Homer θυμολέοντα thumoleonta, or λεοντόθυμον leontothumon -
lion-hearted - Iliad e 639, ee 228, Odyssey l 766. See the character,
the intrepidity, and the habits of the lion fully illustrated in
Bochart, Hieroz. lib. iii. c. 2, pp. 723-745 - Credner, der prophet
Joel, s. 100. f. Compare also the following places in Scripture: [Psa
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#002.md); [Psa
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#021.md); [Psa
57:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004.md); [Psa
58:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#006.md); [Psa
74:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#004.md); [Sa1
17:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#037.md); [Job
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#010.md); [Jer
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#007.md); [Jer
49:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#019.md); [Joe
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#006.md); [Isa
29:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#001.md). The proper notion here, so far
as the emblem of a lion is concerned, is that of a king or kingdom that
would be distinguished for power, conquest, dominion; that would be in
relation to other kings and kingdoms as the lion is among the beasts of
the forest - keeping them in awe, and maintaining dominion over them -
marching where he pleases, with none to cope with him or to resist him.

\(b\) The eagle's wings: "and had eagle's wings." Here appears one
peculiarity of the emblem - the union of things which are not found
joined together in nature - the representation of things or qualities
which no one animal would represent. The lion would denote one thing, or
one quality in the kingdom referred to - power, dominion, sovereignty -
but there would be some characteristic in that king or kingdom which
nothing in the lion would properly represent, and which could be
symbolized only by attaching to him qualities to be found in some other
animal. The lion, distinguished for his power, his dominion, his keeping
other animals in awe - his spring, and the severity of his blow - is not
remarkable for his speed, nor for going forth to conquest. He does not
range far to accomplish his purpose, nor are his movements eminent for
fleetness. Hence, there were attached to the lion the wings of an eagle.
The proper notion, therefore, of this symbol, would be that of a
dominion or conquest rapidly secured, as if a lion, the king of beasts,
should move, not as he commonly does, with a spring or bound, confining
himself to a certain space or range, but should move as the eagle does,
with rapid and prolonged flight, extending his conquests afar. The
meaning of the symbol may be seen by comparing this passage with [Isa
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#011.md), where Cyrus is compared to "a
ravenous bird" - "calling a ravenous bird from the east, the man that
executeth my counsels from a far country." The eagle is an emblem of
swiftness: [Jer 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013.md), "His horses are
swifter than eagles;" [Jer 48:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#040.md),
"Behold, he shall fly as an eagle, and shall spread his wings over
Moab." See also [Jer 49:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#022.md); [Lam
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#019.md); [Hab
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#008.md).

\(c\) The clipping of the wings: "I beheld until the wings thereof were
plucked" The word used (מרט meraṭ) means, to pluck or pull, as to pull
out the beard (compare [Neh 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#025.md);
[Isa 50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006).md), and would here be properly
applied to some process of pulling out the feathers or quills from the
wings of the eagle. The obvious and proper meaning of this symbol is,
that there was some check put to the progress of the conqueror - as
there would be to an eagle by plucking off the feathers from his wings;
that is, the rapidity of his conquests would cease. The prophet says,
that he looked on until this was done, implying that it was not
accomplished at once, but leaving the impression that these conquests
were extended far. They were, however, checked, and we see the lion
again without the wings; the sovereign who has ceased to spread his
triumphs over the earth.

\(d\) The lifting up from the earth: "and it was lifted up from the
earth, and made to stand upon the feet as a man." That is, the lion,
with the wings thus plucked off, was made to stand upright on his hind
feet - an unusual position, but the meaning of the symbol is not
difficult. It was still the lion - the monarch - but changed as if the
lion was changed to a man; that is, as if the ferocity, and the power,
and the energy of the lion had given place to the comparative weakness
of a man. There would be as much difference in the case referred to as
there would be if a lion so fierce and powerful should be made so far to
change his nature as to stand upright, and to walk as a man. This would
evidently denote some remarkable change - something that would be
unusual - something where there would be a diminution of ferocity, and
yet perhaps a change to comparative weakness - as a man is feebler than
a lion.

\(e\) The giving to it of a man's heart: "and a man heart was given to
it." The word heart in the Scriptures often has a closer relation to the
intellect or the understanding than it new has commonly with us; and
here perhaps it is a general term to denote something like human nature
- that is, there would be as great a change in the case as if the nature
of the lion should be transformed to that of a man; or, the meaning may
be, that this mighty empire, carrying its arms with the rapidity of an
eagle, and the fierceness of a lion, through the world, would be checked
in its career; its ferocity would be tamed, and it would be
characterized by comparative moderation and humanity. In [Dan
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#016.md), it is said of Nebuchadnezzar,
"Let his heart be changed from man's, and let a beast's heart be given
unto him;" here, if the symbol refers to him, it does not refer to that
scene of humiliation when he was compelled to eat grass like a beast,
but to the fact that he was brought to look at things as a man should
do; he ceased to act like a ravenous beast, and was led to calm
reflection, and to think and speak like a man - a rational being. Or, if
it refers to the empire of Babylon, instead of the monarch, it would
mean that a change had come over the nation under the succession of
princes, so that the fierceness and ferocity of the first princes of the
empire had ceased, and the nation had not only closed its conquests, but
had actually become, to some extent, moderate and rational.

Now, in regard to the application of this symbol, there can be but
little difficulty, and there is almost no difference of opinion among
expositors. All, or nearly all, agree that it refers to the kingdom of
Babylon, of which Nebuchadnezzar was the head, and to the gradual
diminution of the ferocity of conquest under a succession of
comparatively weak princes. Whatever view may be taken of the book of
Daniel whether it be regarded as inspired prophecy composed by Daniel
himself, and written at the time when it professes to have been, or
whether it be supposed to have been written long after his time by some
one who forged it in his name, there can be no doubt that it relates to
the head of the Babylonian empire, or to that which the "head of gold,"
in the image referred to in Dan. 2, represents. The circumstances all so
well agree with that application, that, although in the explication of
the dream [Dan 7:16-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#016.md) this part of it
is not explained - for the perplexity of Daniel related particularly to
the fourth beast [Dan 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#019.md), yet there
can be no reasonable doubt as to what was intended. For

\(a\) the lion - the king of beasts - would accurately symbolize that
kingdom in the days of Nebuchadnezzar - a kingdom occupying the same
position among other kingdoms which the lion does among other beasts,
and well represented in its power and ferocity by the lion. See the
character and position of this kingdom fully illustrated in the notes at
[Dan 2:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#037.md).

\(b\) The eagle's wings would accurately denote the rapid conquests of
that kingdom - its leaving, as it were, its own native domain, and
flying abroad. The lion alone would have represented the character of
the kingdom considered as already having spread itself, or as being at
the head of other kingdoms; the wings of the eagle, the rapidity with
which the arms of the Babylonians were carried into Palestine, Egypt,
Assyria, etc. It is true that this symbol alone would not designate
Babylon anymore than it would the conquests of Cyrus, or Alexander, or
Caesar, but it is to be taken in the connection in which it is here
found, and no one can doubt that it has a striking applicability to
Babylon.

\(c\) The clipping or plucking of these wings would denote the cessation
of conquest - as if it would extend no farther; that is, we see a nation
once distinguished for the invasion of other nations now ceasing its
conquests; and remarkable, not for its victories, but as standing at the
head of all other nations, as the lion stands among the beasts of the
forest. All who are acquainted with history know that, after the
conquests of that kingdom under Nebuchadnezzar, it ceased
characteristically to be a kingdom distinguished for conquest, but that,
though under his successors, it held a pre-eminence or headship among
the nations, yet its victories were extended no further. The successors
of Nebuchadnezzar were comparatively weak and indolent princes - as if
the wings of the monster had been plucked.

\(d\) The rising up of the lion on the feet, and standing on the feet as
a man, would denote, not inappropriately, the change of the kingdom
under the successors of Nebuchadnezzar. See above in the explanation of
the symbol.

\(e\) The giving of a man's heart to it would not be inapplicable to the
change produced in the empire after the time of Nebuchadnezzar, and
under a succession of comparatively weak and inefficient princes.
Instead of the heart of the lion - of being "lion-hearted" - it had the
heart of a man; that is, the character of wildness and fierceness
denoted by an untamed beast was succeeded by what would be better
represented by a human being. It is not the character of the lion
changed to that of the bear, or the panther, or the leopard; nor is it
man considered as a warrior or conqueror, but man as he is distinguished
from the wild and ferocious beast of the desert. The change in the
character of the empire, until it ceased under the feeble reign of
Belshazzar; would be well denoted by this symbol.

[Daniel 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 7:5</span></span>

And, behold, another beast, a second, like to a bear - That is, after
the lion had appeared, and he had watched it until it had undergone
these surprising transformations. There are several circumstances, also,
in regard to this symbol, all of which, it is to be supposed, were
significant, and all of which demand explication before it is attempted
to apply them.

\(a\) The animal seen: the bear. For a full description of the bear, see
Bochart, Hieroz. lib. iii. c. 9: The animal is well known, and has
properties quite distinct from the lion and other animals. There was
doubtless some reason why this symbol was employed to denote a
particular kingdom, and there was something in the kingdom that
corresponded with these peculiar properties, as there was in the case of
the lion. The bear might, in some respects, have been a proper
representative of Babylon, but it would not in all nor in the main
respects. According to Bochart (Hiefoz, vol. i. p. 812), the bear is
distinguished mainly for two things, cunning and ferocity. Aristotle
says that the bear is greedy as well as silly and foolhardy. (Wemyss,
Key to the Symbolic Language of Scripture.) The name in Hebrew is taken
from his grumbling or growling. Compare [Isa
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#011.md) :

"We roar all like bears."

Compare Horace, Epod. 16, 51:

"Nec vespertinus circumgemit ursus ovile."

Virgil mentions their ferocity:

"Atque in praesepibus ursi Saevire."

\- AEn. vii. 17.

The bear is noted as especially fierce when hungry, or when robbed of
its whelps. Jerome (on [Hos 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#008).md)
remarks, "It is said by those who have studied the nature of wild
beasts, that none among them is more ferocious than the bear when
deprived of its young, or when hungry." Compare [Sa2
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#008.md); [Pro
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#012.md); [Hos
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#008.md). The characteristics of the
kingdom, therefore, that would be denoted by the bear would be ferocity,
roughness, fierceness in war, especially when provoked; a spirit less
manly and noble than that denoted by the lion; severe in its treatment
of enemies, with a mixture of fierce and savage cunning.

\(b\) Its rising up on one of its sides: "and it raised up itself on one
side." The Chaldee word used here (שׁטר sheṭar) occurs nowhere else. It
means side (Gesenius), and would be applied here to the side of an
animal, as if he lifted up one side before the other when he rose. The
Latin Vulgate renders it, in parte stetit. The Greek (Walton), έις μέρος
ἕν ἐστάθη eis meros hen estathē - "it stood on one part;" or, as
Thompson renders it, "he stood half erect." The Codex Chisianus, ἐπὶ τοῦ
ἑνὸς πλευροῦ ἐστάθη epi tou henos pleurou estathē - "it stood upon one
side." Maurer renders this, "on one of its forefeet it was recumbent,
and stood on the other," and says that this is the figure exhibited on
one of the stones found in Babylon, an engraving of which may be seen in
Munter, Religion d. Babyl. p. 112. The animal referred to here, as found
in Babylon, says Lengerke, "lies kneeling on the right forefoot, and is
in the act of rising on the left foot." Bertholdt and Havernick
understand this as meaning that the animal stood on the hindfeet, with
the forepart raised, as the bear is said to do; but probably the true
position is that referred to by Maurer and Lengerke, that the animal was
in the act of raising itself up from a recumbent posture, and rested on
one of its forefeet while the other was reached out, and the body on
that side was partially raised. This position would naturally denote a
kingdom that had been quiet and at rest, but that was now rousing itself
deliberately for some purpose, as of conquest or war - as the bear that
had been couching down would rise when hungry, or when going forth for
prey.

\(c\) The ribs in its mouth: "and it had three ribs in the mouth of it
between the teeth of it." Bertholdt understands this of fangs or tusks -
or fangs crooked or bent like ribs, p. 451, But the proper meaning of
the Chaldee עלע ‛ala‛ is the same as the Hebrew צלע tsēlâ‛ - "a rib." -
Gesenius. The Latin Vulgate is, tres ordines - three rows; the Syriac
and the Greek, three ribs. This would be sufficiently characteristic of
a bear, and the attitude of the animal here seems to be that it had
killed some other animal, and had, in devouring it, torn out three ribs
from its side, and now held them in its mouth. It was slowly rising from
a recumbent posture, with these ribs in its mouth, and about to receive
a command to go forth and devour much flesh. The number three, in this
place, Lengerke supposes to be a round number, without any special
significancy; others suppose that it denotes the number of nations or
kingdoms which the people here represented by the bear had overcome.
Perhaps this latter would be the more obvious idea as suggested by the
symbol, but it is not necessary, in order to a proper understanding of a
symbol, to press such a point too closely. The natural idea which would
be suggested by this part of the symbol would be that of a kingdom or
people of a fierce and rough character having already subdued some, and
then, after reposing, rising up with the trophies of its former
conquests to go forth to new victories, or to overcome others. The
symbol would be a very striking one to represent a conquering nation in
such a posture.

\(d\) The command given to this beast: "and they said thus unto it,
Arise, devour much flesh." That is, it was said to it; or some one
having authority said it. A voice was heard commanding it to go forth
and devour. This command is wholly in accordance with the nature of the
bear. The bear is called by Aristotle σαρκοφαγῶν sarkofagōn,
flesh-eater, and ξῶον πάμφαγον xōon pamphagon, a beast devouring
everything (Hist. Nat. viii. 5), and no better description could be
given of it. As a symbol, this would properly be applicable to a nation
about receiving, as it were, a command from God to go forth to wider
conquests than it had already made; to arouse itself from its repose and
to achieve new triumphs.

The application of this symbol was not explained by the angel to Daniel;
but if the former pertained to Babylon, there can be little difficulty
in understanding to what this is to be applied. It is evidently to what
succeeded the Babylonian - the Medo-Persian, the kingdom ruled
successively by Cyrus, Cambyses, Smerdis, Darius, Xerxes, Artaxerxes,
and Darius Nothus, until it was overthrown by Alexander the Great. The
only inquiry now is as to the pertinency of the symbol here employed to
represent this kingdom.

\(a\) The symbol of the bear. As already seen, the bear would denote any
fierce, rough, overbearing, and arbitrary kingdom, and it is clear that
while it might have applicability to any such kingdom, it would better
represent that of Medo-Persia than the lion would, for while, in some
respects, either symbol would be applicable to either nation, the
Medo-Persian did not stand so decidedly at the head of nations as the
Babylonian. As to its character, however, the bear was not an
inappropriate symbol. Taking the whole nation together, it was fierce
and rough, and unpolished, little disposed to friendliness with the
nations, and dissatisfied while any around it had peace or prosperity.
In the image seen in Dan. ii., this kingdom, denoted by the breast and
arms of silver Dan. 7:32, is described in the explanation Dan. 7:39 as
"inferior to thee;" that is, to Nebuchadnezzar. For a sufficiently full
account of this kingdom - of the mad projects of Cambyses, and his
savage rage against the Ethiopians - well represented by the ferocity of
the bear; of the ill-starred expedition to Greece under Xerxes - an
expedition in its fierceness and folly well represented by the bear, and
of the degeneracy of the national character after Xerxes - well
represented by the bear as compared with the lion, see the notes at [Dan
2:39](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#039.md). No one acquainted with the
history of that nation can doubt the propriety and applicability of the
emblem.

\(b\) The rising up on its side, or from a recumbent posture, as if it
had been in a state of repose, and was now arousing itself for action.
Different interpretations have been adopted of this emblem as applicable
to the Medo-Persians. The ancient Hebrew interpreters, as Jerome
remarks, explain it as meaning that that kingdom was "on one side" in
the sense of separate; that is, that this kingdom kept itself aloof from
Judea, or did not inflict injury on it. Thus also Grotius explains it as
meaning that it did not injure Judea - Judea nihil nocuit." Ephraern the
Syrian, and Theodoret, explain it as meaning that the empire of the
Medo-Persians was situated on the side of Judea, or held itself within
its proper bounds, in the sense that it never extended its dominion,
like Babylon, over the whole earth. Rosenmuller explains it as meaning
that in relation to the kingdom represented by the lion, it was at its
side, both occupying the regions of the East. John D. Michaelis
understands it as denoting that, as the bear was raising itself up, one
part being more raised than the other, the Medo-Persian empire was
composed of two kingdoms, one of which was more exalted or advanced than
the other.

Compare Lengerke. The true meaning however, is that, as seen by Daniel,
the nation that had been in a state of repose was now preparing itself
for new conquests - a state descriptive of, and in every way quite
applicable to the condition of the Medo-Persian empire, after the
conquests by Cyrus, as he overran the kingdom of Lydia, etc., then
reposing, and now about arousing to the conquest and subjugation of
Babylon. The precise time, therefore, indicated would be about 544 b.c.
(Calmer), when, having overcome the Medes, and having secured the
conquest of Lydia, and the dethronement of Croesus, he is meditating the
destruction of Babylon. This interval of repose lasted about a year, and
it is at this time that the united empire is seen, under the image of
the bear rising on its side, arousing itself to go forth to new
conquests.

\(c\) The ribs in the mouth of the beast. This, as above remarked, would
properly refer to some previous conquest - as a bear appearing in that
manner would indicate that some other animal had been overcome and slain
by him, and torn in pieces. The emblem would be fulfilled if the power
here symbolized had been successful in former wars, and had rent
kingdoms or people asunder. That this description would apply to the
Medo-Persian power before its attack on Babylon, or before extending its
dominion over Babylon, and its establishment as the Medo-Persian
kingdoms, no one can doubt. Compare the notes at [Dan
2:39](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#039.md). It has been commonly supposed
that Cyrus succeeded to the throne of Media without war. But this is far
from being the case - though so represented in what may be regarded as
the romance of the Cyropaedia In the Anabasis of Xenophon, however, the
fact of his having subdued Media by arms is distinctly admitted, [Dan
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#004.md), [Dan
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#007.md), [Dan
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#012.md). Herodotus, Ctesias, Isocrates,
and Strabo, all agree also in the fact that it was so. The Upper Tigris
was the seat of one campaign, where the cities of Larissa and Mespila
were taken by Cyrus. From Strabo we learn that the decisive battle was
fought on the spot where Cyrus afterward built Pasargardae, in Persia,
for his capital. See Kitto, Cyclo., art. "Cyrus." In addition to this,
we are to remember the well-known conquests of Cyrus in Lydia and
elsewhere, and the propriety of the emblem will be apparent. It may not
be certain that the number three is significant in the emblem, but it is
possible that there may have been reference to the three kingdoms of
Persia, Media, and Lydia, that were actually under the dominion of Cyrus
when the aggressive movement was made on Babylon.

\(d\) The command to "arise and devour much flesh." No one can fail to
see the appropriateness of this, considered as addressed to the
Medo-Persian power - that power which subdued Babylon; which brought
under its dominion a considerable part of the world, and which, under
Darius and Xerxes, poured its million on Greece. The emblem used here
is, therefore, one of the most striking and appropriate that could be
employed, and it cannot be doubted that it had reference to this
kingdom, and that, in all the particulars, there was a clear
fulfillment.

[Daniel 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">dan 7:6</span></span>

After this I beheld, and, lo, another, like a leopard - That is, as
before, after the bear had appeared - indicating that this was to be a
succeeding kingdom or power. The beast which now appeared was a monster,
and, as in the former cases, so in regard to this, there are several
circumstances which demand explanation in order to understand the
symbol. It may assist us, perhaps, in forming a correct idea of the
symbol here introduced to have before us a representation of the animal
as it appeared to Daniel.

\(a\) The animal itself: "a leopard." The word used here - נמר nemar -
or in Hebrew נמר nâmêr - denotes a panther or leopard, so called from
his spots. This is a well-known beast of prey, distinguished for
blood-thirstiness and cruelty, and these characteristics are especially
applicable to the female panther. The animal is referred to in the
Scriptures as emblematic of the following things, or as having the
following characteristics:

\(1\) As next in dignity to the lion - of the same general nature.
Compare Bochart, Hieroz. P. I. lib. iii. c. vii. Thus the lion and the
panther, or leopard, are often united in the Scriptures. Compare [Jer
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#006.md); [Hos
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#007.md). See also in the Apocrypha,
Ecclesiasticus 28:23. So also they are united in Homer, r

Ὄυτε οἶν παρδάλιος τόσσον μένος, ὄυτε λέοντος.

Oute oun pardalios tosson menos, oute leontos.

"Neither had the leopard nor the lion such strength."

\(2\) As distinguished for cruelty, or a fierce nature, as contrasted
with the gentle and tame animal. [Isa
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006.md), "and the leopard shall lie down
with the kid." In [Jer 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#006.md), it is
compared with the lion and the wolf: "A lion out of the forest shall
slay them, and a wolf of the evenings shall spoil them, a leopard shall
watch over their cities." Compare [Hos
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#007.md).

\(3\) As distinguished for swiftness or fleetness. [Hab
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#008.md) : "their horses are swifter than
the leopards." Compare also the quotations from the classics in Bochart
as above, p. 788. His fleetness is often referred to - the celerity of
his spring or bound especially - by the Greek and Roman writers.

\(4\) As insidious, or as lying in wait, and springing unexpectedly upon
the unwary traveler. Compare [Hos 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#007.md)
: "As a leopard by the way will I observe them;" that is, I will "watch"
(אשׁור 'âshûr) them. So Pliny says of leopards: Insidunt pardi condensa
arborurn, occultatique earurn ramis in prcetereuntia desiliunt.

\(5\) They are characterized by their spots. In the general nature of
the animal there is a strong resemblance to the lion. Thus, an Arabic
writer quoted by Bochart, deflates the leopard to be "an animal
resembling the lion, except that it is smaller, and has a skin marked by
black spots." The proper idea in this representation, when used as a
symbol, would be of a nation or kingdom that would have more nobleness
than the one represented by the bear, but a less decisive headship over
others than that represented by the lion; a nation that, was addicted to
conquest, or that preyed upon others; a nation rapid in its movements,
and springing upon others unawares, and perhaps in its spots denoting a
nation or people made up, not of homogeneous elements, but of various
different people. See below in the application of this.

\(b\) The four wings: which had upon the back of it four wings of a
fowl. The first beast was seen with the wings of an eagle, but without
any specified number; this appears with wings, but without specifying
any particular kind of wings, though the number is mentioned. In both of
them celerity of movement is undoubtedly intended - celerity beyond what
would be properly denoted by the animal itself the lion or the leopard.
If there is a difference in the design of the representation, as there
would seem to be by mentioning the kind of wings in the one case, and
the number in the other, it is probable that the former would denote a
more bold and extended flight; the latter a flight more rapid, denoted
by the four wings. We should look for the fulfillment of the former in a
nation that extended its conquests over a broader space; in the latter,
to a nation that moved with more celerity. But there is some danger of
pressing these similitudes too far. Nothing is said in the passage about
the arrangement of the wings, except that they were on the back of the
animal. It is to be supposed that there were two on each side.

\(c\) The four heads: "the beast had also four heads." This
representation must have been designed to signify either that the one
power or kingdom denoted by the leopard was composed of four separate
powers or nations now united in one; or that there were four successive
kings or dynasties that made up its history; or that the power or
kingdom actually appeared, as seen in its prevailing characteristic, as
a distinct dominion, as having four heads, or as being divided into so
many separate sovereignties. It seems to me that either one of these
would be a proper and natural fulfillment of the design of the image,
though the second suggested would be less proper than either of the
others, as the heads appeared on the animal not in succession - as the
little horn sprung up in the midst of the other ten, as represented in
the fourth beast - but existed simultaneously. The general idea would
be, that in some way the one particular sovereignty had four sources of
power blended into one, or actually exerted the same kind of dominion,
and constituted, in fact, the one kingdom as distinguished from the
others.

\(d\) The dominion given to it: "and dominion was given to it." That is,
it was appointed to rule where the former had ruled, and until it should
be succeeded by another - the beast with the ten horns.

In regard to the application of this, though the angel did not explain
it to Daniel, except in general that a kingdom was represented by it.
[Dan 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#017.md), it would seem that there
could be little difficulty, though there has been some variety in the
views entertained. Maurer, Lengerke, and some others, refer it to the
Medo-Persian empire - supposing that the second symbol referred to the
kingdom of Media. But the objections to this are so obvious, and so
numerous, that it seems to me the opinion cannot be entertained, for

\(1\) the kingdom of Media did not, in any proper sense, succeed that of
Babylon;

\(2\) the representation of the bear with three ribs has no proper
application to Media;

\(3\) the whole description, as we have seen above, of the second beast,
accords entirely with the history of the Medo-Persian empire.

If this be so, then we naturally look for the fulfillment of this symbol
- the third head - in the kingdom or dynasty that followed directly that
of Medo-Persia - the Macedonian dynasty or kingdom founded by Alexander
the Great, extending over the same countries before occupied by Babylon
and the Medo-Persian empire, and continuing until it was swallowed up in
the conquests of Rome. We shall find that all the circumstances agree
with this supposition:

\(a\) The animal - the leopard. The comparative nobleness of the animal;
a beast of prey; the celerity of its movements; the spring or bound with
which it leaps upon its prey - all agree well with the kingdom of which
Alexander was the founder. Indeed there was no other kingdom among the
ancients to which it could be better applied; and it will be admitted
that, on the supposition that it was the design of Daniel to choose a
symbol that would represent the Macedonian empire, he could not have
selected one that was better adapted to it than the leopard. All the
characteristics of the animal that have been noticed -

\(1\) as next in dignity to the lion:

\(2\) as distinguished for a fierce nature;

\(3\) as characterized by fleetness;

\(4\) as known for lying in wait, and springing suddenly upon its prey;
and

\(5\) in the point to be noticed soon - their spots - all agree with the
characteristics of Alexander, and his movements among the nations, and
with the kingdom that was founded by him in the East.

\(b\) The four wings. These represent well the rapidity of the conquests
of Alexander, for no more rapid conquests were ever made than were his
in the East. It was noticed that the leopard had four wings, as
contrasted with the first beast, in reference to which the number is not
mentioned: the one denoting a broader flight, and the other a more rapid
one; and the one agrees well with the conquests of Nebuchadnezzar, and
the other with those of Alexander.

\(c\) The four heads united to one body. It is well known that when
Alexander died, his empire was left to four of his generals, and that
they came to be at the head of as many distinct dominions, yet all
springing from the same source, and all, in fact, out of the Macedonian
empire. This fact would not be so well represented by four distinct and
separate animals, as by one animal with four heads; that is, as the head
represents authority or dominion, one empire, in fact, now ruling by
four distinct authorities. The one empire, considered as Macedonian,
continued its sway until it was swallowed up by the Romans; that is, the
Macedonian power or dominion as distinct from that of Babylon or
Medo-Persia; as having characteristics unlike these; as introducing a
new order of things, continued, though that power was broken up and
exercised under distinct manifestations of sovereignty. The fact was,
that, at the death of Alexander, to whom the founding of this empire was
owing, "Philip Aridaeus, brother of Alexander, and his infant son by
Roxana, were appointed by the generals of the army to succeed, and
Perdiccas was made regent. The empire was divided into thirty-three
governments, distributed among as many general officers. Hence arose a
series of bloody, desolating wars, and a period of confusion, anarchy,
and crime ensued, that is almost without a parallel in the history of
the world. After the battle of Ipsus, 301 b.c., in which Antigonus was
defeated, the empire was divided into four kingdoms - Thrace and
Bithynia under Lysimachus; Syria and the East under Seleucus; Egypt,
under Ptolemy Soter; and Macedonia under Cassander." - Lyman Hist.
Chart. It was these four powers, thus springing out of the one empire
founded by Alexander, that was clearly represented by. the four heads.

\(d\) The dominion given to it. No one can doubt that a dominion was
given to Alexander and the Macedonian dynasty, which would fully
correspond with this. In fact the dominion of the world was practically
conceded to that kingdom.

\(e\) There is only one other circumstance to be noticed, though perhaps
we are not to seek an exact accomphshment for that in any specific
events. It is the fact tbat the leopard is marked by spots - a
circumstance which many have supposed had a fulfillment in the fact that
numerous nations, not homogeneous, were found in the empire of
Alexander. So Bochart, Hieroz. P. I. lib. iii. c. vii. p. 789, says:
"The spots of the leopard refer to the different customs of the nations
over which he ruled. Among these, besides the Macedonians, Greeks,
Thracians, and Illyrians, in Europe, there were in Africa the Libyans,
Egyptians, and Troglodites; in Asia, almost all the nations to the
Ganges." But, without insisting on this, no one can compare the other
particulars which were clearly designed to be symbolic, without
perceiving that they had a full accomplishment in the Macedonian empire.

[Daniel 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 7:7</span></span>

After this I saw in the night visions - The other beasts were seen also
in a dream [Dan 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001.md), and this probably
in the same night, though as a subsequent part of the dream, for the
whole vision evidently passed before the prophet in a single dream. The
succession, or the fact that he saw one after the other, indicates a
sucession in the kingdoms. They were not to be at the same time upon the
earth, but one was to arise after another in the order here indicated,
though they were in some respects to occupy the same territory. The
singular character of the beast that now appears; the number of the
horns; the springing up of a new horn; the might and terror of the
beast, and the long duration of its dominion upon the earth, attracted
and fixed the attention of Daniel, led him into a more minute
description of the appearance of the animal, and induced him
particularly to ask an explanation of the angel of the meaning of this
part of the vision, [Dan 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#019.md).

And, behold, a fourth beast - This beast had peculiar characteristics,
all of which were regarded as symbolic, and all of which demand
explanation in order that we may have a just view of the nature and
design of the symbol.

As in reference to the three former beasts, so also in regard to this,
it will be proper to explain first the significance of the different
parts of the symbol, and then in the exposition ([Dan
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#019), following.md) to inquire into the
application. The particulars of this symbol are more numerous, more
striking, and more important than in either of the previous ones. These
particulars are the following [Dan
7:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007.md) :

\(a\) The animal itself [Dan 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#007.md) : "a
fourth beast, dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly." The form
or nature of the beast is not given as in the preceding cases - the
lion, the bear, and the leopard - but it is left for the imagination to
fill up. It was a beast more terrific in its appearance than either of
the others, and was evidently a monster such as could not be designated
by a single name. The terms which are used here in describing the beast
- "dreadful, terrible, exceedingly strong," are nearly synonymous, and
are heaped together in order to give an impressive view of the terror
inspired by the beast. There can be no doubt as to the general meaning
of this, for it is explained [Dan 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#023.md)
as denoting a kingdom that "should devour the whole earth, and tread it
down, and break it in pieces." As a symbol, it would denote some power
much more fearful and much more to be dreaded; having a wider dominion;
and more stern, more oppressive in its character, more severe in its
exactions, and more entirely destroying the liberty of others; advancing
more by power and terror, and less by art and cunning, than either. This
characteristic is manifest throughout the symbol.

\(b\) The teeth [Dan 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007.md) : "and it had
great iron teeth." Not only teeth or tusks, such as other animals may
have, but teeth made of iron. This is characteristic of a monster, and
shows that there was to be something very peculiar in the dominion that
was here symbolized. The teeth are of use to eat or devour; and the
symbol here is that of devouring or rending - as a fierce monster with
such teeth might be supposed to rend or devour all that was before it.
This, too, would denote a nation exceedingly fierce; a nation of savage
ferocity; a nation that would be signally formidable to all others. For
illustration, compare [Jer 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#012.md); [Mic
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#013.md). As explained in [Dan
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#023.md), it is said that the kingdom
denoted by this would "devour the whole earth." Teeth - great teeth, are
often used as the symbols of cruelty, or of a devouring enemy. Thus in
[Pro 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#014.md) : "There is a generation
whose teeth are as swords, and their jaw teeth are as knives, to devour
the poor from off the earth, and the needy from among men." So David
uses the word to denote the cruelty of tyrants: [Psa
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#007.md), "Thou hast broken the teeth of
the ungodly;" [Psa 57:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004.md), "whose teeth
are spears and arrows;" [Psa 58:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#006.md),
"break their teeth in their mouth; break out the great teeth of the
young lions."

\(c\) The stamping with the feet [Dan
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007.md) : "it devoured and brake in
pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet of it." That is, like a
fierce monster, whatever it could not devour it stamped down and crushed
in the earth. This indicates a disposition or purpose to destroy, for
the sake of destroying, or where no other purpose could be gained. It
denotes rage, wrath, a determination to crush all in its way, to have
universal dominion; and would be applicable to a nation that subdued and
crushed others for the mere sake of doing it, or because it was
unwilling that any other should exist and enjoy liberty - even where
itself could not hope for any advantage.

\(d\) The fact that it was different from all that went before it [Dan
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007.md) : "and it was diverse from all the
beasts that were before it." The prophet does not specify particularly
in what respects it was different, for he does not attempt to give its
appearance. It was not a lion, a bear, or a leopard, but he does not say
precisely what it was. Probably it was such a monster that there were no
animals with which it could be compared. He states some circumstances,
however, in which it was different - as in regard to the ten horns, the
little horn, the iron teeth, etc., but still the imagination is left to
fill up the picture in general. The meaning of this must be, that the
fourth kingdom, represented by this beast, would be materially different
from those which preceded it, and we must look for the fulfillment in
some features that would characterize it by which it would be unlike the
others. There must be something marked in the difference - something
that would be more than the common difference between nations.

\(e\) The ten horns [Dan 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007.md) : "and it
had ten horns." That is, the prophet saw on it ten horns as
characterizing the beast. The horn is a symbol of power, and is
frequently so used as an emblem or symbol in Daniel [Dan
7:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007.md), [Dan
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#020.md), [Dan
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024.md); [Dan
8:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#003.md), [Dan
8:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#020.md) and Revelation [Rev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006.md); [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001.md), [Rev
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011.md); [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003.md), [Rev
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012.md), [Rev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016.md). It is used as a symbol because
the great strength of horned animals is found there. Thus in [Amo
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#013.md), it is said:

"Ye that rejoice in a thing of nought,

That say, Have we not taken dominion to ourselves By our own strength?"

(Heb. horns.)

So in [Deu 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017.md) :

"His beauty shall be that of a young bull,

And his horns shall be the horns of a rhinoceros:

With these he shall push the people to the extremities of the land:

Such are the ten thousands of Ephraim,

Such the thousands of Manasseh."

\- Wemyss.

So in [Kg1 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#011.md), we find horns used
in a symbolic action on the part of the false prophet Zedekiah. "He made
him horns of iron, and said, Thus saith Jehovah, With these shalt thou
push the Syrians, until thou have consumed them." In [Zac
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#018.md), the four horns that are seen by
the prophet are said to be the four great powers which had scattered and
wasted the Jews. Compare Wemyss on the Symbolic Language of Scripture,
art. "Horns." There can be no doubt as to the meaning of the symbol
here, for it is explained in a subsequent part of the chapter [Dan
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024.md), "the ten horns are the ten kings
that shall arise." It would seem also, from that explanation, that they
were to be ten kings that would "arise" or spring out of that kingdom at
some period of its history. "And the ten horns out of this kingdom are
ten kings that shall arise;" that is, not that the kingdom itself would
spring out of ten others that would be amalgamated or consolidated into
one, but that out of that one kingdom there would spring up ten that
would exercise dominion, or in which the power of the one kingdom would
be ultimately lodged. Though Daniel appears to have seen these horns as
pertaining to the beast when he first saw him, yet the subsequent
explanation is, that these horns were emblems of the manner in which the
power of that one kingdom would be finally exerted; or that ten kings or
dynasties would spring out of it. We are, then, naturally to look for
the fulfillment of this in some one great kingdom of huge power that
would crush the nations, and from which, while the same general
characteristic would remain, there would spring up ten kings, or
dynasties, or kingdoms, in which the power would be concentrated.

\(f\) The springing up of the little horn [Dan
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008.md) : "I considered the horns, and,
behold, there came up among them another little horn." There are several
points to be noticed in regard to this:

\(1\) The fact that he "considered the horns;" that is, he looked on
them until another sprang up among them. This implies that when he first
saw the monster, it had no such horn, and that the horn sprang up a
considerable time after he first saw it - intimating that it would
occur, perhaps, far on in the history of the kingdom that was
symbolized. It is implied that it was not an event which would soon
occur.

\(2\) It sprang up "among" the others (ביניהן bēynēyhēn) - starting from
the same source, and pertaining to the same animal, and therefore a
development or putting forth of the same power. The language used here
does not designate, with any degree of certainty, the precise place
which it occupied, but it would seem that the others stood close
together, and that this sprang out of the center, or from the very midst
of them - implying that the new dominion symbolized would not be a
foreign dominion, but one that would spring out of the kingdom itself,
or that would seem to grow up in the kingdom.

\(3\) It was a little horn; that is, it was small at first, though
subsequently it grew so as to be emblematic of great power. This would
denote that the power symbolized would be small at first - springing up
gradually. The fulfillment of this would be found, neither in conquest
nor in revolution, nor in a change of dynasty, nor in a sudden change of
a constitution, but in some power that had an obscure origin, and that
was feeble and small at the beginning, yet gradually increasing, until,
by its own growth, it put aside a portion of the power before exercised
and occupied its place. We should naturally look for the fulfillment of
this in the increase of some power within the state that had a humble
origin, and that slowly developed itself until it absorbed a
considerable portion of the authority that essentially resided in the
kingdom represented by the monster.

\(4\) In the growth of that "horn," three of the others were plucked up
by the roots. The proper meaning of the word used to express this
(אתעקרו 'ethe‛ăqârâv) is, that they were rooted out - as a tree is
overturned by the roots, or the roots are turned out from the earth. The
process by which this was done seems to have been by growth. The gradual
increase of the horn so crowded on the others that a portion of them was
forced out, and fell. What is fairly indicated by this was not any act
of violence, or any sudden convulsion or revolution, but such a gradual
growth of power that a portion of the original power was removed, and
this new power occupied its place. There was no revolution, properly
so-called; no change of the whole dynasty, for a large portion of the
horns remained, but the gradual rise of a new power that would wield a
portion of that formerly wielded by others, and that would now wield the
power in its place. The number three would either indicate that three
parts out of the ten were absorbed in this way, or that a considerable,
though an indefinite portion, was thus absorbed.

\(5\) The eyes: "and behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes of a
man." Eyes denote intelligence, as we see objects by their aid. The rims
of the wheels in Ezekiel's vision were full of eyes [Eze
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#018.md), as symbolic of intelligence.
This would denote that the power here referred to would be remarkably
sagacious. We should naturally look for the fulfillment of this in a
power that laid its plans wisely and intelligently; that had large and
clear views of policy; that was shrewd and far-seeing in its counsels
and purposes; that was skilled in diplomacy; or, that was eminent for
statesman-like plans. This part of the symbol, if it stood alone, would
find its fulfillment in any wise and shrewd administration; as it stands
here, surrounded by others, it would seem that this, as contrasted with
them, was characteristically shrewd and far-seeing in its policy.
Lengerke, following Jerome, supposes that this means that the object
referred to would be a man, "as the eyes of men are keener and sharper
than those of other animals." But the more correct interpretation is
that above referred to - that it denotes intelligence, shrewdness,
sagacity.

\(6\) The mouth: "and a mouth speaking great things." A mouth indicating
pride and arrogance. This is explained in [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025.md), as meaning that he to whom it
refers would "speak great words against the Most High;" that is, would
be guilty of blasphemy. There would be such arrogance, and such claims
set up, and such a spirit evinced, that it would be in fact a speaking
against God. We naturally look for the fulfillment of this to some
haughty and blaspheming power; some power that would really blaspheme
religion, and that would be opposed to its progress and prosperity in
the world. The Septuagint, in the Codex Chisianus, adds here, "and shall
make war against the saints;" but these words are not found in the
original Chaldee. They accord, however, well with the explanation in
[Dan 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025.md). What has been here
considered embraces all that pertains properly to this symbol - the
symbol of the fourth beast - except the fact stated in [Dan
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#011.md), that the beast was slain, and
that his body was given to the burning flame. The inquiry as to the
fulfillment will be appropriate when we come to consider the explanation
given at the request of Daniel, by the angel, in [Dan
7:19-25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#019.md).

[Daniel 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 7:9</span></span>

I beheld - "I continued looking on these strange sights, and
contemplating these transformations." This implies that some time
elapsed before all these things had occurred. He looked on until he saw
a solemn judgment passed on this fourth beast particularly, as if God
had come forth in his majesty and glory to pronounce that judgment, and
to bring the power and arrogance of the beast to an end.

Till the thrones were cast down - The Chaldee word (כרסון kâresâvân)
means, properly, thrones - seats on which monarchs sit. So far as the
word is concerned, it would apply either to a throne occupied by an
earthly monarch, or to the throne of God. The use of the plural here
would seem to imply, at least, that the reference is not to the throne
of God, but to some other throne. Maurer and Lengerke suppose that the
allusion is to the thrones on which the celestial beings sat in the
solemn judgment that was to be pronounced - the throne of God, and the
thrones or seats of the attending inhabitants of heaven, coming with him
to the solemn judgment. Lengerke refers for illustration to [Kg1
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#019.md); [Isa
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001.md); [Job
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006.md), and [Rev
5:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#011.md). But the word itself might be
properly applied to the thrones of earthly monarchs as well as to the
throne of God. The phrase "were cast down" (רמיו remı̂yv), in our
translation, would seem to suppose that there was some throwing down, or
overturning of thrones, at this period, and that the solemn judgment
would follow this, or be consequent on this.

The Chaldee word (רמא remâh) means, as explained by Gesenius, to cast,
to throw [Dan 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#021.md), [Dan
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#024.md); [Dan
6:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#016.md); to set, to place, e. g.,
thrones; to impose tribute [Ezr 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#024.md).
The passage is rendered by the Latin Vulgate, throni positi sunt -
"thrones were placed;" by the Greek, ἐτέθησαν etethēsan - "were placed."
So Luther, stuhle gesetzt; and so Lengerke, stuhle aufgestellt - the
thrones were placed, or set up. The proper meaning, therefore, of the
phrase would seem to be - not, as in our translation, that the "thrones
would be cast down" - as if there was to be an overturning of thrones on
the earth to mark this particular period of history - but that there
was, in the vision, a setting up, or a placing of thrones for the
purpose of administering judgment, etc., on the beast. The use of the
plural is, doubtless, in accordance with the language elsewhere
employed, to denote the fact that the great Judge would be surrounded
with others who would be, as it were, associated in administering
justice - either angels or redeemed spirits.

Nothing is more common in the Scripture than to represent others as thus
associated with God in pronouncing judgment on men. Compare [Mat
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028.md); [Luk
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#030.md); [Co1
6:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#002.md); [Ti1
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#021.md); [Rev
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#026.md); [Rev
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004.md). The era, or period, therefore,
marked here, would be when a solemn Divine judgment was to be passed on
the "beast," or when some events were to take place, as if such a
judgment were pronounced. The events pertaining to the fourth beast were
to be the last in the series preparatory to the reign of the saints, or
the setting up of the kingdom of the Messiah, and therefore it is
introduced in this manner, as if a solemn judgment scene were to occur.

And the Ancient of days did sit - Was seated for the purposes of
judgment. The phrase "Ancient of days" - יומין עתיק ‛attı̂yq yômı̂yn - is
one that denotes an elderly or old person; meaning, he who is most
ancient as to days, and is equivalent to the French L'Eternel, or
English, The Eternal. It occurs only in [Dan
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009.md), [Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013.md), [Dan
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#022.md), and is a representation of one
venerable in years, sitting down for the purposes of judgment. The
appellation does not of itself denote eternity, but it is employed,
probably, with reference to the fact that God is eternal. God is often
represented under some such appellation, as he that is "from everlasting
to everlasting" [Psa 90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002.md), "the first
and the last" [Isa 44:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006.md), etc. There
can be no doubt that the reference here is to God as a Judge, or as
about to pronounce judgment, though there is no necessity for supposing
that it will be in a visible and literal form, anymore than there is for
supposing that all that is here represented by symbols will literally
take place.

If it should be insisted on that the proper interpretation demands that
there will be a literal and visible judgment, such as is here described,
it may be replied that the same rigid interpretation would demand that
there will be a literal "slaying of the beast, and a giving of his body
to the flame" [Dan 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#011.md), and more
generally still, that all that is here referred to by symbols will
literally occur. The fact, however, is, that all these events are
referred to by symbols - symbols which have an expressive meaning, but
which, by their very nature and design, are not to be literally
understood. All that is fairly implied here is, that events would occur
in regard to this fourth beast as if God should sit in solemn judgment
on it, and should condemn it in the manner here referred to. We are,
doubtless, in the fulfillment of this - to look for some event that will
be of so decisive and marked a character, that it may be regarded as a
Divine judgment in the case, or that will show the strongly marked
Divine disapprobation - as really as if the judgment-seat were formally
set, and God should appear in majesty to give sentence. Sitting was the
usual posture among the ancients, as it is among the moderns, in
pronouncing judgment. Among the ancients the judge sat on a throne or
bench while the parties stood before him (compare [Zac
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#013).md), and with the Greeks and Romans
so essential was the sitting posture for a judge, that a sentence
pronounced in any other posture was not valid. - Lengerke. It was a
maxim, Animus sedendo magis sapit; or, as Servius on the AEn. i. 56,
remarks, Est enim curantis et solliciti sedere.

Whose garment was white as snow - Whose robe. The reference here is to
the long flowing robe that was worn by ancient princes, noblemen, or
priests. See the notes at [Isa 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001.md).
Compare the notes at [Rev 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013.md). White
was an emblem of purity and honor, and was not an improper symbol of the
purity of the judge, and of the justness of the sentence which he would
pronounce. So the elder Pitt, in his celebrated speech against employing
Indians in the war with the American people, besought the bishops to
"interpose the unsullied purity of their lawn." Lengerke supposes, as
Prof. Stuart does on [Rev 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013.md), that
the whiteness here referred to was not the mere color of the material of
which the robe was made, but, was a celestial splendor or brightness, as
if it were lightning or fire - such as is appropriate to the Divine
Majesty. Lengerke refers here to [Exo
19:18-24](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018.md); [Dan
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#022.md); [Mat
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002.md); [Ti1
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016.md); 2 Esdras 7:55; Ascension of [Isa
8:21-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#021.md); [Rev
1:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013.md); [Rev
4:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#002.md). But the more correct
interpretation is to suppose that this refers to a pure white robe, such
as judges might wear, and which would not be an improper symbol of their
office.

And the hair of his head like the pure wool - That is, for whiteness - a
characteristic of venerable age. Compare the notes at [Rev
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014.md). The image here set before us is
that of one venerable by years and wisdom.

His throne was like the fiery flame - The seat on which he sat seemed to
be fire. That is, it was brilliant and splendid, as if it were a mass of
flame.

And his wheels as burning fire - The wheels of his throne - for, as in
Ezek. 1; 10, the throne on which Jehovah sat appeared to be on wheels.
In Ezekiel [Eze 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#016.md); [Eze
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#009.md), the wheels of the throne
appeared to be of the color of beryl; that is, they were like precious
stones. Here, perhaps, they had only the appearance of a flame - as such
wheels would seem to flash flames. So, Milton, in describing the chariot
of the Son of God:

"Forth rush'd with whirlwind sound

The chariot of Paternal Deity,

Flashing thick flames, wheel within wheel undrawn,

Itself instinct with spirit, but convoyed

By four cherubic shapes; four faces each

Had wondrous; as with stars their bodies all,

And wings were set with eyes; with eyes the wheels

Of beryl, and careering fires between."

\- Par. Lost, b. vi.

[Daniel 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">dan 7:10</span></span>

A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him - Streams of fire
seemed to burst forth from his throne. Representations of this kind
abound in the Scriptures to illustrate the majesty and glory of God.
Compare [Rev 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#005.md), "And out of the
throne proceeded lightnings, and thunderings, and voices." [Exo
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016.md); [Hab
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#004.md); [Psa
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#008.md).

Thousand thousands ministered unto him - "A thousand of thousands;" that
is, thousands multiplied a thousand times. The mind is struck with the
fact that there are thousands present - and then the number seems as
great as if those thousands were multiplied a thousand times. The idea
is that there was an immense - a countless host. The reference here is
to the angels, and God is often represented as attended with great
numbers of these celestial beings when he comes down to our world. [Deu
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002.md), "he came with ten thousands of
saints;" that is, of holy ones. [Psa
68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017.md), "the chariots of God are twenty
thousand, even thousands of angels." Compare [Jde
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014.md). The word "ministered" means that
they attended on him.

And ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him - An innumerable
host. These were not to be judged, but were attendants on him as he
pronounced sentence. The judgment here referred to was not on the world
at large, but on the beast, preparatory to giving the kingdom to the one
who was like the Son of man [Dan
7:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013.md).

The judgment was set - That is, all the arrangements for a solemn act of
judgment were made, and the process of the judgment commenced.

And the books were opened - As containing the record of the deeds of
those who were to be judged. Compare [Rev
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#012.md). The great Judge is represented
as having before him the record of all the deeds on which judgment was
to be pronounced, and to be about to pronounce sentence according to
those deeds. The judgment here referred to seems to have been some
solemn act on the part of God transferring the power over the world,
from what had long swayed it, to the saints. As already remarked, the
necessary interpretation of the passage does not require us to
understand this of a literal and visible judgment - of a personal
appearing of the "Ancient of days" - of a formal application to him by
"one like the Son of man" [Dan 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013.md) -
or of a public and visible making over to him of a kingdom upon the
earth. It is to be remembered that all this passed in vision before the
mind of the prophet; that it is a symbolic representation; and that we
are to find the fulfillment of this in some event changing the course of
empire - putting a period to the power represented by the "beast" and
the "horn," and causing that power to pass into other hands - producing
a change as great on the earth as if such a solemn act of judgment were
passed. The nature of the representation requires that we should look
for the fulfillment of this in some great and momentous change in human
affairs - some events that would take away the power of the "beast," and
that would cause the dominion to pass into other hands. On the
fulfillment, see the notes at [Dan
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#026.md).

[Daniel 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 7:11</span></span>

I beheld then, because of the voice of the great words which the horn
spake - I was attracted by these words - by their arrogance, and
haughtiness, and pride; and I saw that it was on account of these mainly
that the solemn judgment proceeded against the beast. The attitude of
the seer here is this - he heard arrogant and proud words uttered by the
"horn," and he waited in deep attention, and in earnest expectation, to
learn what judgment would be pronounced. He had seen [Dan
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008.md) that horn spring up and grow to
great power, and utter great things; he had then seen, immediately on
this, a solemn and sublime preparation for judgment, and he now waited
anxiously to learn what sentence would be pronounced. The result is
stated in the subsequent part of the verse.

I beheld - I continued beholding. This would seem to imply that it was
not done at once, but that some time intervened.

Even until the beast was slain - The fourth beast: what had the ten
horns, and on which the little horn had sprung up. This was the result
of the judgment. It is evidently implied here that the beast was slain
on account of the words uttered by the horn that sprang up, or that the
pride and arrogance denoted by that symbol were the cause of the fact
that the beast was put to death. It is not said by whom the beast would
be slain; but the fair meaning is, that the procuring cause of that
death would be the Divine judgment, on account of the pride and
arrogancy of the "horn" that sprang up in the midst of the others. If
the "beast" represents a mighty monarchy that would exist on the earth
and the "little horn" a new power that would spring out of that, then
the fulfillment is to be found in such a fact as this - that this power,
so mighty and terrible formerly, and that crushed down the nations,
would, under the Divine judgment, be ultimately destroyed, on account of
the nature of the authority claimed. We are to look for the
accomplishment of this in some such state of things as that of a new
power springing out of an existing dominion, that the existing dominion
still remains, but was so much controlled by the new power, that it
would be necessary to destroy the former on account of the arrogance and
pride of what sprang from it. In other words, the destruction of the
kingdom represented by the fourth beast would be, as a Divine judgment,
on account of the arrogancy of that represented by the little horn.

And his body destroyed - That is, there would be a destruction of the
kingdom here represented as much as there would be of the beast if his
body was destroyed. The power of that kingdom, as such, is to come to an
end.

And given to the burning flame - Consumed. This would represent, in
strong terms, that the power here symbolized by the beast would be
utterly destroyed. It is not, however, necessary to suppose that this is
to be the mode in which it would be done, or that it would be by fire.
It is to be remembered that all this is symbol, and no one part of the
symbol should be taken literally more than another, nor is it congruous
to suppose there would be a literal consuming fire in the case anymore
than that there would be literally a beast, or ten horns, or a little
horn, The fair meaning is, that there would be as real a destruction as
if it were accomplished by fire; or a destruction of which fire would be
the proper emblem. The allusion is here, probably, to the fact that the
dead bodies of animals were often consumed by fire.

[Daniel 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">dan 7:12</span></span>

As concerning the rest of the beasts - They had been superseded, but not
destroyed. It would seem that they were still represented in vision to
Daniel, as retaining their existence, though their power was taken away,
and their fierceness subdued, or that they still seemed to remain alive
for a time, or while the vision was passing. They were not cut down,
destroyed, and consumed as the fourth beast was.

They had their dominion taken away - They were superseded, or they no
longer exercised power. They no more appeared exerting a control over
the nations. They still existed, but they were subdued and quiet. It was
possible to discern them, but they no longer acted the conspicuous part
which they had done in the days of their greatness and grandeur. Their
power had passed away. This cannot be difficult of interpretation. We
should naturally look for the fulfillment of this in the fact that the
nations referred to by these first three beasts were still in being, and
could be recognized as nations, in their boundaries, or customs, or
languages; but that the power which they had wielded had passed into
other hands.

Yet their lives were prolonged - Margin, as in Chaldee, "a prolonging in
life was given them." That is, they were not utterly destroyed and
consumed as the power of the fourth beast was after the solemn judgment.
The meaning is, that in these kingdoms there would be energy for a time.
They had life still; and the difference between them and the kingdom
represented by the fourth beast was what would exist between wild
animals subdued but still living, and a wild animal killed and burned.
We should look for the fulfillment of this in some state of things where
the kingdoms referred to by the three beasts were subdued and succeeded
by others, though they still retained something of their national
character; while the other kingdom had no successor of a civil kind, but
where its power wholly ceased, and the dominion went wholly into other
hands - so that it might be said that that kingdom, as such, had wholly
ceased to be.

For a season and time - Compare the notes at [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025.md). The time mentioned here is not
definite. The phrase used (ועדן עד־זמן ‛ad-zeman ve‛ı̂ddân) refers to a
definite period, both the words in the original referring to a
designated or appointed time, though neither of them indicates anything
about the length of the time, anymore than our word time does. Luther
renders this, "For there was a time and an hour appointed to them how
long each one should continue." Grotius explains this as meaning,
"Beyond the time fixed by God they could not continue." The true meaning
of the Chaldee is probably this: "For a time, even a definite time." The
mind of the prophet is at first fixed upon the fact that they continue
to live; then upon the fact, somehow apparent, that it is for a definite
period. Perhaps in the vision he saw them one after another die or
disappear. In the words used here, however, there is nothing by which we
can determine how long they were to continue. The time that the power
represented by the little horn is to continue explained in [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025.md), but there is no clue by which we
can ascertain how long the existence of the power represented by the
first three beasts was to continue. All that is clear is, that it was to
be lengthened out for some period, but that that was a definite and
fixed period.

[Daniel 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 7:13</span></span>

I saw in the night visions - Evidently in the same night visions, or on
the same occasion, for the visions are connected. See [Dan
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001.md), [Dan
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007.md). The meaning is, that he continued
beholding, or that a new vision passed before him.

And, behold, one like the Son of man ... - It is remarkable that Daniel
does not attempt to represent this by any symbol. The representation by
symbols ceases with the fourth beast; and now the description assumes a
literal form - the setting up of the kingdom of the Messiah and of the
saints. Why this change of form occurs is not stated or known, but the
sacred writers seem carefully to have avoided any representation of the
Messiah by symbols. The phrase "The Son of Man" - אנשׁ בר bar 'ĕnâsh -
does not occur elsewhere in the Old Testament in such a connection, and
with such a reference as it has here, though it is often found in the
New, and is, in fact, the favorite term by which the Saviour designates
himself. In [Dan 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#025.md), we have the
phrase "the Son of God" (see the note at that passage), as applicable to
one who appeared with the three" children" that were cast into the
burning furnace; and in Ezekiel, the phrase "son of man" often occurs as
applicable to himself as a prophet, being found more than eighty times
in his prophecies, but the expression here used does not elsewhere occur
in the Old Testament as applicable to the personage intended. As
occurring here, it is important to explain it, not only in view of the
events connected with it in the prophecy, but as having done much to
mould the language of the New Testament. There are three questions in
regard to its meaning: What does it signify? To whom does it refer? And
what would be its proper fulfillment?

\(1\) The phrase is more than a mere Hebrew or Chaldee expression to
denote man, but is always used with some peculiar significancy, and with
relation to some peculiar characteristic of the person to whom it is
applied, or with some special design. To ascertain this design, regard
should be had to the expression of the original. "While the words אישׁ
'ı̂ysh and אישׁה 'ı̂iyshâh are used simply as designations of sex, אנושׁ
'ĕnôsh, which is etymologically akin to אישׁ 'ı̂ysh, is employed with
constant reference to its original meaning, to be weak, sick; it is the
ethical designation of man, but אדם 'âdâm denotes man as to his,
physical, natural condition - whence the use of the word in such
passages as [Psa 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#004.md); [Job
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#006.md), and also its connection with בן
bên are satisfactorily explained, The emphatic address אדם בן bên 'âdâm
- Son of man - is therefore (in Ezekiel) a continued admonition to the
prophet to remember that he is a man like all the rest." - Havernick,
Com. on, [Eze 2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#001.md), quoted in the
Bibliotheca Sacra, v. 718. The expression used here is בר־אנושׁ bar
-'ĕnôsh, and would properly refer to man as weak and feeble, and as
liable to be sick, etc. Applied to anyone as "a Son of man," it would be
used to denote that he partook of the weakness and infirmities of the
race; and, as the phrase "the Son of man" is used in the New Testament
when applied by the Saviour to himself, there is an undoubted reference
to this fact - that he sustained a peculiar relation to our race; that
he was in all respects a man; that he was one of us; that he had so
taken our nature on himself that there was a peculiar propriety that a
term which would at once designate this should be given to him. The
phrase used here by Daniel would denote some one

\(a\) in the human form;

\(b\) some one sustaining a peculiar relation to man - as if human
nature were embodied in him.

\(2\) The next inquiry here is, to whom, this refers? Who, in fact, was
the one that was thus seen in vision by the prophet? Or who was designed
to be set forth by this? This inquiry is not so much, whom did Daniel
suppose or understand this to be? as, who was in fact designed to be
represented; or in whom would the fulfillment be found? For, on the
supposition that this was a heavenly vision, it is clear that it was
intended to designate some one in whom the complete fulfillment was to
be found. Now, admitting that this was a heavenly vision, and that it
was intended to represent what would occur in future times, there are
the clearest reasons for supposing that the Messiah was referred to; and
indeed this is so plain, that it may be assumed as one of the
indisputable things by which to determine the character and design of
the prophecy. Among these reasons are the following:

\(a\) The name itself, as a name assumed by the Lord Jesus - the
favorite name by which he chose to designate himself when on the earth.
This name he used technically; he used it as one that would be
understood to denote the Messiah; he used it as if it needed no
explanation as having a reference to the Messiah. But this usage could
have been derived only from this passage in Daniel, for there is no
other place in the Old Testament where the name could refer with
propriety to the Messiah, or would be understood to be applicable to
him.

\(b\) This interpretation has been given to it by the Jewish writers in
general, in all ages. I refer to this, not to say that their explanation
is authoritative, but to show that it is the natural and obvious
meaning; and because, as we shall see, it is what has given shape and
form to the language of the New Testament, and is fully sanctioned
there. Thus, in the ancient book of Zohar it is said, "In the times of
the Messiah, Israel shall be one people to the Lord, and he shall make
them one nation in the earth, and they shall rule above and below; as it
is written, "Behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of
heaven;" this is the King Messiah, of whom it is written, And in the
days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom which shall
never be destroyed, etc." So in the Talmud, and so the majority of the
ancient Jewish rabbis. See Gill, Com. in loc. It is true that this
interpretation has not been uniform among the Jewish rabbis, but still
it has prevailed among them, as it has among Christian interpreters.

\(c\) A sanction seems to be given to this interpretation by the
adoption of the title "Son of man" by the Lord Jesus, as that by which
he chose to designate himself. That title was such as would constantly
suggest this place in Daniel as referring to himself, and especially as
he connected with it the declaration that "the Son of man would come in
the clouds of heaven, etc." It was hardly possible that he should use
the title in such a connection without suggesting this place in Daniel,
or without leaving the impression on the minds of his hearers that he
meant to be understood as applying this to himself.

\(d\) It may be added, that it cannot with propriety be applied to any
other. Porphyry, indeed, supposed that Judas Maccabeus was intended;
Grotius that it referred to the Roman people; Aben Ezra to the people of
Israel; and Cocceius to the people of the Most High (Gill); but all
these are unnatural interpretations, and are contrary to what one would
obtain by allowing the language of the New Testament to influence his
mind. The title - so often used by the Saviour himself; the attending
circumstances of the clouds of heaven; the place which the vision
occupies - so immediately preceding the setting up of the kingdom of the
saints; and the fact that that kingdom can be set up only under the
Messiah, all point to him as the personage represented in the vision.

\(3\) But if it refers to the Messiah, the next inquiry is, What is to
be regarded as the proper fulfillment of the vision? To what precisely
does it relate? Are we to suppose that there will be a literal appearing
of the Son of man - the Messiah - in the clouds of heaven, and a passing
over of the kingdom in a public and solemn manner into the hands of the
saints? In reply to these questions, it may be remarked

\(a\) that this cannot be understood as relating to the last judgment,
for it is not introduced with reference to at all. The "Son of man" is
not here represented as coming with a view to judge the world at the
winding-up of human affairs, but for the purpose of setting up a
kingdom, or procuring a kingdom for his saints. There is no assembling
of the people of the world together; no act of judging the righteous and
the wicked; no pronouncing of a sentence on either. It is evident that
the world is to continue much longer under the dominion of the saints.

\(b\) It is not to be taken literally; that is, we are not, from this
passage, to expect a literal appearance of the of man in the clouds of
heaven, preparatory to the setting up of the kingdom of the saints. For
if one portion is to be taken literally, there is no reason why all
should not be. Then we are to expect, not merely the appearing of the
Son of man in the clouds, but also the following things, as a part of
the fulfillment of the vision, to wit: the literal placing of a throne,
or seat; the literal streaming forth of flame from his throne; the
literal appearing of the "Ancient of days," with a garment of white, and
hair as wool; a literal approach of the Son of man to him as seated on
his throne to ask of him a kingdom, etc. But no one can believe that all
this is to occur; no one does believe that it will.

\(c\) The proper interpretation is to regard this, as it was seen by
Daniel, as a vision - a representation of a state of things in the world
as if what is here described would occur. That is, great events were to
take place, of which this would be a proper symbolic representation - or
as if the Son of man, the Messiah, would thus appear; would approach the
"Ancient of days;" would receive a kingdom, and would make it over to
the saints. Now, there is no real difficulty in understanding what is
here meant to be taught, and what we are to expect; and these points of
fact are the following, namely,:

1\. That he who is here called the "Ancient of days" is the source of
power and dominion.

2\. That there would be some severe adjudication of the power here
represented by the beast and the horn.

3\. That the kingdom or dominion of the world is to be in fact given to
him who is here called "the Son of man" - the Messiah - a fact
represented here by his approaching the "Ancient of days," who is the
source of all power.

4\. That there is to be some passing over of the kingdom or power into
the hands of the saints; or some setting up of a kingdom on the earth,
of which he is to be the head, and in which the dominion over the world
shall be in fact in the hands of his people, and the laws of the Messiah
everywhere prevail. What will be the essential characteristics of that
kingdom we may learn by the exposition of [Dan
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014.md), compared with [Dan
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027.md).

Came with the clouds of heaven - That is, he seemed to come down from
the sky encompassed with clouds. So the Saviour, probably intending to
refer to this language, speaks of himself, when he shall come to judge
the world, as coming in clouds, or encompassed by clouds, [Mat
24:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030.md); [Mat
26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064.md); [Mar
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#026.md); [Mar
14:62](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#062.md). Compare [Rev
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#007.md). Clouds are an appropriate symbol
of the Divinity. See [Psa 97:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#002.md); [Psa
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003.md). The same symbol was employed by
the pagan, representing their deities as appearing covered with a cloud:

"Tandem venias, precamur,

Nube candentes humeros amictus,

Augur Apollo!"

\- Horace, Lyr. I. 2.

The allusion in the place before us is not to the last judgment, but to
the fact that a kingdom on tho earth would be passed over into the hands
of the Messiah. He is represented as coming sublimely to the world, and
as receiving a kingdom that would succeed those represented by the
beasts.

And came to the Ancient of days - [Dan
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009.md). This shows that the passage
cannot refer to the final judgment. He comes to the "Ancient of days" -
to God as the source of power - as if to ask a petition for a kingdom;
not to pronounce a judgment on mankind. The act here appropriately
denotes that God is the source of all power; that all who reign derive
their authority from him, and that even the Messiah, in setting up his
kingdom in the world, receives it at the hand of the Father. This is in
accordance with all the representations in the New Testament. We are not
to suppose that this will occur literally. There is to be no such
literal sitting of one with the appearance of age - denoted by the
"Ancient of days" - on a throne; nor is there to be any such literal
approaching him by one in the form of a man to receive a kingdom. Such
passages show the absurdity of the attcmpts to interpret the language of
the Scriptures literally. All that this symbol fairly means must be,
that the kingdom that was to be set up under the Messiah on the earth
was received from God.

And they brought him near before him - That is, he was brought near
before him. Or, it may mean that his attendants brought him near. All
that the language necessarily implies is, that he came near to his seat,
and received from him a kingdom.

[Daniel 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">dan 7:14</span></span>

And there was given him dominion - That is, by him who is represented as
the "Ancient of days." The fair interpretation of this is, that he
received the dominion from him. This is the uniform representation in
the New Testament. Compare [Mat 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018.md);
[Joh 3:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#035.md); [Co1
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#027.md). The word dominion here means
rule or auhority - such as a prince exercises. He was set over a kingdom
as a prince or ruler.

And glory - That is the glory or honor appropriate to one at the head of
such an empire.

And a kingdom - That is, he would reign. He would have sovereignty. The
nature and the extent of this kingdom is immediately designated as one
that would be universal and perpetual. What is properly implied in this
language as to the question whether it will be literal and visible, will
be appropriately considered at the close of the verse. All that is
necessary to be noticed here is, that it is everywhere promised in the
Old Testament that the Messiah would be a king, and have a kingdom.
Compare [Psa 2:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001.md); [Isa
9:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md).

That all people, nations, and languages should serve him - It would be
universal; would embrace all nations. The language here is such as would
emphatically denote universality. See the notes at [Dan
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#004.md); [Dan
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#001.md). It implies that that kingdom
would extend over all the nations of the earth, and we are to look for
the fulfillment of this only in such a universal reign of the Messiah.

His dominion is an everlasting dominion ... - The others, represented by
the four beasts, would all pass away, but this would be permanent and
eternal. Nothing would destroy it. It would not have, as most kingdoms
of the earth have had, any such internal weakness or source of discord
as would be the cause of its destruction, nor would there be any
external power that would invade or overthrow it. This declaration
affirms nothing as to the form in which the kingdom would exist, but
merely asserts the fact that it would do so. Respecting the kingdom of
the Messiah, to which this undoubtedly alludes, the same thing is
repeatedly and uniformly affirmed in the New Testament. Compare [Mat
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018.md); [Heb
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#028.md); [Rev
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015.md). The form and manner in which
this will occur is more fully developed in the New Testament; in the
vision seen by Daniel the fact only is stated.

The question now arises, What would be a fulfillment of this prediction
respecting the kingdom that will be given to the saints? What, from the
language used in the vision, should we be legitimately authorized to
expect to take place on the earth? In regard to these questions, there
are but two views which can be taken, and the interpretation of the
passage must sustain the one or the other.

\(a\) One is what supposes that this will be literally fulfilled in the
sense that the Son of God, the Messiah, will reign personally on earth.
According to this, he will come to set up a visible and glorious
kingdom, making Jerusalem his capital, and swaying his scepter over the
world. All nations and people will be subject to him; all authority will
be wielded by his people under him.

\(b\) According to the other view, there will be a spiritual reign of
the Son of God over the earth; that is, the principles of his religion
will everywhere prevail, and the righteous will rule, and the laws of
the Redeemer will be obeyed everywhere. There will be such a prevalence
of his gospel on the hearts of all - rulers and people; the gospel will
so modify all laws, and control all customs, and remove all abuses, and
all the forms of evil; men will be so generally under the influence of
that gospel, that it may be said that He reigns on the earth, or that
the government actually administered is his.

In regard to these different views, and to the true interpretation of
the passage, it may be remarked,

\(1\) That we are not to look for the literal fulfillment of this; we
are not to expect that what is here described will literally occur. The
whole is evidently a symbolic representation, and the fulfillment is to
be found in something that the symbol would properly denote. No one can
pretend that there is to be an actual sitting on the throne, by one in
the form of an old man - "the Ancient of days" - or that there is to be
a literal coming to him by one "like the Son of man," to receive a
kingdom. But if one part of the representation is not to be literally
interpreted, why should the other be? It may be added, that it is
nowhere said that this would literally occur.

\(2\) All that is fairly implied here is found in the latter
interpretation. Such a prevalence of the principles of the gospel would
meet the force of the language, and every part of the vision would find
a real fulfillment in that.

\(a\) The fact that it proceeds from God - represented as "the Ancient
of days."

\(b\) The fact that it is given by him, or that the kingdom is made over
by him to the Messiah.

\(c\) The fact that the Messiah would have such a kingdom; that is, that
he would reign on the earth, in the hearts and lives of men.

\(d\) The fact that that kingdom would be universal - extending over all
people.

\(e\) And the fact that it would be perpetual; that is, that it would
extend down to the end of time, or the consummation of all things here,
and that it would be then eternal in the heavens.

For a very full and ample illustration of this passage - so full and
ample as to supersede the necessity of any additional illustration here,
see the notes at [Dan 2:44-45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044.md).

[Daniel 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">dan 7:15</span></span>

I Daniel was grieved in my spirit - That is, I was troubled; or my heart
was made heavy and sad. This was probably in part because he did not
fully understand the meaning of the vision, and partly on account of the
fearful and momentous nature of what was indicated by it. So the apostle
John [Rev 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#004.md) says, "And I wept much
because no man was found worthy to open and to read the book."

In the midst of my body - Margin, as in the Chaldee, sheath. The body is
undoubtedly referred to, and is so called as the envelope of the mind -
or as that in which the soul is inserted, as the sword is in the sheath,
and from which it is drawn out by death. The same metaphor is employed
by Pliny: Donec cremato co inimici remeanti animae velut vaginam
ademerint. So, too, a certain philosopher, who was slighted by Alexander
the Great on account of his ugly face, is said to have replied, Corpus
hominis nil est nisi vagina gladii in qua anima reconditur. - Gesenius.
Compare Lengerke, in loc. See also [Job
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#008.md), "When God taketh away his soul;"
or rather draws out his soul, as a sword is drawn out of the sheath.
Compare the note at that place. See also Buxtorf's Lexicon Tal. p. 1307.
The meaning here is plain - that Daniel felt sad and troubled in mind,
and that this produced a sensible effect on his body.

And the visions of my head troubled me - The head is here regarded as
the seat of the intellect, and he speaks of these visions as if they
were seen by the head. That is, they seemed to pass before his eyes.

[Daniel 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">dan 7:16</span></span>

I came near unto one of them that stood by - That is, to one of the
angels who appeared to stand near the throne. [Dan
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010.md). Compare [Dan
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013.md); [Zac
4:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#004.md); [Rev
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#013.md). It was natural for Daniel to
suppose that the angels who were seen encircling the throne would be
able to give him information on the subject, and the answers which
Daniel received show that he was not mistaken in his expectation. God
has often employed angels to communicate important truths to men, or has
made them the medium of communicating his will. Compare [Rev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md); [Act
7:53](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#053.md); [Heb
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#002.md).

So he told me, and made me know the interpretation of the things - He
explained the meaning of the symbols, so that Daniel understood them. It
would seem probable that Daniel has not recorded all that the angel
communicated respecting the vision, but he has preserved so much that we
may understand its general signification.

[Daniel 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 7:17</span></span>

These great beasts, which are four, are four kings - Four kings or four
dynasties. There is no reason for supposing that they refer to
individual kings, but the obvious meaning is, that they refer to four
dominions or empires that would succeed one another on the earth. So the
whole representation leads us to suppose, and so the passage has been
always interpreted. The Latin Vulgate renders it regna; the Septuagint
βασιλεῖαι basileiai; Luther, Reiche; Lengerke, Konigreiche. This
interpretation is confirmed, also, by [Dan
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#023.md), where it is expressly said that
"the fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom upon earth." See also [Dan
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024.md).

Which shall arise out of the earth - In [Dan
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#002.md) the beasts are represented as
coming up from the sea - the emblem of agitated nations. Here the same
idea is presented more literally - that they would seem to spring up out
of the earth, thus thrown into wild commotion. These dynasties were to
be upon the earth, and they were in all things to indicate their earthly
origin. Perhaps, also, it is designed by these words to denote a marked
contrast between these four dynasties and the one that would follow -
which would be of heavenly origin. This was the general intimation which
was given to the meaning of the vision, and he was satisfied at once as
to the explanation, so far as the first three were concerned; but the
fourth seemed to indicate more mysterious and important events, and
respecting this he was induced to ask a more particular explanation.

[Daniel 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">dan 7:18</span></span>

But the saints of the Most High shall take the kingdom - That is, they
shall ultimately take possession of the rule over all the world, and
shall control it from that time onward to the end. This is the grand
thing which the vision is designed to disclose, and on this it was
evidently the intention to fix the mind. Everything before was
preparatory and subordinate to this, and to this all things tended. The
phrase rendered the Most High - in the margin "high ones, i. e., things
or places" - עליונין ‛eleyônı̂yn - is in the plural number, and means
literally high ones; but there can be no doubt that it refers here to
God, and is given to Him as the word אלהים 'ĕlohı̂ym is ([Gen
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001), et saepe.md), to denote majesty or
honor - pluralis excellentice. The word rendered saints means the holy,
and the reference is undoubtedly to the people of God on the earth,
meaning here that they would take possession of the kingdom, or that
they would rule. When true religion shall everywhere prevail, and when
all offices shall be in the hands of good men - of men that fear God and
that keep his commandments - instead of being in the hands of bad men,
as they generally have been, then this prediction will be accomplished
in respect to all that is fairly implied in it.

And possess the kingdom for ever, even forever and ever - This is a
strong and emphatic declaration, affirming that this dominion will be
perpetual. It will not pass away, like the other kingdoms, to be
succeeded by another one. What is here affirmed, as above remarked, will
be true if such a reign should continue on earth to the winding up of
all things, and should then be succeeded by an eternal reign of holiness
in the heavens. It is not necessary to interpret this as meaning that
there would be literally an eternal kingdom on this earth, for it is
everywhere taught in the Scriptures that the present order of things
will come to a close. But it does seem necessary to understand this as
teaching that there will be a state of prevalent righteousness on the
earth hereafter, and that when that is introduced it will continue to
the end of time.

[Daniel 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 7:19</span></span>

Then I would know the truth of the fourth beast - I desired to know
particularly what was symbolized by that. He appears to have been
satisfied with the most general intimations in regard to the first three
beasts, for the kingdoms represented by them seemed to have nothing very
remarkable. But it was different in regard to the fourth. The beast
itself was so remarkable - so fierce and terrific; the number of the
horns was so great; the springing up of the little horn was so
surprising; the character of that horn was so unusual; the judgment
passed on it was so solemn; and the vision of one like the Son of man
coming to take possession of the kingdom - all these things were of so
fearful and so uncommon a character, that the mind of Daniel was
peculiarly affected in view of them, and he sought earnestly for a
further explanation. In the description that Daniel here gives of the
beast and the horns, he refers in the main to the same cirumstances
which he had before described; but he adds a few which he had before
omitted, all tending to impress the mind more deeply with the fearful
character and the momentous import of the vision; as, for instance, the
fact that it had nails of brass, and made war with the saints.

Which was diverse from all the others - Different in its form and
character; - so different as to attract particular attention, and to
leave the impression that something very peculiar and remarkable was
denoted by it. Notes, [Dan 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007.md).

Exceeding dreadful - Notes, [Dan 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007.md).

And his nails of brass - This circumstance is not mentioned in the first
statement, [Dan 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007.md). It accords well
with the other part of the description, that his teeth were of iron, and
is designed to denote the fearful and terrific character of tho kingdom,
symbolized by the beast.

Which devoured ... - See the notes at [Dan
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007.md).

[Daniel 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">dan 7:20</span></span>

And of the ten horns ... - See the notes at [Dan
7:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007.md).

Whose look was more stout than his fellows - literally, "whose aspect
was greater than that of its companions." This does not mean that its
look or aspect was more fierce or severe than that of the others, but
that the appearance of the horn was greater - רב rab. In [Dan
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008.md), this is described as a "little
horn;" and to understand this, and reconcile the two, we must suppose
that the seer watched this as it grew until it became the largest of the
number. Three fell before it, and it outgrew in size all the others
until it became the most prominent. This would clearly denote that the
kingdom or the authority referred to by this eleventh horn would be more
distinct and prominent than either of the others - would become so
conspicuous and important as in fact to concentrate and embody all the
power of the beast.

[Daniel 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">dan 7:21</span></span>

I beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints - I continued to
look on this until I saw war made by this horn with the people of God.
This circumstance, also, is not referred to in the first description,
and the order of time in the description would seem to imply that the
war with the saints would be at a considerable period after the first
appearance of the horn, or would be only when it had grown to its great
size and power. This "war" might refer to open hostilities, carried on
in the usual manner of war; or to persecution, or to any invasion of the
rights and privileges of others. As it is a "war with the saints," it
would be most natural to refer it to persecution.

And prevailed against them - That is, he overcame and subdued them, he
was stronger than they were, and they were not able to resist him. The
same events are evidently referred to and in almost similar language -
borrowed probably from Daniel - in [Rev
13:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005.md) : "And there was given him a
mouth speaking great things and blasphemies, and power was given unto
him to continue forty and two months. And he opened his mouth in
blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and
them that dwell in heaven. And it was given him to make war with the
saints, and to overcome them; and power was given him over all kindreds,
and tongues, and nations."

[Daniel 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">dan 7:22</span></span>

Until the Ancient of days came - Notes, [Dan
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009.md). That is, this was to occur after
the horn grew to its full size, and after the war was made with the
saints, and they had been overcome. It does not affirm that this would
occur immediately, but that at some subsequent period the Ancient of
days would come, and would set up a kingdom on the earth, or would make
over the kingdom to the saints. There would be as real a transfer and as
actual a setting up of a peculiar kingdom, as if God himself should
appear on the earth, and should publicly make over the dominion to them.

And judgment was given to the saints of the Most High - That is, there
was a solemn act of judgement in the case by which the kingdom was given
to their hands. It was as real a transfer as if there had been a
judgment pronounced on the beast, and he had been condemned and
overthrown, and as if the dominion which he once had should be made over
to the servants of the Most High.

And the time came that the saints possessed the kingdom - That they
ruled on the earth; that good men made and administered the laws; that
the principles of religion prevailed, influencing the hearts of all men,
and causing righteousness and justice to be done. The universal
prevalence of true religion, in controlling the hearts and lives of men,
and disposing them to do what in all circumstances ought to be done,
would be a complete fulfillment of all that is here said. Thus far the
description of what Daniel saw, of which he was so desirous to obtain an
explanation. The explanation follows, and embraces the remainder of the
chapter.

[Daniel 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">dan 7:23</span></span>

Thus he said ... - That is, in explanation of the fourth symbol which
appeared - the fourth beast, and of the events connected with his
appearing. This explanation embraces the remainder of the chapter; and
as the whole subject appeared difficult and momentous to Daniel before
the explanation, so it may be said to be in many respects difficult, and
in all respects momentous still. It is a question on which expositors of
the Scriptures are by no means agreed, to what it refers, and whether it
has been already accomplished, or whether it extends still into the
future; and it is of importance, therefore, to determine, if possible,
what is its true meaning. The two points of inquiry which are properly
before us are, first, What do the words of explanation as used by the
angel fairly imply - that is, what, according to the fair interpretation
of these words, would be the course of events referred to, or what
should we naturally expect to find as actually occurring on the earth in
the fulfillment of this? and, secondly, To what events the prophecy is
actually to be applied - whether to what has already occurred, or what
is yet to occur; whether we can find anything in what is now past which
would be an accomplishment of this, or whether it is to be applied to
events a part of which are yet future? This will lead us into a
statement of the points which it is affirmed would occur in regard to
this kingdom: and then into an inquiry respecting the application.

What is fairly implied in the explanation of the angel? This would
embrace the following points:

\(1\) There was to be a fourth kingdom on the earth: "the fourth beast
shall be the fourth kingdom upon earth," [Dan
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#023.md). This was to succeed the other
three, symbolized by the lion, the bear, and the leopard. No further
reference is made to them, but the characteristics of this are fully
stated. Those characteristics, which have been explained in the notes at
[Dan 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007.md), are, as here repeated,

\(a\) that it would be in important respects different from the others;

\(b\) that it would devour, or subdue the whole earth;

\(c\) that it would tread it down and break it in pieces; that is, it
would be a universal dynasty, of a fierce and warlike character, that
would keep the whole world subdued and subject by power.

\(2\) out of this sovereignty or dominion, ten powers would arise [Dan
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024.md) : "and the ten horns out of this
kingdom are ten kings that shall arise." Compare the notes at [Dan
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007.md). That is, they would spring out of
this one dominion, or it would be broken up into these minor
sovereignties, yet all manifestly springing from the one kingdom, and
wielding the same power. We should not naturally look for the
fulfillment of this in a succession of kings, for that would have been
symbolized by the beast itself representing the entire dominion or
dynasty, but rather to a number of contemporaneous powers that had
somehow sprung out of the one power, or that now possessed and wielded
the power of that one dominion. If the kingdom here referred to should
be broken up into such a number of powers, or if in any way these powers
became possessed of this authority, and wielded it, such a fact would
express what we are to expect to find in this kingdom.

\(3\) From the midst of these sovereignties or kingdoms there was to
spring up another one of peculiar characteristics, [Dan
7:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024.md). These characteristics are the
following:

\(a\) That it would spring out of the others, or be, as it were, one
form of the administration of the same power - as the eleventh horn
sprang from the same source as the ten, and we are, therefore, to look
for the exercise of this power somehow in connection with the same
kingdom or dynasty.

\(b\) This would not spring up contemporaneously with the ten, but would
arise "after them" - and we are to look for the power as in some sense
succeeding them.

\(c\) It would be small at first - as was the horn [Dan
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008.md), and we are to look for the
fulfillment in some power that would be feeble at first.

\(d\) It would grow to be a mighty power for the little horn became so
powerful as to pluck up three of the others [Dan
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008.md), and it is said in the explanation
[Dan 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024.md), that he would subdue three
of the kings.

\(e\) It would subdue "three kings;" that is, three of the ten, and we
are to look for the fulfillment in some manifestation of that power by
which, either literally three of them were overthrown, or by which about
one-third of their power was taken away. The mention of the exact number
of "three," however, would rather seem to imply that we are to expect
some such exact fulfillment, or some prostration of three sovereignties
by the new power that would arise.

\(f\) It would be proud, and ambitious, and particularly arrogant
against God: "and he shall speak great words against the Most High,"
[Dan 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025.md). The Chaldee here rendered
against - לצד letsad - means, literally, at, or against the part of it,
and then against. Vulgate contra; Greek πρὸς pros. This would be
fulfilled in one who would blaspheme God directly; or who would be
rebellious against his government and authority; or who would complain
of his administration and laws; or who would give utterance to harsh and
reproachful words against his real claims. It would find a fulfillment
obviously in an open opposer of the claims and the authority of the true
God; or in one the whole spirit and bearing of whose pretensions might
be fairly construed as in fact an utterance of great words against him.

\(g\) This would be a persecuting power: "and shall wear out the saints
of the Most High," [Dan 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025.md). That is,
it would be characterized by a persecution of the real saints - of those
who were truly the friends of God, and who served him.

\(h\) It would claim legislative power, the power of changing
established customs and laws: "and think to change times and laws," [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025.md). The word rendered "think" (סבר
sebar) means, more properly, to hope; and the idea here is, that he
hopes and trusts to be able to change times and laws. Vulgate, Putabit
quod possit mutare tempora, etc. The state of mind here referred to
would be that of one who would desire to produce changes in regard to
the times and laws referred to, and who would hope that he would be able
to effect it. If there was a strong wish to do this, and if there was a
belief that in any way he could bring it about, it would meet what is
implied in the use of the word here. There would be the exercise of some
kind of authority in regard to existing times for festivals, or other
occasions, and to existing laws, and there would be a purpose so to
change them as to accomplish his own ends.

The word "times" - זמנין zı̂mnı̂yn - would seem to refer properly to some
stated or designated times - as times appointed for festivals, etc.
Gesenius, "time, specially an appointed time, season:" [Ecc
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#001.md); [Neh
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#006.md); [Est
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#027.md), [Est
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#031.md). Lengerke renders the word
Fest-Zeiten - "festival times," and explains it as meaning the holy
times, festival days, [Lev 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#002.md), [Lev
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#004.md), [Lev
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#037.md), [Lev
23:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#044.md). The allusion is, undoubtedly,
to such periods set apart as festivals or fasts - seasons consecrated to
the services of religion and the kind of jurisdiction which the power
here referred to would hope and desire to set up would be to have
control of these periods, and so to change and alter them as to
accomplish his own purposes - either by abolishing those in existence,
or by substituting others in their place. At all times these seasons
have had a direct connection with the state and progress of religion;
and he who has power over them, either to abolish existing festivals, or
to substitute others in their places, or to appoint new festivals, has
an important control over the whole subject of religion, and over a
nation.

The word rendered "laws" here - דת dâth - while it might refer to any
law, would more properly designate laws pertaining to religion. See [Dan
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#005.md), [Dan
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#007.md), [Dan
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#012.md) ([Dan
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#006.md), [Dan
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#009.md), [Dan
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#013).md); [Ezr
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#012.md), [Ezr
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#021.md). So Lengerke explains it as
referring to the laws of religion, or to religion. The kind of
jurisdiction, therefore, referred to in this place would be what would
pertain to the laws and institutions of religion; it would be a purpose
to obtain the control of these; it would be a claim of right to abolish
such as existed, and to institute new ones; it would be a determination
to exert this power in such a way as to promote its own ends.

\(i\) It would continue for a definite period: "and they shall be given
into his hands until a time and times and the dividing of time," [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025.md). They; that is, either those
laws, or the people, the powers referred to. Maurer refers this to the
"saints of the Most High," as meaning that they would be delivered into
his hands. Though this is not designated expressly, yet perhaps it is
the most natural construction, as meaning that he would have
jurisdiction over the saints during this period; and if so, then the
meaning is, that he would have absolute control over them, or set up a
dominion over them, for the time specified the time, and times, etc. In
regard to this expression "a time and times, etc., it is unnecessary to
say that there has been great diversity of opinion among expositors, and
that many of the controversies in respect to future events turn on the
sense attached to this and to the similar expressions which occur in the
book of Revelation. The first and main inquiry pertains, of course, to
its literal and proper signification. The word used here rendered "time,
times, time" - עדן עדנין ‛ı̂dânı̂yn ‛ı̂dân - is a word which in itself
would no more designate any definite and fixed period than our word time
does.

See [Dan 2:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#008.md), [Dan
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#021.md); [Dan
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#005.md), [Dan
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#015.md); [Dan
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#016.md), [Dan
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#023.md), [Dan
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#025.md), [Dan
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#032.md); [Dan
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#012.md). In some of these instances, the
period actually referred to was a year [Dan
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#016.md), [Dan
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#023.md), but this is not necessarily
implied in the word used, but the limitation is demanded by the
circumstances of the case. So far as the word is concerned, it would
denote a day, a week, a month, a year, or a larger or smaller division
of time, and the period actually intended to be designated must be
determined from the connection. The Latin Vulgate is indefinite - ad
tempus; so the Greek - ἕως καιροῦ heōs kairou; so the Syriac, and so
Luther - eine Zeit; and so Lengerke - eine Zeit. The phrase "for a time"
expresses accurately the meaning of the original word. The word rendered
"times" is the same word in the plural, though evidently with a dual
signification. - Gesenius, Lexicon; Lengerke, in loc. The obvious
meaning is two such times as is designated by the former "time."

The phrase "and the dividing of a time" means clearly half of such a
period. Thus, if the period denoted by a "time," here be a year, the
whole period would be three years and a half. Designations of time like
this, or of this same period, occur several times in the prophecies
(Daniel and Revelation), and on their meaning much depends in regard to
the interpretation of the prophecies pertaining to the future. This
period of three years and a half equals forty-two months, or twelve
hundred and sixty days - the periods mentioned in [Rev
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002.md); [Rev
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006.md), and on which so much depends in
the interpretation of that book. The only question of importance in
regard to the period of time here designated is, whether this is to be
taken literally to denote three years and a half, or whether a symbolic
method is to be adopted, by making each one of the days represent a
year, thus making the time referred to, in fact, twelve hundred and
sixty years. On this question expositors are divided, and probably will
continue to be, and according as one or the other view is adopted, they
refer the events here to Antiochus Epiphanes, or to the Papal power; or
perhaps it should be said more accurately, according as they are
disposed to refer the events here to Antiochus or to the Papacy, do they
embrace one or the other method of interpretation in regard to the
meaning of the days. At this point in the examination of the passage,
the only object is to look at it exegetically; to examine it as language
apart from the application, or unbiassed by any purpose of application;
and though absolute certainty cannot perhaps be obtained, yet the
following may be regarded as exegetically probable:

\(1\) The word time may be viewed as denoting a year: I mean a year
rather than a week, a month, or any other period - because a year is a
more marked and important portion of time, and because a day, a week, a
month, is so short that it cannot be reasonably supposed that it is
intended. As there is no larger natural period than a year - no cycle in
nature that is so marked and obvious as to be properly suggested by the
word time, it cannot be supposed that any such cycle is intended. And as
there is so much particularity in the language used here, "a time, and
times, and half a time," it is to be presumed that some definite and
marked period is intended, and that it is not time in general. It may be
presumed, therefore, that in some sense of the term the period of a year
is referred to.

\(2\) The language does not forbid the application to a literal year,
and then the actual time designated would be three years and a half. No
laws of exegesis, nothing in the language itself, could be regarded as
violated, if such an interpretation were given to the language, and so
far as this point is concerned, there would be no room for debate.

\(3\) The same remark may be made as to the symbolic application of the
language - taking it for a much longer period than literally three years
and a half; that is, regarding each day as standing for a year, and thus
considering it as denoting twelve hundred and sixty years. This could
not be shown to be a violation of prophetic usage, or to be forbidden by
the nature of prophetic language, because nothing is more common than
symbols, and because there are actual instances in which such an
interpretation must be understood. Thus in [Eze
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#006.md), where the prophet was commanded
to lie upon his right side forty days, it is expressly said that it was
symbolic or emblematic: "I have appointed thee each day for a year." No
one can doubt that it would be strictly consistent with prophetic usage
to suppose that the time here might be symbolic, and that a longer time
might be referred to than the literal interpretation would require.

\(4\) It may be added, that there are some circumstances, even
considering the passage with reference only to the interpretation of the
language, and with no view to the question of its application, which
would make this appear probable. Among these circumstances are the
following:

\(a\) the fact that, in the prophecies, it is unusual to designate the
time literally. Very few instances can be referred to in which this is
done. It is commonly by some symbol; some mark; some peculiarity of the
time or age referred to, that the designation is made, or by some symbol
that may be understood when the event has occurred.

\(b\) This designation of time occurs in the midst of symbols - where
all is symbol - the beasts, the horns, the little horn, etc.; and it
would seem to be much more probable that such method would be adopted as
designating the time referred to than a literal method.

\(c\) It is quite apparent on the mere perusal of the passage here that
the events do actually extend far into the future - far beyond what
would be denoted by the brief period of three and a half years. This
will be considered more fully in another place in the inquiry as to the
meaning of these prophecies. (See also Editor's Preface to volume on
Revelation.)

\(4\) a fourth point in the explanation given by the interpreter to
Daniel is, that there would be a solemn judgment in regard to this
power, and that the dominion conceded to it over the saints for a time
would be utterly taken away, and the power itself destroyed: "but the
judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to consume,
and to destroy it unto the end," [Dan
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#026.md). That is, it shall be taken away;
it shall come entirely to an end. The interpreter does not say by whom
this would be done, but he asserts the fact, and that the destruction of
the dominion would be final. That is, it would entirely and forever
cease. This would be done by an act of Divine judgment, or as if a
solemn judgment should be held, and a sentence pronounced. It would be
as manifestly an act of God as if he should sit as a judge, and
pronounce sentence. See the notes at [Dan
7:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009.md).

\(5\) And, a fifth point in the explanation of the interpreter is, that
the dominion under the whole heaven would be given to the saints of the
Most High, and that all nations should serve him; that is, that there
would be a universal prevalence of righteousness on the earth, and that
God would reign in the hearts and lives of men, [Dan
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027.md). See the notes at [Dan
7:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013.md).

[Daniel 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">dan 7:28</span></span>

Hitherto is the end of the matter - That is, the end of what I saw and
heard. This is the sum of what was disclosed to the prophet, but he
still says that he meditated on it with profound interest, and that he
had much solicitude in regard to these great events. The words rendered
hitherto, mean, so far, or thus far. The phrase "end of the matter,"
means "the close of the saying a thing;" that is, this was all the
revelation which was made to him, and he was left to his own meditations
respecting it.

As for me Daniel - So far as I was concerned; or so far as this had any
effect on me. It was not unnatural, at the close of this remarkable
vision, to state the effect that it had on himself.

My cogitations much troubled me - My thoughts in regard to it. It was a
subject which he could not avoid reflecting on, and which could not but
produce deep solicitude in regard to the events which were to occur. Who
could look into the future without anxious and agitating thought? These
events were such as to engage the profoundest attention; such as to fix
the mind in solemn thought. Compare the notes at [Rev
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#004.md).

And my countenance changed in me - The effect of these revelations
depicted themselves on my countenance. The prophet does not say in what
way - whether by making him pale, or careworn, or anxious, but merely
that it produced a change in his appearance. The Chaldee is "brightness"
- זיו zı̂yv - and the meaning would seem to be, that his bright and
cheerful countenance was changed; that is, that his bright looks were
changed; either by becoming pale (Gesenius, Lengerke), or by becoming
serious and thoughtful.

But I kept the matter in my heart - I communicated to no one the cause
of my deep and anxious thoughts. He hid the whole subject in his own
mind, until he thought proper to make this record of what he had seen
and heard. Perhaps there was no one to whom he could communicate the
matter who would credit it; perhaps there was no one at court who would
sympathize with him; perhaps he thought that it might savor of vanity if
it were known; perhaps he felt that as no one could throw any new light
on the subject, there would be no use in making it a subject of
conversation; perhaps he felt so overpowered that he could not readily
converse on it.

We are prepared now, having gone through with an exposition of this
chapter, as to the meaning of the symbols, the words, and the phrases,
to endeavor to ascertain what events are referred to in this remarkable
prophecy, and to ask what events it was designed should be pourtrayed.
And in reference to this there are but two opinions, or two classes of
interpretations, that require notice: what refers it primarily and
exclusively to Antiochus Epiphanes, and what refers it to the rise and
character of the Papal power; what regards the fourth beast as referring
to the empire of Alexander, and the little horn to Antiochus, and what
regards the fourth beast as referring to the Roman empire, and the
little horn to the Papal dominion. In inquiring which of these is the
true interpretation, it will be proper, first, to consider whether it is
applicable to Antiochus Epiphanes; secondly, whether it in fact finds a
fulfillment in the Roman empire and the Papacy; and, thirdly, if such is
the proper application, what are we to look for in the future in what
remains unfulfilled in regard to the prophecy.

I. The question whether it is applicable to the case of Antiochus
Epiphanes. A large class of interpreters, of the most respectable
character, among whom are Lengerke, Maurer, Prof. Stuart (Hints on the
Interpretation of Prophecy, p. 86, following; also Com. on Daniel, pp.
205-211), Eichhorn, Bertholdt, Bleek, and many others, suppose that the
allusion to Antiochus is clear, and that the primary, if not the
exclusive, reference to the prophecy is to him. Professor Stuart (Hints,
p. 86) says, "The passage in [Dan 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025.md)
is so clear as to leave no reasonable room for doubt." "In [Dan
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008.md), [Dan
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#020.md), [Dan
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024.md), the rise of Antiochus Epiphanes
is described; for the fourth beast is, beyond all reasonable doubt, the
divided Grecian dominion which succeeded the reign of Alexander the
Great. From this dynasty springs Antiochus, [Dan
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008.md), [Dan
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#020.md), who is most graphically
described in [Dan 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025.md) 'as one who
shall speak great words against the most High,' etc."

The facts in regard to Antiochus, so far as they are necessary to be
known in the inquiry, are briefly these: Antiochus Epiphanes (the
Illustrios, a name taken on himself, Prideaux, iii. 213), was the son of
Antiochus the Great, but succeeded his brother, Seleucus Philopator, who
died 176 b.c. Antiochus reigned over Syria, the capital of which was
Antioch, on the Oronres, from 176 b.c. to 164 b.c. His character, as
that of a cruel tyrant, and a most bloodthirsty and bitter enemy of the
Jews, is fully detailed in the first and second book of Maccabees.
Compare also Prideaux, Con. vol. iii. 213-234. The facts in the case of
Antiochus, so far as they are supposed to bear on the application of the
prophecy before us, are thus stated by Prof. Stuart (Hints on the
Interpretation of Prophecy, pp. 89, 90): "In the year 168 before Christ,
in the month of May, Antiochus Epiphanes was on his way to attack Egypt,
and he detached Apollonius, one of his military confidants, with 22,000
soldiers, in order to subdue and plunder Jerusalem. The mission was
executed with entire success. A horrible slaughter was made of the men
at Jerusalem, and a large portion of the women and children, being made
captives, were sold and treated as slaves. The services of the temple
were interrupted, and its joyful feasts were turned into mourning, 1
Macc. 1:37-39. Soon after this the Jews in general were compelled to eat
swine's flesh, and to sacrifice to idols. In December of that same year,
the temple was profaned by introducing the statue of Jupiter Olympius;
and on the 25th of that month sacrifices were offered to that idol on
the altar of Jehovah. Just three years after this last event, namely,
December 25, 165 b.c., the temple was expurgated by Judas Maccabeus, and
the worship of Jehovah restored.

Thus, three years and a half, or almost exactly this period, passed
away, while Antiochus had complete possession and control of everything
in and around Jerusalem and the temple. It may be noted, also, that just
three years passed, from the time when the profanation of the temple was
carried to its greatest height - namely, by sacrificing to the statue of
Jupiter Olympius on the altar of Jehovah, down to the time when Judas
renewed the regular worship. I mention this last circumstance in order
to account for the three years of Antiochus' profanations, which are
named as the period of them in Joseptus, Ant. xii. 7, Section 6. This
period tallies exactly with the time during which the profanation as
consummated was carried on, if we reckon down to the period when the
temple worship was restored by Judas Maceabeus. But in Prooem. ad Bell.
Jud. Section 7, and Bell. Jud. 1. 1, Section 1, Josephus reckons three
years and a half as the period during which Antiochus ravaged Jerusalem
and Judea."

In regard to this statement, while the general facts are correct, there
are some additional statements which should be made, to determine as to
its real bearing on the case. The act of detaching Apollonius to attack
Jerusalem was not, as is stated in this extract, when Antiochus was on
his way to Egypt, but was on his return from Egypt, and was just two
years after Jerusalem had been taken by Antiochus. - Prideaux, iii. 239.
The occasion of his detaching Apollonius, was that Antiochus was enraged
because he had been defeated in Egypt by the Romans, and resolved to
vent all his wrath upon the Jews, who at that time had given him no
particular offence. When, two years before, Antiochus had himself taken
Jerusalem, he killed forty thousand persons; he took as many captives,
and sold them for slaves; he forced himself into the temple, and entered
the most holy place; he caused a great sow to be offered on the altar of
burnt-offering, to show his contempt for the temple and the Jewish
religion; he sprinkled the broth over every part of the temple for the
purpose of polluting it; he plundered the temple of the altar of
incense, the showbread table, and the golden candlestick, and then
returned to Antioch, having appointed Philip, a Phrygian, a man of a
cruel and barbarous temper, to be governor of the Jews. - Prideaux, iii.
231.

When Apollonius again attacked the city, two years afterward, he waited
quietly until the Sabbath, and then made his assault. He filled the city
with blood, set it on fire, demolished the houses, pulled down the
walls, built a strong fortress over against the temple, from which the
garrison could fall on all who should attempt to go to worship. From
this time, "the temple became deserted, and the daily sacrifices were
omitted," until the service was restored by Judas Maccabeus, three years
and a half after. The time during which this continued was, in fact,
just three years and a half, until Judas MaccaUcus succeeded in
expelling the pagan from the temple and from Jerusalem, when the temple
was purified, and was solemnly reconsecrated to the worship of God. See
Prideaux, Con. iii. 240, 241, and the authorities there cited.

Now, in reference to this interpretation, supposing that the prophecy
relates to Antiochus, it must be admitted that there are coincidences
which are remarkable, and it is on the ground of these coincidences that
the prophecy has been applied to him. These circumstances are such as
the following:

\(a\) The general character of the authority that would exist as denoted
by the "little horn," as that of severity and cruelty. None could be
better fitted to represent that than the character of Antiochus
Epiptianes. Compare Prideaux, Con. iii. 213, 214.

\(b\) His arrogance and blasphemy - "speaking great words against the
Most High." Nothing is easier than to find what would be a fulfillment
of this in the character of Antiochus - in his sacrilegious entrance
into the most holy places; in his setting up the statue of Jupiter; in
his offering a sow as a sacrifice on the great altar; in His sprinkling
the broth of swine on the temple in contempt of the Hebrews and their
worship, and in his causing the daily sacrifice at the temple to cease.

\(c\) His making war with the "saints," and "wearing out the saints of
the Most High" - all this could be found accomplished in the wars which
Antiochus waged against the Jews in the slaughter of so many thousands,
and in sending so many into hopeless slavery.

\(d\) His attempt to "change times and laws" - this could be found to
have been fulfilled in the case of Antiochus - in his arbitrary
character, and in his interference with the laws of the Hebrews.

\(e\) The time, as above stated, is the most remarkable coincidence. If
this is not to be regarded as referring exclusively to Antiochus, it
must be explained on one of two suppositions - either that it is one of
those coincidences which will be found to happen in history, as
coincidences happen in dreams; or as having a double reference, intended
to refer primarily to Antiochus, but in a secondary and more important
sense referring also to other events having a strong resemblance to
this; or, in other words, that the language was designedly so couched as
to relate to two similar classes of events. It is not to be regarded as
very remarkable, however, that it is possible to find a fulfillment of
these predictions in Antiochus, though it be supposed that the design
was to describe the Papacy, for some of the expressions are of so
general a character that they could be applied to many events which have
occurred, and, from the nature of the case, there were strong points of
resemblance between Antiochus and the Papal power. It is not absolutely
necessary, therefore, to suppose that this had reference to Antiochus
Epiphanes; and there are so many objections to this view as to make it,
it seems to me, morally impossible that it should have had such a
reference. Among these objections are the following:

\(1\) This interpretation makes it necessary to divide the kingdom of
the Medes and Persians, and to consider them two kingdoms, as Eichhorn,
Jahn, Dereser, DeWette, and Bleek do. In order to this interpretation,
the following are the kingdoms denoted by the four beasts - by the
first, the Chaldee; by the second, the Medish; by the third, the
Persian; and by the fourth, the Macedonian, or the Macedonian-Asiatic
kingdom under Alexander the Great. But to say nothing now of any other
difficulties, it is an insuperable objection to this, that so far as the
kingdoms of the Medes and Persians are mentioned in Scripture, and so
far as they play any part in the fulfillment of prophecy, they are
always mentioned as one. They appear as one; they act as one; they are
regarded as one. The kingdom of the Medes does not appear until it is
united with that of the Persians, and this remark is of special
importance when they are spoken of as succeeding the kingdom of Babylon.
The kingdom of the Medes was contemporaneous with that of Babylon; it
was the Mede-Persian kingdom that was in any proper sense the successor
of that of Babylon, as described in these symbols. The kingdom of the
Medes, as Hengstenberg well remarks, could in no sense be said to have
succeeded that of Babylon any longer than during the reign of Cyaxares
II, after the taking of Babylon: and even during that short period of
two years, the government was in fact in the hands of Cyrus. - Die
Authentic des Daniel, p. 200. Schlosser (p. 243) says, "the kingdom of
the Medes and Persians is to be regarded as in fact one and the same
kingdom, only that in the change of the dynasty another branch obtained
the authority." See particularly, Rosenmuller, Alterthumskunde, i. 290,
291. These two kingdoms are in fact always blended - their laws, their
customs, their religion, and they are mentioned as one. Compare [Est
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#003.md), [Est
1:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#018.md); [Est
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#002.md); [Dan
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#028.md); [Dan
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#008.md), [Dan
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#012.md), [Dan
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#015.md).

\(2\) In order to this interpretation, it is necessary to divide the
empire founded by Alexander, and instead of regarding it as one, to
consider what existed when he reigned as one; and that of Antiochus, one
of the successors of Alexander, as another. This opinion is maintained
by Bertholdt, who supposes that the first beast represented the
Babylonian kingdom; the second, the kingdom of the Medes and Persians;
the third, that of Alexander; and the fourth the kingdoms that sprang
out of that. In order to this, it is necessary to suppose that the four
heads and wings, and the ten horns, equally represent that kingdom, or
sprang from it - the four heads, the kingdom when divided at the death
of Alexander, and the ten horns, powers that ultimately sprang up from
the same dominion. But this is contrary to the whole representation in
regard to the Asiatic-Macedonian empire. In [Dan
8:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#008.md), where there is an undoubted
reference to that empire, it is said "the he-goat waxed very great: and
when he was strong, the great horn was broken; and for it came up four
notable ones toward the four winds of heaven. And out of one of them
came forth a little horn, which waxed exceeding great, toward the south,
etc." Here is an undoubted allusion to Alexander, and to his followers,
and particularly to Antiochus, but no mention of any such division as is
necessary to be supposed if the fourth beast represents the power that
succeeded Alexander in the East. In no place is the kingdom of the
successors of Alexander divided from his in the same sense in which the
kingdom of the Medes and Persians is from that of Babylon, or the
kingdom of Alexander from that of the Persians. Compare Hengstenberg, as
above, pp. 203-205.

\(3\) The supposition that the fourth beast represents either the
kingdom of Alexander, or, according to Bertholdt and others, the
successors of Alexander, by no means agrees with the character of that
beast as compared with the others. That beast was far more formidable,
and more to be dreaded than either of the others. It had iron teeth and
brazen claws; it stamped down all before it, and broke all to pieces,
and manifestly represented a far more fearful dominion than either of
the others. The same is true in regard to the parallel representation in
[Dan 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#033.md), [Dan
2:40](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#040.md), of the fourth kingdom
represented by the legs and feet of iron, as more terrific than either
of those denoted by the gold, the silver, or the brass. But this
representation by no means agrees with the character of the kingdom of
either Alexander or his successors, and in fact would not be true of
them. It would agree well, as we shall see, with the Roman power, even
as contrasted with that of Babylon, Persia, or Macedon; but it is not
the representation which would, with propriety, be given of the empire
of Alexander, or his successors, as contrasted with those which preceded
them. Compare Hengstenberg, as above, pp. 205-207. Moreover, this does
not agree with what is expressly said of this power that should succeed
that of Alexander, in a passage undoubtedly referring to it, in [Dan
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#022.md), where it is said, "Now that
being broken, whereas four stood up for it, four kingdoms shall stand up
out of the nation, but not in his power."

\(4\) On this supposition it is impossible to determine who are meant by
the "ten horns" of the fourth beast [Dan
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007.md), and the "ten kings" [Dan
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024.md) that are represented by these.
All the statements in Daniel that refer to the Macedonian kingdom [Dan
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#006.md); [Dan
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#008.md), [Dan
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#022.md) imply that the Macedonian empire
in the East, when the founder died, would be divided into four great
powers or monarchies - in accordance with what is well known to have
been the fact. But who are the ten kings or sovereignties that were to
exist under this general Macedonian power, on the supposition that the
fourth beast represents this? Bertholdt supposes that the ten horns are
"ten Syrian kings," and that the eleventh little horn is Antiochus
Epiphanes. The names of these kings, according to Bertholdt (pp. 432,
433), are Seleucus Nicator, Antiochus Sorer, Antiochus Theos, Seleucus
Callinicus, Seleucus Ceraunus, Antiochus the Great, Seleucus Philopator,
Heliodorus, Ptolemy Philometor, and Demetrius. So also Prof. Stuart,
Com. on Dan. p. 208. But it is impossible to make out this exact number
of Syrian kings from history, to say nothing now of the improbability of
supposing that their power was represented by the fourth beast. These
kings were not of the same dynasty, of Syria, of Macedonia, or of Egypt,
but the list is made up of different kingdoms. Grotius (in loc.) forms
the catalogue of ten kings out of the lists of the kings of Syria and
Egypt - five out of one, and five out of the other; but this is
manifestly contrary to the intention of the prophecy, which is to
represent them as springing out of one and the same power. It is a
further objection to this view, that these are lists of successive kings
- rising up one after the other; whereas the representation of the ten
horns would lead us to suppose that they existed simultaneously; or that
somehow there were ten powers that sprang out of the one great power
represented by the fourth beast.

\(5\) equally difficult is it, on this supposition, to know who are
intended by the "three horns" that were plucked up by the little horn
that sprang up among the ten, [Dan
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008.md). Grotius, who regards the "little
horn" as representing Antiochus Epiphanes, supposes that the three horns
were his elder brothers, Seleucus, Demetrius, the son of Seleucus, and
Ptolemy Philopator, king of Egypt. But it is an insuperable objection to
this that the three kings mentioned by Grotius are not all in his list
of ten kings, neither Ptolemy Philometor (if Philometor he meant), nor
Demetrius being of the number. - Newton on the Proph. p. 211. Neither
were they plucked up by the roots by Antiochus, or by his order.
Seieueus was poisoned by his treasurer, Helioderus, whose aim it was to
usurp the crown for himself, before Antiochus came from Rome, where he
had been detained as a hostage for several years. Demetrius lived to
dethrone and murder the son of Antiochus, and succeeded him in the
kingdom of Syria. Ptolemy Philopater died king of Egypt almost thirty
years before Antiochus came to the throne of Syria; or if Ptolemy
Philometer, as is most probable, was meant by Grotius, though he
suffered much in the wars with Antiochus, yet he survived him about
eighteen years, and died in possession of the crown of Egypt. - Newton,
ut supra. Bertlholdt supposes that the three kings were Heliodorus, who
poisoned Seleucus Philopater, and sought, by the help of a party, to
obtain the throne; Ptolemy Philometor, king of Egypt, who, as sister's
son to the king, laid claim to the throne; and Demetrius, who, as son of
the former king, was legitimate heir to the throne. But there are two
objections to this view;

\(a\) that the representation by the prophet is of actual kings - which
these were not; and

\(b\) that Antiochus ascended the throne peaceably; Demetrius, who would
have been regarded as the king of Syria, not being able to make his
title good, was detained as a hostage at Rome. Hengstenberg, pp. 207,
208. Prof Stuart, Com. on Dan., pp. 208, 209, supposes that the three
kings referred to were Heliodorus, Ptolemy Philometer, and Demetrius I;
but in regard to these it should be observed, that they were mere
pretenders to the throne, whereas the text in Daniel supposes that they
would be actual kings. Compare Hengstenberg, p. 208.

\(6\) The time mentioned here, on the supposition that literally three
years and a half [Dan 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025.md) are
intended, does not agree with the actual dominion of Antiochus. In an
undoubted reference to him in [Dan
8:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013.md), it is said that "the vision
concerning the daily sacrifice, and the transgression of desolation,"
would be "unto two thousand and three hundred days; then shall the
sanctuary be cleansed;" that is, one thousand and forty days, or some
two years and ten months more than the time mentioned here. I am aware
of the difficulty of explaining this (see Prof. Stuart, Hints on the
Interpretation of Prophecy, p. 98, following), and the exact menning of
the passage in [Dan 8:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013.md), will come
up for consideration hereafter; but it is an objection of some force to
the application of the "time, and times, and dividing of a time" [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025.md) to Antiochus, that it is not the
same time which is applied to him elsewhere.

\(7\) And, one more objection to this application is, that, in the
prophecy, it is said that he who was represented by the "little horn"
would continue until "the Ancient of days should sit," and evidently
until the kingdom should be taken by the one in the likeness of the Son
of man, [Dan 7:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009.md), [Dan
7:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013.md), [Dan
7:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#021.md), [Dan
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#026.md). But if this refers to Antiochus,
then these events must refer to the coming of the Messiah, and to the
setting up of his kingdom in the world. Yet, as a matter of fact;
Antiochus died about 164 years before the Saviour came, and there is no
way of showing that he continued until the Messiah came in the flesh.

These objections to the opinion that this refers to Antiochus Epiphanes
seem to me to be insuperable.

II\. The question whether it refers to the Roman empire and the Papal
power. The fair inquiry is, whether the things referred to in the vision
actually find such a correspondence in the Roman empire and the Papacy,
that they would fairly represent them if the symbols had been made use
of after the events occurred. Are they such as we might properly use now
as describing the portions of those events that are past, on the
supposition that the reference was to those events? To determine this,
it will be proper to refer to the things in the symbol, and to inquire
whether events corresponding to them have actually occurred in the Roman
empire and the Papacy. Recalling the exposition which has been above
given of the explanation furnished by the angel to Daniel, the things
there referred to will find an ample and a striking fulfillment in the
Roman empire and the Papal power.

\(1\) The fourth kingdom, symbolized by the fourth beast, is accurately
represented by the Roman power. This is true in regard to the place
which that power would occupy in the history of the world, on the
supposition that the first three referred to the Babylonian, the
Medo-Persian, and the Macedonian. On this supposition there is no need
of regarding the Medo-Persian empire as divided into two, represented by
two symbols; or the kingdom founded by Alexander - the
Asiatic-Macedonian - as distinct from that of his successors. As the
Medo-Persian was in fact one dominion, so was the Macedonian under
Alexander, and in the form of the four dynasties into which it was
divided on his death, and down to the time when the whole was subverted
by the Roman conquests. On this supposition, also, everything in the
symbol is fulfilled. The fourth beast - so mighty, so terrific, so
powerful, so unlike all the others, armed with iron teeth, and with
claws of brass, trampling down and stamping on all the earth - well
represents the Roman dominion.

The symbol is such a one as we should now use appropriately to represent
that power, and in every respect that empire was well represented by the
symbol. It may be added, also, that this supposition corresponds with
the obvious interpretation of the parallel place in [Dan
2:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#033.md), [Dan
2:40](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#040.md), where the same empire is
referred to in the image by the legs and feet of iron. See the note at
that passage. It should be added, that this fourth kingdom is to be
considered as prolonged through the entire continuance of the Roman
power, in the various forms in which that power has been kept up on the
earth - alike under the empire, and when broken up into separate
sovereignties, and when again concentrated and embodied under the
Papacy. That fourth power or dominion was to be continued, according to
the prediction here, until the establishment of the kingdom of the
saints. Either, then, that kingdom of the saints has come, or has been
set up, or the fourth kingdom, in some form, still remains.

The truth is, that in prophecy the entire Roman dominion seems to be
contemplated as one - one mighty and formidable power trampling down the
liberties of the world; oppressing and persecuting the people of God -
the true church; and maintaining an absolute and arbitrary dominion over
the souls of men - as a mighty domination standing in the way of the
progress of truth, and keeping back the reign of the saints on the
earth. In these respects the Papal dominion is, and has been, but a
prolongation, in another form, of the influence of pagan Rome, and the
entire domination may be represented as one, and might be symbolized by
the fourth beast in the vision of Daniel. When that power shall cease,
we may, according to the prophecy, look for the time when the "kingdom
shall be given to the saints," or when the true kingdom of God shall be
set up all over the world.

\(2\) Out of this one sovereignty, represented by the fourth beast, ten
powers or sovereignties, represented by the ten horns, were to arise. It
was shown in the exposition, that these would all spring out of that one
dominion, and would wield the power that was wielded by that; that is,
that the one great power would be broken up and distributed into the
number represented by ten. As the horns all appeared at the same time on
the beast, and did not spring up after one another, so these powers
would be simultaneous, and would not be a mere succession; and as the
horns all sprang from the beast, so these powers would all have the same
origin, and be a portion of the same one power now divided into many.
The question then is, whether the Roman power was in fact distributed
into so many sovereignties at any period such as would be represented by
the springing up of the little horn - if that refers to the Papacy. Now,
one has only to look into any historical work, to see how in fact the
Roman power became distributed and broken up in this way into a large
number of kingdoms, or comparatively petty sovereignties, occupying the
portions of the world once governed by Rome. In the decline of the
empire, and as the new power represented by the "little horn" arose,
there was a complete breaking up of the one power that was formerly
wielded, and a large number of states and kingdoms sprang out of it.

To see that there is no difficulty in making out the number ten, or that
some such distribution and breaking up of the one power is naturally
suggested, I cast my eye on the historical chart of Lyman, and found the
following kingdoms or sovereignties specified as occupying the same
territory which was possessed by the Roman empire, and springing from
that - namely, the Vandals, Alans, Suevi, Heruli, Franks, Visigoths,
Ostrogoths, Burgundians, Lombards, Britons. The Roman empire as such had
ceased, and the power was distributed into a large number of
comparatively petty sovereignties - well represented at this period by
the ten horns on the head of the beast. Even the Romanists themselves
admit that the Roman empire was, by means of the incursions of the
northern nations, dismembered into ten kingdoms (Calmet on [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001.md); and he refers likewise to
Berengaud, Bossuet, and Dupin. See Newton, p. 209); and Machiaveli
(Hist. of Flor. 1. i.), with no design of furnishing an illustration of
this prophecy, and probably with no recollection of it, has mentioned
these names:

1, the Ostrogoths in Moesia;

2, the Visigoths in Pannonia;

3, the Sueves and Alans in Gascoign and Spain;

4, the Vandals in Africa;

5, the Franks in France;

6, the Burgundians in Burgundy;

7, the Heruli and Turingi in Italy;

8, the Saxons and Angles in Britain;

9, the Huns in Hungary;

10, the Lombards at first upon the Danube, afterward in Italy.

The arrangement proposed by Sir Isaac Newton is the following:

1, The kingdom of the Vandals and Alans in Spain and Africa;

2, the kingdom of the Suevians in Spain;

3, the kingdom of the Visigoths;

4, the kingdom of the Alans in Gallia;

5, the kingdom of the Burgundians;

6, the kingdom of the Franks;

7, the kingdom of the Britons;

8\. the kingdom of the Huns;

9, the kingdom of the Lombards;

10, the kingdom of Ravenna.

Compare also Duffield on the Prophecies, pp. 279, 280. For other
arrangements constituting the number ten, as embracing the ancient power
of the Roman empire, see Newton on the Prophecies, pp. 209, 210. There
is some slight variation in the arrangements proposed by Mr. Mede,
Bishop Lloyd, and Sir Isaac Newton; but still it is remarkable that it
is easy to make out that number with so good a degree of certainty, and
particularly so, that it should have been suggested by a Romanist
himself. Even if it is not practicable to make out the number with
strict exactness, or if all writers do not agree in regard to the
dynasties constituting the number ten, we should bear in remembrance the
fact that these powers arose in the midst of great confusion; that one
kingdom arose and another fell in rapid succession; and that there was
not that entire certainty of location and boundary which there is in old
and established states. One thing is certain, that there never has been
a case in which an empire of vast power has been broken up into small
sovereignties, to which this description would so well apply as to the
rise of the numerous dynasties in the breaking up of the vast Roman
power; and another thing is equally certain, that if we were now to seek
an appropriate symbol of the mighty Roman power - of its conquests, and
of the extent of its dominion, and of the condition of that empire,
about the time that the Papacy arose, we could not find a more striking
or appropriate symbol than that of the terrible fourth beast with iron
teeth and brazen claws - stamping the earth beneath his feet, and with
ten horns springing out of his head.

\(3\) in the midst of these there sprang up a little horn that had
remarkable characteristics. The inquiry now is, if this does not
represent Antiochus, whether it finds a proper fulfillment in the
Papacy. Now, in regard to this inquiry, the slightest acquaintance with
the history and claims of the Papal power will show that there was a
striking appropriateness in the symbol - such an appropriateness, that
if we desired now to find a symbol that would represent this, we could
find no one better adapted to it than that employed by Daniel.

\(a\) The little horn would spring up among the others, and stand among
them - as dividing the power with them, or sharing or wielding that
power. That is, on the supposition that it refers to the Papacy, the
Papal power would spring out of the Roman empire; would be one of the
sovereignties among which that vast power would be divided, and share
with the other ten in wielding authority. It would be an eleventh power
added to the ten. And who can be ignorant that the Papal power at the
beginning, when it first asserted civil authority, sustained just such a
relation to the crumbled and divided Roman empire as this? It was just
one of the powers into which that vast sovereignty passed.

\(b\) It would not spring up contemporaneously with them, but would
arise in their midst, when they already existed. They are seen in vision
as actually existing together, and this new power starts up among them.
What could be more strikingly descriptive of the Papacy - as a power
arising when the great Roman authority was broken to fragments, and
distributed into a large number of sovereignties?. Then this new power
was seen to rise - small at first, but gradually gaining strength, until
it surpassed any one of them in strength, and assumed a position in the
world which no one of them had. The representation is exact. It is not a
foreign power that invaded them; it starts up in the midst of them -
springing out of the head of the same beast, and constituting a part of
the same mighty domination that ruled the world.

\(c\) It would be small at first, but would soon become so powerful as
to pluck up and displace three of the others. And could any symbol have
been better chosen to describe the Papal power than this? Could we find
any now that would better describe it? Any one needs to have but the
slightest acquaintance with the history of the Papal power to know that
it was small at its beginnings, and that its ascendency over the world
was the consequence of slow but steady growth. Indeed, so feeble was it
at its commencement, so undefined were its first appearance and form,
that one of the most difficult things in history is to know exactly when
it did begin, or to determine the exact date of its origin as a distinct
power. Different schemes in the interpretation of prophecy turn wholly
on this. We see, indeed, that power subsequently strongly marked in its
character, and exerting a mighty influence in the world - having
subjugated nations to its control; we see causes for a long time at work
tending to this, and can trace their gradual operation in producing it,
but the exact period when its dominion began, what was the first
characteristic act of the Papacy as such, what constituted its precise
beginning as a peculiar power blending and combining a peculiar civil
and ecclesiastical authority, no one is able with absolute certainty to
determine. Who can fix the exact date? Who can tell precisely when it
was? It is true that there were several distinct acts, or the exercise
of civil authority, in the early history of the Papacy, but what was the
precise beginning of that power no one has been able to determine with
so much certainty as to leave no room for doubt. Any one can see with
what propriety the commencement of such a power would be designated by a
little horn springing up among others.

\(d\) It would grow to be mighty, for the "little horn" thus grew to be
so powerful as to pluck up three of the horns of the beast. Of the
growth of the power of the Papacy no one can be ignorant who has any
acquaintance with history. It held nations in subjection, and claimed
and exercised the right of displacing and distributing crowns as it
pleased.

\(e\) It would subdue "three kings;" that is, three of the ten
represented by the ten horns. The prophet saw this at some point in its
progress when three fell before it, or were overthrown by it. There
might have been also other points in its history when it might have been
seen as having overthrown more of them - perhaps the whole ten, but the
attention was arrested by the fact that, soon after its rise, three of
the ten were seen to fall before it. Now, in regard to the application
of this, it may be remarked,

\(1\) That it does not apply, as already shown, to Antiochus Epiphanes -
there being no sense in which he overthrew three of the princes that
occupied the throne in the succession from Alexander, to say nothing of
the fact that these were contemporaneous kings or kingdoms.

\(2\) there is no other period in history, and there are no other events
to which it could be applied except either to Antiochus or the Papacy.

\(3\) in the confusion that existed on the breaking up of the Roman
empire, and the imperfect accounts of the transactions which occurred in
the rise of the Papal power, it would not be wonderful if it should be
difficult to find events distinctly recorded that would be in all
respects an accurate and absolute fulfillment of the vision.

\(4\) yet it is possible to make out the fulfillment of this with a good
degree of certainty in the history of the Papacy. If applicable to the
Papal power, what seems to be demanded is, that three of these ten
kingdoms, or sovereignties should be rooted up by that power; that they
should cease to exist as separate sovereignties; that they should be
added to the sovereignty that should spring up; and that, as distinct
kingdoms, they should cease to play a part in the history of the world.
The three sovereignties thus transplanted, or rooted up, are supposed by
Mr. Mede to have been the Greeks, the Longobards, and the Franks. Sir
Isaac Newton supposes they were the Exarchate of Ravenna, the Lombards,
and the senate and dukedom of Rome. The objections which may be made to
these suppositions may be seen in Newton on the Prophecies, pp. 216,
217. The kingdoms which he supposes are to be referred to were the
following:

First. The Exarchate of Ravenna. This of right belonged to the Greek
emperors. This was the capital of their dominions in Italy. It revolted
at the instigation of the Pope, and was seized by Astolphus, king of the
Lombards, who thought to make himself master of Italy. The Pope in his
exigency applied for aid to Pepin, king of France, who marched into
Italy, besieged the Lombards in Pavia, and forced them to surrender the
Exarchate and other territories in Italy. These were not restored to the
Greek emperor, as they in justice should have been, but, at the
solicitation of the Pope, were given to Peter and his successors for
perpetual possession. "And so," says Platina, "the name of the
Exarchate, which had continued from the time of Narses to the taking of
Ravenna, one hundred and seventy years, was extinguished." - Lives of
the Popes. This, according to Sigonius, was effected in the year 755.
See Gibbon, Dec. and Fall, vol. ii. 224; iii. 332, 334, 338. From this
period, says Bp. Newton, the Popes being now become temporal princes, no
longer date their epistles and bulls by the years of the emperor's
reign, but by the years of their own advancement to the Papal chair.

Secondly. The kingdom of the Lombards. This kingdom was troublesome to
the Popes. The dominions of the Pope were invaded by Desiderius, in the
time of Pope Adrian I. Application was again made to the king of France,
and Charles the Great, the son and successor of Pepin, invaded the
Lombards; and desirous of enlarging his own dominions, conquered the
Lombards, put an end to their kingdom, and gave a great part of their
territory to the Pope. This was the end of the kingdom of the Lombards,
in the 206th year after their obtaining possessions in Italy, and in the
year of our Lord 774. See Gibbon, Dec. and Fall, vol. iii. 335.

Thirdly. The Roman States subjected to the Popes in a civil sense.
Though subjected to the Pope spiritually, yet for a long time the Roman
people were governed by a senate, and retained many of their old
privileges, and elected both the Western Emperors and the Popes. This
power, however, as is well known, passed into the hands of the Popes,
and has been retained by them to the present time, the Pope having
continued to be the civil as well as the ecclesiastical head. See Bp.
Newton, pp. 319, 320. All semblance of the freedom of ancient Rome
passed away, and this Roman dominion, as such, ceased to be, being
completely absorbed in the Papacy. The Saxons, the Franks, etc.,
continued their independence as civil powers; these states passed
entirely into the dominion of the Pope, and as independent kingdoms or
sovereignties ceased to be. This is the solution in regard to the "three
horns" that were to be plucked up, as given by Bp. Newton. Absolute
certainly in a case of this kind is not to be expected in the confusion
and indefiniteness of that portion of history, nor can it be reasonably
demanded.

If there were three of these powers planted in regions that became
subject to the Papal power, and that disappeared or were absorbed in
that one dominion constituting the peculiarity of the Papal dominion, or
which entered into the Roman Papal state, considered as a sovereignty by
itself among the nations of the earth, this is all that is required. Mr.
Faber supposes the three to have been these; the Herulo-Turingic, the
Ostrogothic, and the Lombardie, and says of them, that they "were
necessarily eradicated in the immediate presence of the Papacy, before
which they were geographically standing - and that the temporal
principality which bears the name of Peter's patrimony, was carved out
of the mass of their subjugated dominions." - Sacred Calendar, vol. ii.
p. 102. Prof. Gaussen (Discourse on Popery: Geneva, 1844) supposes that
the three kings or kingdoms here referred to were the Heruli, the
Ostrogoths, and the Lombards. According to Bower (Lives of the Popes,
vol. ii. 108, Dr. Cox's edition, note), the temporal dominions granted
by Pepin to the Pope, or of which the Pope became possessed in
consequence of the intervention of the kings of France, were the
following:

\(1\) The Exarchate of Ravenna, which comprised, according to Sigonius,
the following cities: Ravenna, Bologna, Imola, Fienza, Forlimpoli,
Forli, Cesena, Bobbio, Ferrara, Commachio. Adria, Servia, and Secchia

\(2\) The Pentapolis, comprehending Rimini, Pesaro, Coneha, Fano,
Sinigalia, Ancono, Osimo, Umono, Jesi, Fossombrone, Monteferetro,
Urbino, Cagli, Lucoli, and Eugubio.

\(3\) the city and dukedom of Rome, containing several cities of note,
which had withdrawn themselves from all subjection to the emperor, had
submitted to Peter ever since the time of Pope Gregory II. See also
Bower, ii. 134, where he says, "The Pope had, by Charlemagne, been put
in possession of the Exarchate, the Pentapolis, and the dukedom of
Spoleti" (embracing the city and dukedom of Rome). And again, on the
same page (note): "The Pope possessed the Exarchate, the Pentapolis, and
the dukedom of Spoleti, with the city and dukedom of Rome." It should be
remembered that these statements are made by historians with no
reference to any supposed fulfillment of this prophecy, and no allusion
to it, but as matters of simple historical fact, occurring in the
regular course of history. The material fact to be made out in order to
show that this description of the "little horn" is applicable to the
Papacy is, that at the - commencement of what was properly the Papacy -
that is, as I suppose, the union of the spiritual and temporal power, or
the assumption, of temporal authority by him who was Bishop of Rome, and
who had been before regarded as a mere spiritual or ecclesiastical
ruler, there was a triple jurisdiction assumed or conceded, a threefold
domination; or a union under himself of what had been three
sovereignties, that now disappeared as independent administrations, and
whose distinct governments were now merged in the one single sovereignty
of the Pope. Now, that there was, just at this time, or at the beginning
of the Papacy, or when it had so increased that it could be recognized
as having a place among the temporal sovereignties of the earth, such a
united domination, or such a union of three separate powers under one,
will be apparent from an extract from Mr. Gibbon. He is speaking of the
rewards conferred on the Pope by the Carlovingian race of kings, on
account of the favor shown to them in his conferring the crown of France
on Pepin, the mayor of the palace - directing in his favor over
Childeric, the descendant of Clovis. Of this transaction, Mr. Gibbon
observes, in general (iii. 336), that "the mutual obligations of the
Popes and the Carlovingian family form the important link of ancient and
modern, of civil and ecclesiastical history." He then proceeds

\(1\) to specify the gifts or favors which the Popes conferred on the
Carlovingian race; and

\(2\) those which, in return, Pepin and Charlemagne bestowed on the
Popes. In reference to the latter, he makes the following statement
(iii. 338): "The gratitude of the Carlovingians was adequate to these
obligations, and their names are consecrated as the saviours and
benefactors of the Roman church. Her ancient patrimony of farms and
houses was transformed by their bounty into the temporal dominion of
cities and provinces, and the donation of the Exarchate was the
first-fruits of the conquests of Pepin. Astolphus (king of the Lombards)
with a sigh relinquished his prey; the keys and the hostages of the
principal cities were delivered to the French ambassador; and in his
master's name he presented them before the tomb of Peter. The ample
measure of the Exarchate might comprise all the provinces of Italy which
had obeyed the emperor or his vicegerent; but its strict and proper
limits were included in the territories of Ravenna, Bologna, and
Ferrara; its inseparable dependency was the Pentapolis, which stretched
along the Adriatic from Rimini to Ancona, and advanced into the midland
country as far as the ridge of the Apennines. In this transaction, the
ambition and avarice of the Popes have been severely condemned.

Perhaps the humility of a Christian priest should have rejected an
earthly kingdom, which it was not easy for him to govern without
renouncing the virtues of his profession. Perhaps a faithful subject, or
even a generous enemy, would have been less impatient to divide the
spoils of the barbarian; and if the emperor had entrusted Stephen to
solicit in his name the restitution of the Exarchate, I will not absolve
the Pope from the reproach of treachery and falsehood. But, in the rigid
interpretation of the laws, every one may accept, without inquiry,
whatever his benefactor may bestow without injustice. The Greek emperor
had abdicated or forfeited his right to the Exarctiate; and the sword of
Astolphus was broken by the stronger sword of the Carlovingian. It was
not in the cause of the Iconoclast that Pepin had exposed his person and
army in a double expedition beyond the Alps; he possessed, and he might
lawfully alienate his conquests: and to the importunities of the Greeks
he piously replied, that no human consideration should tempt him to
resume the gift which he had conferred on the Roman pontiff for the
remission of his sins and the salvation of his soul.

The splendid donation was granted in supreme and absolute dominion, and
the world beheld for the first time a Cristian bishop invested with the
prerogatives of a temporal prince, the choice of magistrates, the
exercise of justice, the imposition of taxes, and the wealth of the
palace of Ravenna. In the dissolution of the Lombard kingdom, the
inhabitants of the duchy of Spoleti sought a refuge from the storm,
shaved their heads after the Ravenna fashion, declared themselves the
servants and subjects of Peter, and completed, by this voluntary
surrender, the present circle of the Ecclesiastical State." The
following things are apparent from this extract:

\(a\) That here, according to Mr. Gibbon, was the beginning of the
temporal power of the Pope.

\(b\) That this was properly, in the view above taken, the commencement
of the Papacy as a distinct and peculiar dominion.

\(c\) That in this there was a threefold government, or three temporal
sovereignties united under him, and constituting at that time, in the
language of Mr. Gibbon, "the present circle of the ecclesiastical
state." There was, first, the Exarchate of Ravenna; secondly, the
Pentapolis, "which," he says, was its inseparable dependency; and,
thirdly, the "duchy of Spoleti," which, he says, "completed the present
circle of the ecclesiastical state." This was afterward, Mr. Gibbon goes
on to say, greatly "enlarged;" but this was the form in which the Papal
power first made its appearance among the temporal sovereignties of
Europe. I do not find, indeed, that the kingdom of the Lombards was, as
is commonly stated, among the number of the temporal sovereignties that
became subject to the authority of the Popes, but I do find that there
were three distinct temporal sovereignties that lost their independent
existence, and that were united under that one temporal authority -
constituting by the union of the spiritual and temporal power that one
peculiar kingdom. In Lombardy the power remained in the possession of
the kings of the Lombards themselves, until that kingdom was subdued by
the arms of Pepin and Charlemagne, and then it became subject to the
crown of France, though for a time under the nominal reign of its own
kings. See Gibbon, iii. 334, 335, 338. If it should be said, that in the
interpretation of this passage respecting the "three horns" that were
plucked up, or the three kingdoms that were thus destroyed, it would be
proper to look for them among the ten, into which the one great kingdom
was divided, and that the three above referred to - the Exarchate of
Ravenna, the Pentapolis, and the dukedom of Spoleti and Rome - were not
properly of that number, according to the list above given, it is
necessary, in reply to this, to advert only to the two main facts in the
case:

\(1\) that the great Roman power was actually divided into a large
number of sovereignties that sprang up on its ruins - usually, but not
in fact exactly, represented by ten; and

\(2\) that the Papacy began its career with a conceded dominion over the
three territories above referred to - a part, in fact, of the one great
dominion constituting the Roman power, and in the same territory. It is
a remarkable fact that the popes to this day wear a triple crown - a
fact that exists in regard to no other monarchs - as if they had
absorbed under themselves three separate and distinct sovereignties; or
as if they represented three separate forms of dominion. The sum of what
is said in the exposition of these verses may be thus expressed:

\(1\) That there was originally one great sovereignty represented here
by the "fourth beast" - the Roman empire.

\(2\) that, in fact, as is abundantly confirmed by history, this one
great and united power was broken up into a large number of separate and
independent sovereignties - most naturally and obviously described by
ten, or such as would appear in a prophetic vision to be ten, and such
as is actually so represented by historians having no interest in the
fulfillment of the prophecy, and no designed reference to what may be
symbolized by the "ten horns."

\(3\) that there was another peculiar and distinct power that sprang out
of them, and that grew to be mighty - a power unlike the others, and
unlike anything that had before appeared in the world - combining
qualities to be found in no other sovereignty - having a peculiar
relation at the same time to the one original sovereignty, and to the
ten into which that was divided - the prolongation, in an important
sense, of the power of the one, and springing up in a peculiar manner
among the others - that peculiar ecclesiastical and civil power - the
Papacy - well represented by the "little horn."

\(4\) that, in fact, this one power absorbed into itself three of these
sovereignties - annihilating them as independent powers, and combining
them into one most peculiar dominion - properly represented by "plucking
them up."

\(5\) that as a proper symbol, or emblem of some such domination, a
crown or diadem is still worn, most naturally and obviously suggesting
such a threefold absorption of dominion.

\(6\) that all this is actually prefigured by the symbols employed by
the prophet, or that the symbols are such as would be naturally employed
on the supposition that these events were designed to be referred to.

\(7\) and that there have been no other historical events to which these
remarkable symbols could be naturally and obviously applied. And if
these things are so, how are they to be explained except on the
supposition that Daniel was inspired? Has man any natural sagacity by
which such symbols representing the future could be suggested?

\(d\) It would be arrogant and proud, "speaking great words against the
Most High." No Protestant will doubt that this is true of the Papacy; no
one acquainted with history will presume to call it in question. The
arrogant pretensions of the Papacy have been manifested in all the
history of that power, and no one can doubt that its assumptions have
been, in fact, by fair construction, "a speaking of great words against
God." The Pope has claimed, or allowed to be conferred on him, names and
prerogatives which can belong only to God. See this fully shown in the
notes at [Th2 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004.md). The facts there
referred to are all that is necessary to illustrate this passage, on the
supposition that it refers to the Papacy. Compare also the Literalist,
vol. i. pp. 24-27.

\(e\) This would be a persecuting power - "making war with the saints,"
and "wearing out the saints of the Most High." Can anyone doubt that
this is true of the Papacy? The Inquisition; the "persecutions of the
Waldenses;" the ravages of the Duke of Alva; the fires of Smithfield;
the tortures at Goa - indeed, the whole history of the Papacy may be
appealed to in proof that this is applicable to that power. If anything
could have "worn out the saints of the Most High" - could have cut them
off from the earth so that evangelical religion would have become
extinct, it would have been the persecutions of the Papal power. In the
year 1208, a crusade was proclaimed by Pope Innocent III against the
Waldenses and Albigenses, in which a million of men perished. From the
beginning of the order of the Jesuits, in the year 1540 to 1580, nine
hundred thousand were destroyed. One hundred and fifty thousand perished
by the Inquisition in thirty years. In the Low Countries fifty thousand
persons were hanged, beheaded, burned, or buried alive, for the crime of
heresy, within the space of thirty-eight years from the edict of Charles
V, against the Protestants, to the peace of Chateau Cambresis in 1559.
Eighteen thousand suffered by the hands of the executioner, in the space
of five years and a half, during the administration of the Duke of Alva.
Indeed, the slightest acquaintance with the history of the Papacy, will
convince anyone that what is here said of "making war with the saints"
[Dan 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#021.md), and "wearing out the saints
of the Most High" [Dan 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025.md), is
strictly applicable to that power, and will accurately describe its
history. There have been, indeed, other persecuting powers, but none to
which this language would be so applicable, and none which it would so
naturally suggest. In proof of this, it is only necessary to refer to
the history of the Papacy, and to what it has done to extirpate those
who have professed a different faith. Let anyone recall:

\(1\) the persecution of the Waldenses;

\(2\) the acts of the Duke of Alva in the Low Countries;

\(3\) the persecution in England under Mary;

\(4\) the Inquisition;

\(5\) the attempts, too successful, to extinguish all the efforts at
reformation in Italy and Spain in the time of Luther and Calvin (see
McCrie), and

\(6\) the attempts to put down the Reformation in Germany and
Switzerland - all which were either directly originated or sanctioned by
the Papacy, and all for the same end, and he will see no reason to doubt
that the language here is strictly applicable to that power, and that
there has been no government on earth which would be so naturally
suggested by it. - Cunninghame, in the Literalist, i. 27, 28. Indeed,
who can number up all that have perished in the Inquisition alone?

\(h\) It would claim legislative power - "thinking to change times and
laws." The original Chaldee here may be rendered, as is done by Gesenius
and DeWette, set times, stated times, or festival seasons. The word
here, says Gesenius (Lexicon), is "spoken of sacred seasons, festivals,"
and there can be no doubt that in this place it refers to religious
institutions. The meaning is, that he would claim control over such
institutions or festivals, and that he would appoint or change them at
his pleasure. He would abolish or modify existing institutions of that
kind, or he would institute new ones, as should seem good to him. This
would be applicable, then, to some power that should claim authority to
prescribe religious institutions, and to change the laws of God. No one,
also, can fail to see a fulfillment of this in the claims of the Papacy,
in setting up a jurisdiction over seasons of festival and fast; and in
demanding that the laws of kingdoms should be so modelled as to sustain
its claims, and modifying the laws of God as revealed in the Bible. The
right of deposing and setting up kings; of fixing the boundaries of
nations; of giving away crowns and scepters; and of exercising dominion
over the sacred seasons, the customs, the amusements of nations - all
these, as illustrated under the Papacy, will leave no doubt that all
this would find an ample fulfillment in the history of that power. The
Pope has claimed to be the head of the church, and has asserted and
exercised the right of appointing sacred seasons; of abolishing ancient
institutions; of introducing numberless new festival occasions,
practically abrogating the laws of God on a great variety of subjects.
We need only refer, in illustration of this,

\(a\) to the claim of infallibility, by which an absolute jurisdiction
is asserted that covers the whole ground;

\(b\) to all the laws pertaining to image-worship, so directly in the
face of the laws of God;

\(c\) to the celibacy of the clergy, rendering void one of the laws of
heaven in relation to marriage;

\(d\) to the whole doctrine respecting purgatory;

\(e\) to the doctrine of transubstantiation;

\(f\) to the practical abolition of the Christian Sabbath by appointing
numerous saints' days to be observed as equally sacred;

\(g\) to the law withholding the cup from the laity - contrary to the
commandment of the Saviour; and

\(h\) in general to the absolute control claimed by the Papacy over the
whole subject of religion.

Indeed, nothing would better characterize this power than to say that it
asserted the right to "change times and laws." And to all this should be
added another characteristic [Dan 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008.md),
that "it would have the eyes of a man;" that is, would be distinguished
for a far-seeing sagacity. Could this be so appropriately applied to
anything else as to the deep, the artful, and the far-reaching diplomacy
of the court of Rome; to the sagacity of the Jesuit; to the skillful
policy which subdued the world to itself?

These illustrations will leave no doubt, it seems to me, that all that
is here said will find an ample fulfillment in the Papacy, and that it
is to be regarded as having a reference to that power. If so, it only
remains,

III\. To inquire what, according to his interpretation, we are to expect
will yet occur, or what light this passage throws on events that are yet
future. The origin, the growth, the general character and influence of
this power up to a distant period are illustrated by this
interpretation. What remains is the inquiry, from the passage before us,
how long this is to continue, and what we are to anticipate in regard to
its fall. The following points, then, would seem to be clear, on the
supposition that this refers to the Papal power:

It is to continue a definite period from its establishment, [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025.md). This duration is mentioned as "a
time, and times, and the dividing of a time" - three years and a half -
twelve hundred and sixty days - twelve hundred and sixty years. See the
note at that verse. The only difficulty in regard to this, if that
interpretation is correct, is to determine the time when the Papacy
actually began - the terminus a quo - and this has given rise to all the
diversity of explanation among Protestants. Assuming any one time as the
period when the Papal power arose, as a date from which to calculate, it
is easy to compute from that date, and to fix some period - terminus ad
quem - to which this refers, and which may be looked to as the time of
the overthrow of that power. But there is nothing more difficult in
history than the determination of the exact time when the Papacy
properly began: that is, when the peculiar domination which is fairly
understood by that system commenced in the world; or what were its first
distinguishing acts. History has not so marked that period that there is
no room for doubt. It has not affixed definite dates to it; and to this
day it is not easy to make out the time when that power commenced, or to
designate any one event at a certain period that will surely mark it. It
seems to have been a gradual growth, and its commencement has not been
so definitely characterized as to enable us to demonstrate with absolute
certainty the time to which the twelve hundred and sixty years will
extend.

Different writers have assigned different periods for the rise of the
Papacy, and different acts as the first act of that power; and all the
prophecies as to its termination depend on the period which is fixed on
as the time of its rise. It is this which has led to so much that is
conjectural, and which has been the occasion of so much disappointment,
and which throws so much obscurity now over all calculations as to the
termination of that power. In nothing is the Scripture more clear than
that that power shall be destroyed; and if we could ascertain with
exactness the date of its origin, there would be little danger of erring
in regard to its close. The different periods which have been fixed on
as the date of its rise have been principally the following:

\(1\) An edict published by Justinian (533 a.d.), and a letter addressed
by him at the same time to the Pope, in which he acknowledged him to be
the head of the churches, thus conferring on him a title belonging only
to the Saviour, and putting himself and empire under the dominion of the
bishop of Rome. - Duffield on the Prophecies, p. 281.

\(2\) The decree of the emperor Phocas (606 a.d.), confirming what had
been done by Justinian, and giving his sanction to the code of laws
promulgated by him; a code of laws based on the acknowledged supremacy
of the Pope, and which became the basis of European legislation for
centuries; and conferring on him the title of "Universal Bishop."

\(3\) The act of Pope Stephen, by which, when appealed to by the
claimant to the crown of France, he confirmed Pepin in the kingdom, and
set aside Childeric III, and, in return, received from Pepin the
Exarchate of Ravenna and the Pentapolis. See Ranke's Hist. of the
Papacy, vol. i. 23. This occurred about 752 a.d.

\(4\) The opinion of Mr. Gibbon (4:363), that Gregory VII was the true
founder of the Papal power. "Gregory VII.," says he, "who may be adored
or detested as the founder of the Papal monarchy, was driven from Rome,
and died in exile at Salerno." Gregory became Pope 1073 a.d. These
different dates, if assumed as the foundation of the Papal power, would,
by the addition to each of the period of 1260 years, lead respectively
to the years 1793, 1866, 2012, and 2333, as the period of the
termination of the Papal dominion. As this is a point of great
importance in the explanation of the prophecies, it may be proper to
examine these opinions a little more in detail. But in order to this, it
is necessary to have a clear conception of what the Papacy as a distinct
domination is, or what constitutes its peculiarity, as seen by the
sacred writers, and as it has in fact existed, and does exist in the
world; and in regard to this there can be little difference of opinion.

It is not a mere ecclesiastical power - not a mere spiritual domination
- not the control of a bishop as such over a church or a diocese - nor
is it a mere temporal dominion, but it is manifestly the union of the
two: that peculiar domination which the bishop of Rome has claimed, as
growing out of his primacy as the head of the church, and of a temporal
power also, asserted at first over a limited jurisdiction, but
ultimately, and as a natural consequence, over all other sovereignties,
and claiming universal dominion. We shall not find the Papacy, or the
Papal dominion as such, clearly, in the mere spiritual rule of the first
bishop of Rome, nor in that mere spiritual dominion, however enlarged,
but in that junction of the two, when, in virtue of a pretended Divine
right, a temporal dominion grew up that ultimately extended itself over
Europe, claiming the authority to dispose of crowns; to lay kingdoms
under interdict, and to absolve subjects from their allegiance. If we
can find the beginning of this claim - the germ of this peculiar kind of
domination - we shall doubtless have found the commencement of the
Papacy - the terminus a quo - as it was seen by the prophets - the point
from which we are to reckon in determining the question of its duration.

With this view, then, of the nature of the Papacy, it is proper to
inquire when it commenced, or which of the periods referred to, if
either, can be properly regarded as the commencement.

I. The edict of Justinian, and the letter to the bishop of Rome, in
which he acknowledged him to be the head of the church, 533 a.d. This
occurred under John II, reckoned as the fifty-fifth bishop of Rome. The
nature of this application of Justinian to the Pope, and the honor
conferred on him, was this: On all occasion of a controversy in the
church, on the question whether "one person of the Trinity suffered in
the flesh," the monks of Constantinople, fearful of being condemned
under an edict of Justinian for heresy in denying this, applied to the
Pope to decide the point. Justinian, who took great delight in inquiries
of that nature, and who maintained the opposite opinion on that subject,
also made his appeal to the Pope. Having, therefore, drawn up a long
creed, containing the disputed article among the rest, he despatched two
bishops with it to Rome, and laid the whole matter before the Pope. At
the same time he wrote a letter to the Pope, congratulating him on his
election, assuring him that the faith contained in the confession which
he sent him was the faith of the whole Eastern church, and entreating
him to declare in his answer that he received to his communion all who
professed that faith, and none who did not. To add weight to the letter
he accompanied it with a present to Peter, consisting of several
chalices and other vessels of gold, enriched with precious stones. From
this deference to the Pope, on the part of the emperor, and this
submitting to him, as the head of the whole church, of an important
question to be determined, it has been argued that this was properly the
beginning of the Papacy, and that the twelve hundred and sixty years are
to be reckoned from that. But against this opinion the objections are
insuperable, for

\(a\) there was here nothing of what properly constitutes the Papacy -
the peculiar union of the temporal and spiritual power; or the peculiar
domination which that power has exerted over the world. All that
occurred was the mere deference which an emperor showed to one who
claimed to be the spiritual head of the church, and who had long before
claimed that. There was no change - no beginning, properly so called -
no commencement of a new form of domination over mankind, such as the
Papacy has been.

\(b\) But, as a matter of fact, there was, after all, little real
deference to the Pope in this case. "Little or no account," says Bower,
"ought to be made of that extraordinary deference (the deference shown
by carrying this question before the Pope). Justinian paid great
deference to the Pope, as well as to all other bishops, when they agreed
with him; but none at all when they did not - thinking himself at least
as well qualified as the best of them - and so he certainly was - to
decide controversies concerning the faith; and we shall soon see him
entering the lists with his holiness himself" - Lives of the Popes, i.
336.

II\. The second date which has been assigned to the origin of the Papacy
is the decree made by the emperor Phocas (606 a.d.), by which, it is
said, he continued the grant made by Justinian. This act was the
following: Boniface III, when he had been made bishop of Rome, relying
on the favor and partiality which Phocas had shown him, prevailed on him
to revoke the decree settling the title of "Universal Bishop" on the
bishop of Constantinople, and obtained another settling that title on
himself and his successors. The decree of Phocas, conferring this title,
has not indeed come down to us; but it has been the common testimony of
historians that such title was conferred. See Mosheim, i. 513; Bower, i.
426. The fact asserted here has been doubted, and Mosheim supposes that
it rests on the authority of Baronius. "Still," says he, "it is certain
that something of this kind occurred." But there are serious objections
to our regarding this as properly the commencement of the Papacy as
such. For

\(a\) this was not the beginning of that peculiar domination, or form of
power, which the Pope has asserted and maintained. If this title were
conferred, it imparted no new power; it did not change the nature of
this domination; it did not, in fact, make the Roman bishop different
from what he was before. He was still, in all respects, subject to the
civil power of the emperors, and had no control beyond what he exercised
in the church.

\(b\) And even this little was withdrawn by the same authority which
granted it - the authority of the emperor of Constantinople - though it
has always since been claimed and asserted by the Pope himself. See
Bower, i. 427. It is true that, as a consequence of the fact that this
title was conferred on the Popes, they began to grasp at power, and
aspire to temporal dominion; but still there was no formal grasp of such
power growing out of the assumption of this title, nor was any such
temporal dominion set up as the immediate result of such a title. The
act, therefore, was not sufficiently marked, distinct, and decisive, to
constitute an epoch, or the beginning of an era, in the history of the
world, and the rise of the Papacy cannot with any propriety be dated
from that. This was undoubtedly one of the steps by which that peculiar
power rose to its greatness, or which contributed to lay the foundation
of its subsequent claims, its arrogance, and its pride; but it is
doubtful whether it was so important an event characterizing the Papacy
as to be regarded as the origin, or the terminus a quo in ascertaining
the time of its continuance.

It was, however, in view of this, and with this considered as properly
the origin of the Papacy, that the Rev. Robert Fleming, in his work on
the Rise and Fall of the Papacy, first published in 1701, uttered the
following remarkable language, as based on his calculations respecting
the continuance of that power: "If we may suppose that Antichrist began
his reign in the year 606, the additional one thousand two hundred and
sixty years of his duration, were they Julian or ordinary years, would
lead down to the year 1866, as the last period of the seven-headed
monster. But seeing they are prophetic years only (of 360 days), we must
cast away eighteen years in order to bring them to the exact measure of
time that the Spirit of God designs in this book. And thus the final
period of the Papal usurpati (supposing that he did indeed rise in the
year 606) must conclude with the year 1848 - (Cobbin's Edition, p. 32.)
Whether this be considered as merely a happy conjecture - the one
successful one among thousands that have failed, or as the result of a
proper calculation respecting the future, no one in comparing it with
the events of the year 1848, when the Pope was driven from Rome, and
when a popular government was established in the very seat of the Papal
power, can fail to see that it is remarkable considered as having been
uttered a century and a half ago. Whether it is the correct calculation,
and that temporary downfall of the Papal government is to be regarded as
the first in a series of events that will ultimately end in its
destruction, time must determine. The reasons mentioned above, however,
and those which will be suggested in favor of a different beginning of
that power, make it, at present, more probable that a different period
is to be assigned as its close.

III\. The third date which has been assigned as the beginning of the
Papacy is the grant of Pepin above referred to, 752 a.d. This grant
conferred by Pepin was confirmed also by Charlemagne and his successors,
and it was undoubtedly at this period that the Papacy began to assume
its place among the sovereignties of Europe. In favor of this opinion -
that this was properly the rise of the Papacy - the terminus a quo of
prophecy, the following considerations may be urged:

\(a\) We have here a definite act - an act which is palpable and
apparent, as characterizing the progress of this domination over men.

\(b\) We have here properly the beginning of the temporal dominion, or
the first acknowledged exercise of that power in acts of temporal
sovereignty - in giving laws, asserting dominion, swaying a temporal
scepter, and wearing a temporal crown. All the acts before had been of a
spiritual character, and all the deference to the Bishop of Rome had
been of a spiritual nature. Henceforward, however, he was acknowledged
as a temporal prince, and took his place as such among the crowned heads
of Europe.

\(c\) This is properly the beginning of that mighty domination which the
Pope wielded over Europe - a beginning, which, however small at first,
ultimately became so powerful and so arrogant as to claim jurisdiction
over all the kingdoms of the earth, and the right to absolve subjects
from their allegiance, to lay kingdoms under interdict, to dispose of
crowns, to order the succession of princes, to tax all people, and to
dispose of all newly-discovered countries.

\(d\) This accords better with the prophecies than any other one event
which has occurred in the world - especially with the prophecy of
Daniel, of the springing up of the little horn, and the fact that that
little horn plucked up three others of the ten into which the fourth
kingdom was divided.

\(e\) And it should be added that this agrees with the idea all along
held up in the prophecies, that this would be properly the fourth empire
prolonged. The fifth empire or kingdom is to be the reign of the saints,
or the reign of righteousness on the earth; the fourth extends down in
its influences and power to that. As a matter of fact, this Roman power
was thus concentrated in the Papacy. The form was changed, but it was
the Roman power that was in the eye of the prophets, and this was
contemplated under its various phases, as pagan and nominally Christian,
until the reign of the saints should commence, or the kingdom of God
should be set up. But it was only in the time of Stephen, and by the act
of Pepin and Charlemagne, that this change occurred, or that this
dominion of a temporal character was settled in the Papacy - and that
the Pope was acknowledged as having this temporal power. This was
consummated indeed in Hildebrand, or Gregory VII (Gibbon, iii. 353, iv.
363), but this mighty power properly had its origin in the time of
Pepin.

IV\. The fourth date assigned for the origin of the Papacy is the time
of Hildebrand, or Gregory VII. This is the period assigned by Mr.
Gibbon. Respecting this, he remarks (vol. iv. p. 363), "Gregory the
Seventh, who may be adored or detested as the founder of the Papal
monarchy, was driven from Rome, and died in exile at Salerno." And again
(vol. iii. p. 353), he says of Gregory, "After a long series of scandal,
the apostolic see was reformed and exalted, by the austerity and zeal of
Gregory VII. That ambitious monk devoted his life to the execution of
two projects:

I. To fix in the college of Cardinals the freedom and independence of
election, and forever to abolish the right or usurpation of the emperors
and the Roman people.

II\. To bestow and resume the Western Empire as a fief or benefice of
the church, and to extend his temporal dominion over the kings and
kingdoms of the earth.

After a contest of fifty years, the first of these designs was
accomplished by the firm support of the ecclesiastical order, whose
liberty was connected with that of the chief. But the second attempt,
though it was crowned with some apparent and partial success, has been
vigorously resisted by the secular power, and finally extinguished by
the improvement of human reason."

If the views above suggested, however, are correct; or if we look at the
Papacy as it was in the time of Hildebrand, it must be apparent that
this was not the rise or origin of that peculiar domination, but was
only the carrying out and completing of the plan laid long before to set
up a temporal dominion over mankind.

It should be added, whatever of the three first periods referred to be
regarded as the time of the rise of the Papacy, if we add to them the
prophetic period of 1260 years, we are now in the midst of scenes on
which the prophetic eye rested, and we cannot, as fair interpreters of
prophecy, but regard this mighty domination as hastening to its fall. It
would seem probable, then, that according to the most obvious
explanation of the subject, we are at present not far from the
termination and fall of that great power, and that events may be
expected to occur at about this period of the world, which will be
connected with its fall.

Its power is to be taken away as by a solemn judgment - if the throne
was set, and God was to come forth to pronounce judgment on this power
to overthrow it, [Dan 7:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010.md), [Dan
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#026.md). This destruction of the power
referred to is to be absolute and entire - as if the "beast were slain,
and the body given to the burning flame" - "and they shall take away his
dominion, to consume and destroy it unto the end." This would denote the
absolute destruction of this peculiar power - its entire cessation in
the world; that is, the absolute destruction of what had constituted its
peculiarity - the prolonged power of the beast of the fourth kingdom -
concentrated and embodied in that represented by the little horn. If
applied to the Roman power, or the fourth kingdom, it means that that
power which would have been prolonged under the dominion of that
represented by the little horn, would wholly cease - as if the body of
the beast had been burned.

If applied to the power represented by the "little horn" - the Papacy -
it means that that power which sprang up amidst the others, and which
became so mighty - embodying so much of the power of the beast, would
wholly pass away as an ecclesiastico-civil power. It would cease its
dominion, and as one of the ruling powers of the earth would disappear.
This would be accomplished by some remarkable Divine manifestation - as
if God should come in majesty and power to judgment and should pronounce
a sentence; that is, the overthrow would be decisive, and as manifestly
the result of the Divine interposition as if God should do it by a
formal act of judgment. In the overthrow of that power, whenever it
occurs, it would be natural, from this prophecy, to anticipate that
there would be some scenes of commotion and revolution bearing directly
on it, as if God were pronouncing sentence on it; some important changes
in the nations that had acknowledged its authority, as if the great
Judge of nations were coming forth to assert his own power and his own
right to rule, and to dispose of the kingdoms of the earth as he
pleased.

\(C\) It is to be anticipated that the power referred to will be
destroyed on account of its pride and arrogance. See the notes at [Dan
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#011.md). That is, whatever power there is
upon the earth at the time referred to that shall be properly that of
the fourth beast or kingdom, will be taken away on account of the claims
set up and maintained by the "little horn:" "I beheld because of the
voice of the great words which the horn spake; I beheld until the beast
was slain, etc.," [Dan 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#011.md). On the
supposition that this refers to the Papacy, what is to be expected would
be, that the pride and arrogance of that power as such - that is, as an
ecclesiastical power claiming dominion over civil things, and wielding
civil authority, would be such that the Roman power - the lingering
power of the fourth kingdom - would be taken away, and its dominion over
the world would cease. That vast Roman domination that once trod down
the earth, and that crushed and oppressed the nations, would still
linger, like the prolonged life of the beast, until, on account of the
arrogance and pride of the Papacy, it would be wholly taken away. If one
were to judge of the meaning of this prophecy without attempting to
apply it to particular passing events, he would say that it would be
fulfilled by some such events as these: if the people over whom the
prolonged Roman civil power would be extended, and over whom the
ecclesiastical or papal scepter would be swayed, should, on account of
the pride and arrogance of the Papacy, rise in their might, and demand
liberty - that would be in fact an end of the prolonged power of the
fourth beast; and it would be on account of the "great words which the
horn spake," and would be in all respects a fulfillment of the language
of this prophecy. Whether such an end of this power is to occur, time is
to determine.

\(D\) Simultaneously with this event, as the result of this, we are to
anticipate such a spread of truth and righteousness, and such a reign of
the saints on the earth, as would be properly symbolized by the coming
of the Son of man to the ancient of days to receive the kingdom, [Dan
7:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013.md). As shown in the
interpretation of those verses, this does not necessarily imply that
there would be any visible appearing of the Son of man, or any personal
reign (see the note at these verses), but there would be such a making
over of the kingdom to the Son of man and to the saints as would be
properly symbolized by such a representation. That is, there would be
great changes; there would be a rapid progress of the truth; there would
be a spread of the gospel; there would be a change in the governments of
the world, so that the power would pass into the hands of the righteous,
and they would in fact rule. From that time the "saints" would receive
the kingdom, and the affairs of the world would be put on a new footing.
From that period it might be said that the reign of the saints would
commence; that is, there would be such changes in this respect that that
would constitute an epoch in the history of the world - the proper
beginning of the reign of the saints on the earth - the setting up of
the new and final dominion in the world. If there should be such changes
- such marked progress - such facilities for the spread of truth - such
new methods of propagating it - and such certain success attending it,
all opposition giving way, and persecution ceasing, as would properly
constitute an epoch or era in the world's history, which would be
connected with the conversion of the world to God, this would fairly
meet the interpretation of this prophecy; this occurring, all would have
taken place which could be fairly shown to be implied in the vision.

\(E\) We are to expect a reign of righteousness on the earth. On the
character of what we are fairly to expect from the words of the
prophecy, see the notes at [Dan 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014.md).
The prophecy authorizes us to anticipate a time when there shall be a
general prevalence of true religion; when the power in the world shall
be in the hands of good men - of men fearing God; when the Divine laws
shall be obeyed - being acknowledged as the laws that are to control
men; when the civil institutions of the world shall be pervaded by
religion, and moulded by it; when there shall be no hinderance to the
free exercise of religion, and when in fact the reigning power on the
earth shall be the kingdom which the Messiah shall set up. There is
nothing more certain in the future than such a period, and to that all
things are tending. Such a period would fulfill all that is fairly
implied in this wonderful prophecy, and to that faith and hope should
calmly and confidently look forward. For that they who love their God
and their race should labor and pray; and by the certain assurance that
such a period will come, we should be cheered amidst all the moral
darkness that exists in the world, and in all that now discourages us in
our endeavors to do good.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 8](dan008.md)

</div>
