<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan009)  [Next](dan011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 10:0</span></span>

Analysis of the Chapter

This chapter introduces the last revelation made to Daniel, and is
"merely" introductory to the disclosures made in the two following
chapters. The whole extends to the time of the coming of the Messiah,
embracing a detail of the principal historical events that would occur,
and closes with some fearful allusions to the ultimate results of human
conduct in the day of judgment, and to the great principles on which God
governs the world. The contents of this introductory chapter are as
follows:

\(a\) The statement of the time when the revelation occurred, [Dan
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001). This was in the third year of
Cyrus king of Persia, subsequently, therefore, to the visions in the
previous chapters, and after the order had been given by Cyrus for the
restoration of the Jews, [Ezr 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001).

\(b\) The particular period when this occurred was when Daniel was
observing a fast that continued through three weeks, [Dan
10:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#002). This was at the passover, the
first month in their ecclesiastical year, and the fast was observed by
Daniel, evidently, on account of the sins and the calamities of his
people.

\(c\) The place where this occurred, [Dan
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#004). He was by the side of the river
Hiddekel or Tigris. Why he was there he does not say. But it is to be
remembered that he seems to have been employed on some occasions in
other parts of the empire than Babylon; and one of his former visions
occurred on the banks of a river that flowed into the Tigris - the river
Ulai. See the notes at [Dan 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002).
Indeed, it would appear that the banks of rivers were not unfrequently
the places to which the prophets resorted, or where they were favored
with their visions. They were retired places, and were on many accounts
favorable for devotion. Compare [Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001); [Act
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#013). See also [Rev
22:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001).

\(d\) While there, engaged in his devotions, Daniel saw a man, who
suddenly appeared to him, clothed in linen, and girded with a belt of
gold. Those who were with him fled astonished, and left him alone to
contemplate the vision, and to receive the communication which this
glorious stranger had to make to him. The effect of this vision on
himself, however, was wholly to overcome him, to prostrate him to the
earth, and to render him insensible, until the angel touched him, and
raised him up, [Dan 10:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#004). In all
this there is nothing unnatural. The effect is such as would be produced
in any case in similar circumstances, and it has a striking resemblance
to what occurred to Saul of Tarsus on his way to Damascus ([Act
9:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003); [Act
22:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#007); and to John in the visions of
Patmos, [Rev 1:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010).)

\(e\) He who had thus appeared to Daniel proceeded to state to him the
design for which he had come, [Dan
10:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#011). The prayer of Daniel, he
said, had been heard the first day in which he had given himself to
these solemn acts of devotion. He had himself been commissioned at that
time to come to Daniel, and to disclose the events which were to occur.
During a period of twenty-one days, however, in which Daniel had been
engaged in this season of devotion, he had been withstood by "the prince
of the kingdom of Persia," and had been detained until Michael, one of
the chief princes, had interposed to release him, and he had now come,
at last, to make known to Daniel what would occur to his people in the
latter days. The nature of this detention will, of course, be considered
in the notes at [Dan 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013).

\(f\) Daniel then [Dan 10:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#015)
describes the effect which this vision had on him, rendering him unable
to converse with him who had thus appeared to him.

\(g\) The heavenly messenger then touched him, and bade him be of good
courage and be strong [Dan 10:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#018),
and then said that he would return and fight with the prince of Persia,
after having stated what was "noted in the Scripture of truth," [Dan
10:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#020).

[Daniel 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 10:1</span></span>

In the third year of Cyrus, king of Persia - In regard to Cyrus, see the
notes at [Isa 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#002). In [Dan
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#021), it is said that "Daniel
continued even unto the first year of king Cyrus." But it is not
necessarily implied in that passage that he "died" then. It may mean
only that he continued in authority, and was employed, in various ways,
as a public officer, until that time. See the note at that passage. For
anything that appears, he may have lived several years after, though,
for causes now unknown, he may have retired from the court after the
accession of Cyrus. This vision may have occurred when he was no longer
a public officer, though the whole narrative leads us to suppose that he
had not lost his interest in the affairs of the Jewish people. He may
have retired on account of age, though his declining years would be
naturally devoted to the welfare of his people, and he would embrace any
opportunity which he might have of doing them good.

A thing was revealed unto Daniel - A revelation was made to him. The
occasion on which it was done is stated in the next verse. It was when
he was earnestly engaged in prayer for his people, and when his mind was
deeply anxious in regard to their condition.

Whose name was called Belteshazzar - See the notes at [Dan
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#007). The name Belteshazzar was
probably that by which he was known in Babylon, and as this prophecy was
perhaps published in his own time, the use of this name would serve to
identify the author. The name "Daniel" would have been sufficient to
give it currency and authority among his own countrymen.

And the thing was true - That is, it would be certainly accomplished.
This expresses the deep conviction of the writer that what was revealed
in this vision would certainly come to pass. In his own mind there was
no doubt that it would be so, though the time extended through many
years, and though it could not be expected that it would be complete
until long after his own death. Perhaps the declaration here is designed
to bring the weight of his own authority and his well-known character to
pledge his own word, that what is here said would be accomplished; or,
as we should say, to stake his veracity as a prophet and a man, on the
fulfillment of what he had affirmed. Such an assertion might be of great
use in consoling the minds of the Jews in the troubles that were to come
upon their nation.

But the time appointed was long - Margin, "great." There is considerable
variety in the translation and interpretation of this passage. The Latin
Vulgate renders it, "fortitudo magna." The Greek, "And the power was
great." The Syriac, "And the discourse was apprehended with great
effort, but he understood the vision." Luther, "And it was of great
matters." Lengerke, "And the misery (Elend) is great;" that is, the
distress of the people. Bertholdt renders it, "Whose contents pertained
to great wars." This variety of interpretation arises from the word
rendered in our version "the time appointed" - צבא tsâbâ'. This word
properly means an army, host, as going forth to war; then the host of
angels, of the stars, and hence, God is so often called "Jehovah of
hosts." Then the word means warfare, military service, a hard service, a
season of affliction or calamity. See the notes at [Job
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001). It seems to me that this is the
meaning here, and that Gesenius (Lexicon) has correctly expressed the
idea: "And true is the edict, and "relates to long warfare;" that is, to
many calamities to be endured." It was not a thing to be soon
accomplished, nor did it pertain to peaceful and easy times, but it had
reference to the calamities, the evils, and the hardships of wars - wars
attended with the evils to which they are usually incident, and which
were to be conducted on a great scale. This interpretation will accord
with the details in the following chapters.

And he understood the thing ... - This seems to be said in
contradistinction to what had occurred on some other occasions when the
meaning of the vision which he saw was concealed from him. Of this he
says he had full understanding. The prophecy was, in fact, more clearly
expressed than had been usual in the revelations made to Daniel, for
this is almost entirely a historical narrative, and there could be
little doubt as to its meaning.

[Daniel 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 10:2</span></span>

In those days I Daniel was mourning - I was afflicting myself; that is,
he had set apart this time as an extraordinary fast. He was sad and
troubled. He does not say on what account he was thus troubled, but
there can be little doubt that it was on account of his people. This was
two years after the order had been given by Cyrus for the restoration of
the Hebrew people to their country, but it is not improbable that they
met with many embarrassments in their efforts to return, and possibly
there may have sprung up in Babylon some difficulties on the subject
that greatly affected the mind of Daniel. The difficulties attending
such an enterprise as that of restoring a captured people to their
country, when the march lay across a vast desert, would at any time have
been such as to have made an extraordinary season of prayer and fasting
proper.

Three full weeks - Margin, "weeks of days." Hebrew, "Three sevens of
days." He does not say whether he had designedly set apart that time to
be occupied as a season of fasting, or whether he had, under the
influence of deep feeling, continued his fast from day to day until it
reached that period. Either supposition will accord with the
circumstances of the case, and either would have justified such an act
at anytime, for it would be undoubtedly proper to designate a time of
extraordinary devotion, or, under the influence of deep feeling, of
domestic trouble, of national affliction, to continue such religious
exercises from day to day.

[Daniel 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 10:3</span></span>

I ate no pleasant bread - Margin, "bread of desires." So the Hebrew. The
meaning is, that he abstained from ordinary food, and partook of that
only which was coarse and disagreeable.

Neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth - That is, he lived on bread or
vegetables. It is not to be inferred from this that Daniel ordinarily
made use of wine, for it would seem from Dan. 1: that that was not his
custom. What would appear from this passage would be, that he practiced
on this occasion the most rigid abstinence.

Neither did I anoint myself - The use of unguents was common in the East
(see the notes at [Mat 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#017)), and
Daniel here says that he abstained during these three weeks from what he
ordinarily observed as promoting his personal comfort. He gave himself
up to a course of life which would be expressive of deep grief. Nature
prompts to this when the mind is overwhelmed with sorrow. Not only do we
become indifferent to our food, but it requires an effort not to be
indifferent to our dress, and to our personal appearance.

[Daniel 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 10:4</span></span>

And in the four and twentieth day of the first month - At the close of
his season of fasting. Though he had not set apart this season of
fasting with any view or expectation that it would be followed by such a
result, yet there was a propriety that an occasion like this should be
selected as that on which the communication which follows should be made
to his mind, for

\(a\) his mind was in a prepared state by this extraordinary season of
devotion for such a communication; and

\(b\) his attention during that period had been turned toward the
condition of his people, and it was a fit opportunity to impart to him
these extraordinary views of what would occur to them in future days.

It may be added, that we shall be more likely to receive Divine
communications to our souls at the close of seasons of sincere and
prolonged devotion than at other times, and that, though we may set
apart such seasons for different purposes, the Spirit of God may take
occasion from them to impart to us clear and elevated views of Divine
truth, and of the Divine government. A man is in a better state to
obtain such views, and is more likely to obtain them, in such
circumstances than he is in others, and he who desires to understand God
and his ways should wait upon him with intense and prolonged devotion.
The "time" here specified is the "first month" - the month Nisan,
answering to a part of our month April. This was the month in which the
Passover was celebrated, and was a time, therefore, which a Jew would be
likely to select as a season of extraordinary devotion. It was, for some
reason, very common for the prophets to record "the very day" on which
the visions which they saw appeared to them, or on which Divine
communications were made to them. This was often of importance, because
it served to determine the time when a prophecy was fulfilled.

I was by the side of the great river, which is Hiddekel - That is, the
Tigris. The Syriac renders it the Euphrates. The name in the Scriptures,
however, denotes the Tigris. Why Daniel was there he does not say. He
was often away from Babylon (compare the notes at [Dan
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002)), and he may have been now among
some of his people who resided near the Tigris. Possibly he may at that
time have ceased to reside at the court in Babylon, and have taken up
his residence in some place on the Tigris. See the notes at [Dan
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001).

[Daniel 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 10:5</span></span>

Then I lifted up mine eyes, and looked ... - While he was engaged in
devotion. What is here said would lead us to suppose that he had been
occupied in deep thought and meditation, perhaps with his eyes fixed on
the ground.

Behold, a certain man clothed in linen - One who had the form and
appearance of a man.

The subsequent disclosures showed that he was an angel, but when angels
have appeared on earth they have commonly assumed the human form. The
margin is, "one." So also is the Hebrew "one man." From [Dan
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#006), it would seem that two other
such beings appeared in the course of the vision, but either one only
was manifest now to Daniel, or his attention was particularly directed
to him. The name of this celestial messenger is not given, but all the
circumstances of the case lead us to suppose that it was the same who
had appeared to him on the banks of the Ulai [Dan
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#016), and the same who had made the
revelation of the seventy weeks, [Dan
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#021), following. Linen was the common
raiment of priests, because it was supposed to be more pure than wool,
[Exo 28:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#042); [Lev
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#010); [Lev
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#004), [Lev
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#023); [Sa1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#018). It was also worn by prophets,
[Jer 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#001), and is represented as the
raiment of angels, [Rev 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#006). The
nature of the raiment would suggest the idea at once that this person
thus appearing was one sustaining a saintly character.

Whose loins were girded with fine gold of Uphaz - With a girdle made of
fine gold; that is, probably, it was made of something in which fine
gold was interwoven, so as to give it the appearance of pure gold. It
was customary in the East, as it is now, to wear a girdle around the
loins. See the notes at [Mat 5:38-41](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#038).
These girdles are often made of rich material, and are highly
ornamented. Compare the notes at [Rev
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013). Nothing is known of Uphaz,
unless, as Gesenius supposes, the word is a corruption of Ophir, made by
a change of a single letter - ז (z) for ר (r). Ophir was celebrated for
its gold, but its situation is unknown. See the notes at [Job
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#024).

[Daniel 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">dan 10:6</span></span>

His body also was like the beryl - There is a very striking resemblance
between the description here given and that of the Saviour as he
appeared to John in Patmos, [Rev
1:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013). See the notes at that
passage. It contains, however, no description of the appearance of the
body. "Beryl" is "a mineral of great hardness, occurring in green and
bluish-green six-sided prisms. It is identical with the emerald, except
that the latter has a purer and richer color. " - Dana, in Webster's
Dictionary. The Hebrew word used here is תרשׁישׁ tarshı̂ysh "Tarshish,
Tartessus," and properly refers to a country supposed to be on the south
of Spain, a place where this mineral was probably found. This was
situated between the mouths of the river Baetis, or Guadalquivir, and
was a flourishing mart of the Phoenicians, [Gen
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#004); [Psa
72:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#010); [Isa
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001), [Isa
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#006), [Isa
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#010), ... - Gesenius. The name was
given to this gem because it was brought from that place. The true
meaning of the word, as applied to a gem, is supposed to be the
chrysolite, that is, the topaz of the moderns. "Tarshish, the
chrysolite," says Rosenmuller ("Mineralogy and Botany of the Bible," pp.
38, 39), "is a crystal-line precious stone of the quartz kind, of a
glassy fracture. The prevailing color is yellowish-green, and
pistachio-green of every variety and degree of shade, but always with a
yellow and gold luster. It is completely diaphanous, and has a strong
double refraction. Most commonly the chrysolite is found solid and in
grains, or in angular pieces. The Hebrew word "Tarshish" denotes the
south of Spain, the Tartessus of the Greeks and Romans, a place to which
the Phoenicians traded even in the earliest ages. Probably the
Phoenicians first brought the chrysolite from Spain to Syria, and it was
on that account called Tarshish stone."

And his face as the appearance of lightning - Bright, shining. In [Rev
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016) it is, "And his countenance was
as the sun shineth in his strength." See the notes at that passage.

And his eyes as lamps of fire - Keen, penetrating. So in [Rev
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014) : "His eyes were as a flame of
fire."

And his arms and his feet like in color to polished brass - So in [Rev
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#015) : "And his feet like unto fine
brass, as if they burned in a furnace." See the notes at that passage.
The meaning is, that they were bright - like burnished metal. The Hebrew
here is, "like the eye of brass;" then, as the word eye comes to denote
the "face or countenance," the meaning is, "like the face or appearance
of brass." Complete [Exo 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#005), [Exo
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#015); [Num
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#005), [Num
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#011). It is easy to conceive of the
appearance which one would make whose arms and feet resembled burnished
brass.

And the voice of his words like the voice a multitude - A multitude of
people - loud and strong. So in [Rev
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#015) : "And his voice as the sound of
many waters."

[Daniel 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 10:7</span></span>

And I Daniel alone saw the vision - That is, he only saw it distinctly.
The others who were with him appear to have seen or heard something
which alarmed them, and they fled. Who those men were, or why they were
with him, he does not say. They may have been his own countrymen,
engaged with him in the act of devotion, or they may have been
Babylonians occupied in the public service; but whoever they were, or
whatever was the reason why they were there, they became alarmed and
fled. The case was somewhat different with the companions of Saul of
Tarsus when the Saviour appeared to him on his way to Damascus. These
saw the light; they all fell to the earth together, but Saul only heard
the voice of him that spake. [Act
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#009).

[Daniel 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 10:8</span></span>

Therefore I was left alone, and saw this great vision - That is, I
distinctly saw it, or contemplated it. He perceived, doubtless, that it
was a heavenly vision; and as he had often been favored with similar
manifestations, he remained to receive the communication which probably
he understood was to be made.

And there remained no strength in me - He was completely overcome. A
similar effect was produced on John when he was in Patmos: "And when I
saw him I fell at his feet as dead," [Rev
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#017). That he should be overcome, and
his strength taken away, was not an unnatural effect; and what occurred
to Daniel and John may demonstrate that there may be such views of the
Divine character and glory now as to prostrate our physical powers. It
is certain that such visions as those which appeared to Daniel and John
would have this effect; and, though we are not to expect that they will
now be vouchsafed to men, no one can doubt that there may be such views
of God, and heaven, and eternal realities presented to the eye of faith
and hope; such joy in the evidence of pardoned sin; such a change from a
sense of condemnation to the peace resulting from forgiveness, that the
powers of the body may be prostrated, and sink from exhaustion. Indeed,
it is not much of the revelation of the Divine character that in our
present state we can bear.

For my comeliness - Margin, "vigour." Hebrew, הוד hôd. The word means,
properly, majesty or splendor; then beauty or brightness, as of the
complexion. The meaning here is, that his "bright complexion" (Gesenius,
Lexicon) was changed upon him; that is, that he turned pale.

Into corruption - The phrase used here means literally "into
destruction." The sense is, that by the change that came over him. his
beauty - his bright or florid complexion was completely "destroyed." He
became deadly pale.

[Daniel 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 10:9</span></span>

Yet heard I the voice of his words - What the angel said when he
appeared to him Daniel has not recorded. He says [Dan
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006) that the voice of his words was
"like the voice of a multitude." It is probable that those who were with
him had heard that voice, and hearing it, and being struck with the
remarkable character of the vision, they had suddenly fled in alarm.
Daniel heard more distinctly what he said, though it does not yet appear
that he had heard anything more than the sound of his voice.

And when I heard the voice of his words, then was I in a deep sleep on
my face - Compare the notes at [Dan
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#018). Lengerke renders this, "I sank
into a deep sleep," etc. This is undoubtedly the meaning, that when he
heard this voice he was overcome, and sank prostrate and senseless upon
the earth. The sense of the Hebrew may be thus expressed: "I became
(הייתי hâyı̂ytı̂y) oppressed with sleep," etc.

[Daniel 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">dan 10:10</span></span>

And, behold, an hand touched me - The hand of the angel. Compare [Dan
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#018).

Which set me upon my knees and upon the palms of my hands - Not
"upright," as in [Dan 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#018). That is,
he had not strength given him at once to stand erect, but he was
partially raised up and enabled to move, though in a feeble and
tottering manner. The word used here (נוע nôa‛) means to move to and
fro; to waver; to vacillate; and the sense here, as expressed by
Gesenius (Lexicon) is, "lo, a hand touched me, and caused me to reel (i.
e., to stand reeling and trembling) upon my knees and hands." He was
gradually restored to strength.

[Daniel 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 10:11</span></span>

And he said unto me, O Daniel, a man greatly beloved - That is, in
heaven. Margin, as in Hebrew, "of desires." See the notes at [Dan
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023).

Understand the words that I speak unto thee - That is, attend to them,
implying that he would be able to understand them.

And stand upright - Margin, as in Hebrew, upon thy standing. That is,
stand erect. See the notes at [Dan
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#018).

[Daniel 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">dan 10:12</span></span>

Then said he unto me, Fear not - Be not alarmed at my presence; do not
fear that your devotions are not accepted, and that your prayers are not
heard.

For from the first day that thou didst set thine heart to understand -
That is, by a season of extraordinary devotion. Daniel had devoted three
full weeks to such a service [Dan
10:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#002), and it would seem from this
that one object which he had in view was to make inquiry about the
future condition of his people, or to learn what was his own duty in the
present circumstances, or what methods he might use to secure the return
of his countrymen to their own land. The circumstances of the case were
such as to make either of these inquiries proper; and the angel now
affirms that, from the first day when he entered on these
investigations, he was despatched to come to him, and to assure him that
his prayer was heard. The reason why he had not sooner arrived, and why
Daniel was left to continue his prayers so long without any answer being
returned, is stated in the following verses. Compare the notes at [Dan
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023).

And to chasten thyself before thy God - That is, by fasting and
humiliation. Literally, to afflict thyself.

Thy words were heard - In heaven. Another proof that prayer is at once
heard, though the answer may be long delayed. The instance before us
shows that the answer to prayer may seem, to be delayed, from causes
unknown to us, though the prayer ascends at once to heaven, and God
designs to answer it. In this case, it was deferred by the detention of
the messenger on the way [Dan 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013);
in other cases it may be from a different cause; but it should never be
set down as a proof that prayer is not heard, and that it will not be
answered, because the answer is not granted at once. Weeks, or months,
or years may elapse before the Divine purpose shall be made known,
though, so to speak, the messenger may be on his way to us. Something
may prevent the answer being borne to us; some "prince of the kingdom of
Persia" may withstand the messenger; some cause which we may not know
may hinder the immediate answer of our prayer, either in our own hearts,
or in outward events which cannot at once be controlled without a
miracle, or in the feelings and views of our friends whom we seek to
have converted and saved; but the purpose to answer the prayer may have
been simultaneous with its being offered, and a train of measures may
have been commenced at once to bring about the result, though many weeks
or months of delay, of anxiety, of tears, may elapse before we attain
the object we desired.

Daniel would have been cheered in his days of fasting and service if he
had known that an angel was on his way to him to comfort him, and to
communicate to him an answer from God; often - if not always - in our
days of deepest anxiety and trouble; when our prayers seem not to
penetrate the skies; when we meet with no response; when the thing for
which we pray seems to be withheld; when our friends remain unconverted;
when irreligion abounds and prevails; when we seem to be doing no good,
and when calamity presses upon us, if we saw the arrangement which God
was already making to answer the prayer, and could see the messenger on
the way, our hearts would exult, and our tears would cease to flow. And
why, in our days of trouble and anxiety, should we not believe that it
is so; and that God, even though the delay may seem to be long, will yet
show himself to be a hearer and an answerer of prayer?

[Daniel 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 10:13</span></span>

But the prince of the kingdom of Persia - In explaining this very
difficult verse it may be proper

\(1\) to consider the literal sense of the words;

\(2\) to deduce the fair meaning of the passage as thus explained; and

\(3\) to notice the practical truths taught.

The word rendered "prince" - שׂר s'ar - means, properly, a leader,
commander, chief, as of troops, [Gen
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#022); of a king's body-guard, [Gen
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#036); of cup-bearers, [Gen
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#009); of a prison, [Gen
39:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#021); of a flock, [Gen
47:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#006). Then it means a prince, a noble,
a chief in the state, [Gen 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#015). In
[Dan 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#025), in the phrase "Prince of
princes," it refers to God. So far as the word is concerned in the
phrase "prince of the kingdom of Persia," it might refer to a prince
ruling over that kingdom, or to a prime minister of the state; but the
language also is such that it is applicable to an angelic being supposed
to preside over a state, or to influence its counsels. If this idea is
admitted; if it is believed that angels do thus preside over particular
states, this language would properly express that fact. Gesenius
(Lexicon) explains it in this passage as denoting the "chiefs, princes,
and angels; i. e., the archangels acting as patrons and advocates of
particular nations before God." That this is the proper meaning here as
deduced from the words is apparent, for

\(a\) it is an angel that is speaking, and it would seem most natural to
suppose that he had encountered one of his own rank;

\(b\) the mention of Michael who came to his aid - a name which, as we
shall see, properly denotes an angel, leads to the same conclusion;

\(c\) it accords, also, with the prevailing belief on the subject.

Undoubtedly, one who takes into view all the circumstances referred to
in this passage would most naturally understand this of an angelic
being, having some kind of jurisdiction over the kingdom of Persia. What
was the character of this "prince," however, whether he was a good or
bad angel, is not intimated by the language. It is only implied that he
had a chieftainship, or some species of guardian care over that kingdom
- watching over its interests and directing its affairs. As he offered
resistance, however, to this heavenly messenger on his way to Daniel, as
it was necessary to counteract his plans, and as the aid of Michael was
required to overcome his opposition, the fair construction is, that he
belonged to the class of evil angels.

Withstood me - Hebrew, "stood over against me." Vulgate, "restitit
mihi." The fair meaning is, that he resisted or opposed him; that he
stood over against him, and delayed him on his way to Daniel. In what
manner he did this is not stated. The most obvious interpretation is,
that, in order to answer the prayers of Daniel in respect to his people,
it was necessary that some arrangement should be made in reference to
the kingdom of Persia - influencing the government to be favorable to
the restoration of the Jews to their own land; or removing some
obstacles to such return - obstacles which had given Daniel such
disquietude, and which had been thrown in his way by the presiding angel
of that kingdom.

One and twenty days - During the whole time in which Daniel was engaged
in fasting and prayer [Dan 10:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#002). The
angel had been sent forth to make arrangements to secure the answer to
his prayer when he began to pray, but had been delayed during all that
time by the opposition which he had met with in Persia. That is, it
required all that time to overcome the obstacles existing there to the
accomplishment of these purposes, and to make those arrangements which
were necessary to secure the result. Mean-time, Daniel, not knowing that
these arrangements were in a process of completion, or that an angel was
employed to secure the answer to his prayers, yet strong in faith, was
suffered to continue his supplications with no intimation that his
prayers were heard, or that he would be answered. How many arrangements
may there be in progress designed to answer our prayers of which we know
nothing! How many agents may be employed to bring about an answer! What
mighty obstacles may be in a process of removal, and what changes may be
made, and what influences exerted, while we are suffered to pray, and
fast, and weep, amidst many discouragements, and many trials of our
faith and patience! For a much longer period than Daniel was engaged in
his devotions, may we be required often now to pray before the
arrangements in the course of Providence shall be so far complete that
we shall receive an answer to our supplications, for the things to be
done may extend far into future months or years.

But, lo, Michael, one of the chief princes - Margin, "the first." That
is, the first in rank of the "princes," or the angels. In other words,
Michael, the archangel." The proper meaning of this name (מיכאל
mı̂ykâ'êl) is, "Who as God," and is a name given, undoubtedly, from some
resemblance to God. The exact reason why it is given is not anywhere
stated; but may it not be this - that one looking on the majesty and
glory of the chief of the angels would instinctively ask, "Who, after
all, is like God? Even this lofty angel, with all his glory, cannot be
compared to the high and lofty One." Whatever may have been the reason
of the appellation, however, the name in the Scriptures has a definite
application, and is given to the chief one of the angels. Compare the
notes at [Jde 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009). The word "Michael,"
as a proper name, occurs several times in the Scriptures, [Num
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#013); [Ch1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#013); [Ch1
6:40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#040); [Ch1
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#003); [Ch1
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#016); [Ch1
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#020); [Ch1
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#018); [Ch2
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#002); [Ezr
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#008). It is used as applicable to an
angel or archangel in the following places: [Dan
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013), [Dan
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021); [Dan
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001); [Jde
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009); [Rev
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007). Little more is known of him than

\(a\) that he occupied the rank which entitled him to be called an
archangel; and

\(b\) that he sustained, in the time of Daniel, the relation of patron
of Israel before God [Dan 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021).

That an "angel" is referred to here is manifest, for,

\(1\) It occurs in the account of transactions conducted by an angel.

\(2\) The use of the word elsewhere leads to this supposition.

\(3\) What is said to have been done is the appropriate work of an
angel. This is apparent, because Gabriel, the speaker, says that what
was done was beyond his power to accomplish. He was effectually resisted
and thwarted by the counsels of Persia, until one of higher wisdom and
rank than himself came to his aid. He could, therefore, have been no
less than an angel, and was clearly a being of a higher rank than
Gabriel himself.

\(4\) The phrase "one of the chief princes" sustains this
interpretation. It implies that he was one of those who held an exalted
rank among those who are called "princes," and if this word in this
connection denotes angels, then Michael was an angel, and one of the
most exalted of the angels. This accords with the appellation given to
him by Jude - "the archangel."

Came to help me - He does not state in what way this was done, but it is
fairly implied that it was by securing better counsels at the court of
Persia - counsels more favorable to the Hebrews, and different from
those which would have been carried out under the auspices of him who is
called "the prince of Persia." There is nothing in the passage to forbid
the supposition that it was by so influencing the mind of the king and
his ministers as to dispose them to favor the return of the Jews, or to
afford them facilities to rebuild their temple, or to remove some of the
obstacles which would tend to prevent their restoration.

And I remained there with the kings of Persia - The kings of Persia
here, in the plural, must mean the rulers. There was properly but one
king of that nation, though the name may have been given to subordinate
rulers, or perhaps to those who had been kings in their own country, and
whose countries had been subdued by the Persian arms, and who now
resided, with more or less authority, at the Persian court. The phrase
"I remained there" has been variously translated. The Vulgate renders it
as in our version. The Greek, "And I left him (to wit, Michael) there
with the prince of the kingdom of Persia." The Syriac, "And I was
hindered there against the prince of the Persians." Luther, "Then
obtained I the victory with the kings in Persia." Lengerke, "Then
obtained I the ascendency (Vorrang) among the kings of Persia." That is,
as he explains it, "I obtained the victory; I secured this result that
my counsel in behalf of the Jewish people prevailed," p. 503.

The same explanation is given by Geier, Gesenius, DeWette, Havernick.
The word יתר yâthar properly means, to hang out and over; to be
redundant; to remain or be left; to be over and above; to excel, etc.
Hence, the notion in Niphal, of excelling others, of getting the
ascendency, of obtaining a victory. This is, undoubtedly, the meaning
here, for he was not left with the kings of Persia; he did not remain
there. The true idea is, that by the help of Michael, who came to his
aid, he was enabled so far to influence the Persian counsels against the
purposes of him who is called the "prince of Persia," as to secure the
favors for the Hebrew people which Daniel sought by prayer; and having
done this, he came at once to him. The only delay in the case was what
was caused by the purposes of the Persian court, and by the difficulty
of securing such arrangements there as to favor the Hebrew people, and
to facilitate their return to their own country. Having done this, he
came at once to Daniel to announce the long series of events which would
follow pertaining to his people, and in reference to which his mind had
been so much affected during his protracted period of devotion.

Such is the explanation of the literal meaning of this difficult
passage. Now, in reference to the second point suggested as necessary to
its proper interpretation its real meaning - the exact truth taught in
it, the following remarks may be made:

\(1\) There was early a prevailing opinion that special angels had the
charge of individuals, as their guardians; and the same idea existed
respecting nations, that their affairs were assigned to particular
celestial beings. This notion among the Hebrews was found in this form -
that they were "angels, or created" beings of exalted rank who thus
presided over the affairs of men. Among the Greeks, and other pagan
nations, the form which it took was, that they were gods or tutelary
divinities, and hence, each people, each class, each family, each house,
had its own god. The Hebrews never approximated to this opinion so far
as to suppose that these beings were divine, or that they occupied the
place of the supreme God - Jehovah - who was peculiarly their covenant
God, and who was the only true God. They did admit the supposition,
however, that there might be guardian angels of their own nation, and
the same idea seems to have prevailed among them in regard to other
nations. This is clearly the idea in the passage before us, that while
Michael was, in a peculiar sense, entrusted with the affairs of the
Hebrew people, there were intelligent invisible beings of angelic rank
who presided over other nations, and who influenced their counsels. It
does not appear by any means that it was supposed that in all cases
these were good beings, for the counsels of the nations were too often
malignant and evil to admit of this supposition. In the ease before us,
it is evidently supposed that the influence of the presiding angel of
Persia was adverse to what was right, and such as should be counteracted
by one who came from heaven. Compare the notes at [Eph
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002).

\(2\) No one can demonstrate that this is not so. The existence of
wicked angels is no more incredible in itself than the existence of
wicked men, and that they should influence nations and rulers is in
itself no more improbable than that distinguished statesmen should.
There may be, indeed, no foundation for the opinion that particular
angels axe assigned to particular individuals or nations, as peculiar
guardians; but it may be true, notwithstanding, that some one of these
fallen spirits for if there are any such beings at all, they are
numerous - may have special influence over a particular individual or
nation. If it be said that we know too little about this to enable us to
make any positive statements in favor of this opinion, it should also be
said that we know too little to enable us to make any positive
statements against it; and for aught anyone can prove, it may be so. No
one has a right to assume that it is not so; no one can demonstrate that
it is not so.

It may be said further, that things look as if this were so. There are
many influences on nations and individuals; many things that occur that
can be most easily accounted for on the supposition that there is such
an agency from some invisible quarter. If we admit the reality of such
influence, and such interpositions, the things which occur are more
easily explained than if we deny it. There are measures taken; plans
proposed; influences exerted; schemes adopted - there are things from an
unseen quarter to give prosperity, or to thwart the best laid plans,
that cannot be well explained without the supposition of such an
interference; things which perplex all philosophers and all historians
in accounting for them; things which cannot be anticipated or explained
on any known principles of human nature. If we admit the reality of the
influence of invisible beings, as in the case before us, the solution
becomes comparatively easy; at least we find phenomena just such as we
should expect on such a supposition.

\(3\) It may be added, also, in regard to the particular case before us

\(a\) that the counsels against the Jews to prevent their return to
their own land, and to embarrass them, were such as we should anticipate
on the supposition that an evil angel - an enemy of God and his people -
had influenced the Persian rulers; and

\(b\) that the changes wrought in those counsels in favor of the Jews,
facilitating their return to their own land, were such as we should
expect to find on the supposition that those counsels and plans were
overruled and changed by the interposition say of Gabriel and Michael.

And similar events often happen. There are such changes in the counsels
of nations, and in the minds of rulers, as would occur on the
supposition that superior beings were engaged in thwarting evil plans,
and influencing those who have the power to do right. In reference to
the Jews in their exile, there had been a long series of acts of
opposition and oppression pursued by the governments of the East, as if
under the direction of some malignant spirit; then a series of acts in
their favor followed, as if the change had been brought about by the
interposition of some benignant angel. These facts are the historical
basis on which the representation is here made.

In reference to the third point suggested pertaining to this passage -
the practical truths taught that may be of use to us - it may be
remarked that the great truth is, that the answer to prayer is often
delayed, not by any indisposition on the part of God to answer it, and
not by any purpose not to answer it, and not by the mere intention of
trying our faith, but "by the necessary arrangements to bring it about."
It is of such a nature that it cannot be answered at once. It requires
time to make important changes; to influence the minds of men; to remove
obstacles; to raise up friends; to put in operation agencies that shall
secure the thing desired. There is some obstacle to be overcome. There
is some plan of evil to be checked and stayed. There is some agency to
be used which is not now in existence, and which is to be created. The
opposition of the "prince of Persia" could not be overcome at once, and
it was necessary to bring in the agency of a higher power - that of
Michael - to effect the change.

This could not be done in a moment, a day, or a week, and hence, the
long delay of three "full weeks" before Daniel had an assurance that his
prayers would be answered. So it often happens now. We pray for the
conversion of a child; yet there may be obstacles to his conversion,
unseen by us, which are to be patiently removed, and perhaps by a
foreign influence, before it can be done. Satan may have already secured
a control over his heart, which, is to be broken gradually, before the
prayer shall be answered. We pray for the removal of the evils of
intemperance, of slavery, of superstition, of idolatry; yet these may be
so interlocked with the customs of a country, with the interests of men,
and with the laws, that they cannot be at once eradicated except by
miracle, and the answer to the prayer seems to be long delayed. We pray
for the universal spread of the gospel of Christ; yet how many obstacles
are to be overcome, and how many arrangements made, before this prayer
can be fully answered; and how many tears are to be shed, and perils
encountered, and lives sacrificed, before the prayer of the church shall
be fully answered, and the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of
the Lord. The duty, then, which is taught, is that of patience, of
perseverance, of faith in God, of a firm belief that he is true to all
his promises, and that he is a hearer of prayer - though the blessing
seems long delayed.

[Daniel 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">dan 10:14</span></span>

Now I am come to make thee understand ... - After these long delays, and
after the arrangements have been made necessary to bring about the
objects sought by your prayers.

In the latter days - In future times - extending down to the last period
of the world. See the notes at [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002).

For yet the vision is for many days - Extends far into future time. It
is probable that the prayer of Daniel referred more particularly to what
he desired should soon occur - the restoration of the people to their
own land; the angel informs him that the disclosures which he was to
make covered a much more extended period, and embraced more important
events. So it is often. The answer to prayer often includes much more
than we asked for, and the abundant blessings that are conferred, beyond
what we supplicate, are vastly beyond a compensation for the delay.

[Daniel 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">dan 10:15</span></span>

And when he had spoken such words ... - Daniel was naturally overcome by
the communication which had been made to him. The manner in which the
prayer was answered seems to have been entirely different from what he
had expected. The presence of a heavenly being; the majesty of his
appearance; the assurance that he gave that he had come to answer his
prayer; and the fact that he had important revelations to make
respecting the future, overcame him, and he laid his face upon the
ground in silence. Is there any one of us who would not be awed into
profound silence if a heavenly messenger should stand before us to
disclose what was to occur to us, to our families, to our friends, to
our country, in far-distant years?

[Daniel 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">dan 10:16</span></span>

And, behold, one like the similitude of the sons of men touched my lips
- In the form of a man. The reference here is undoubtedly to Gabriel
appearing to Daniel in human form. Why he does not name him is unknown;
nor is there any intimation whether he changed his form as he now
approached the prophet. It would seem not improbable that, seeing the
effect of his presence and his words on Daniel, he laid aside some of
the manifestations of awe and majesty in which he had at first appeared
to him, and approached him as a man, and placed his hands on his lips -
as a sign that he should speak, or as imparting power to him to speak.
See the notes at [Isa 6:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#006).

I opened my mouth, and spake - His fear was removed, and he was now able
to address the heavenly messenger.

O my lord - A title of respectful address, but without indicating the
rank of him to whom it is applied.

By the vision my sorrows are turned upon me - The word rendered
"sorrows" (צירים tsı̂yrı̂ym) means, properly, "writhings, throes, pains,"
as of a woman in travail, [Isa 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#008);
[Isa 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#003); [Sa1
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#019); and then any deep pain or
anguish. Here it refers to "terror or fright," as so great as to
prostrate the strength of Daniel. The word rendered "are turned" (נהפכוּ
nehepekû - from הפך hâphak) means, in Niphal. to turn one's self about,
to turn back. The same phrase which is used here occurs also in [Sa1
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#019), "her pains turned upon her;"
that is, came upon her. Perhaps we should express the idea by saying
that they rolled upon us, or over us - like the surges of the ocean.

[Daniel 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 10:17</span></span>

For how card the servant of this my lord - Acknowledging his humble and
lowly condition and rank in the presence of an angel - a messenger now
sent from heaven.

Neither is there breath left in me - That is, he was utterly overcome
and prostrate. He felt that he was incapable of speaking in the presence
of one who tied descended from God.

[Daniel 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">dan 10:18</span></span>

Then there came again, and touched me ... - The same one is here
referred to doubtless who is mentioned in [Dan
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#016) - the angel. He came to him
again in this condescending and familiar manner in order to allay his
fears, and to prepare him to receive his communications with entire
calmness.

[Daniel 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 10:19</span></span>

And said, O man greatly beloved - See the notes at [Dan
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023).

Fear not - Neither at my presence, nor at what I have to say. There was
nothing in the visitation of an angel that could be a ground of dread to
a good man; there was nothing in what he had to communicate that could
be a reasonable cause of alarm.

Be strong, yea, be strong - These are words of encouragement such as we
address to those who are timid and fearful. We exhort them not to yield;
to make a vigorous effort to meet danger, difficulty, or trial.

Let my lord speak - That is, I am now prepared to receive what you have
to communicate.

For thou hast strengthened me - By your encouraging words, and by the
kindness of your manner.

[Daniel 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">dan 10:20</span></span>

Then said he, Knowest thou wherefore I come unto thee? - This was known
by what the angel had said in [Dan
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#014). He seems to have called his
attention to it, and to have proposed the question, because Daniel had
been so overcome by his fright that it might be doubtful whether he had
understood him distinctly when he had told him the object of his coming.
He therefore proposes the question here; and as the silence of Daniel
seems to have been construed as a declaration that he did understand the
purpose of the visit, he proceeds to unfold frilly the purport of his
message.

And now will I return - That is, evidently, after he had made known to
him the message which he came to deliver. He cannot mean that he would
then leave Daniel, and return immediately to Persia, for he proceeds at
length Dan. 11-12 to deliver his message to him, and to state what would
occur in the world in future times.

To fight with the prince of Persia - In [Dan
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013), he says that he had had a
contest with that "prince," and that in consequence of that he had been
delayed on his journey to Daniel. By the interposition of Michael, the
affairs of Persia had been so arranged that the opposition to what was
desired by Daniel had been in part removed - so far, at least, as to
make it certain that Iris prayers would be answered. See the note at
that verse. But still it would seem that the difficulty was not entirely
overcome, and that it would be desirable for him to return, and to
complete the arrangements which had been commenced. There were still
causes in existence in Persia which might tend to frustrate all these
plans unless they were counteracted, and his presence might still be
necessary there to secure the safe return of the exiles to their own
land, and the means required to rebuild the city and temple. The simple
meaning of this is, that it would be necessary to exert a farther
influence at the Persian court in order to bring about the object
desired; and this fact is expressed in language derived from the belief
that angelic beings, good and bad, have much to do in controlling the
minds of men.

And when I am gone forth - literally, "and I go forth." The meaning
seems to be, that he would return to Persia, and would so direct affairs
there that the welfare of the Jews would be promoted, and that
protection would be extended to them. This, he says, he would continue
as long as it was necessary, for when he should have gone forth, the
king of Greece would come, and the affairs of Persia would be put on a
new footing, but on such a footing as not to require his presence - for
the government would be of itself favorable to the Jews. The sense is,
that up to the time when this "king of Grecia" should come, there would
be a state of things in the Persian court that would demand the presence
of some being from heaven - exerting some constant influence to prevent
an outbreak against the Jews, and to secure their peace and prosperity;
but that when the "king of Grecia" should come, he would himself favor
their cause, and render the presence of the angel unnecessary. No one
can prove that this is not a correct representation, or that the favor
shown to the Jews at the Persian court during all the time of the
rebuilding of the city and the temple, was not to be traced to some
presiding influence from above, or that that was not put forth in
connection with the ministration of an angelic being. Indeed, it is in
accordance with all the teachings of the Bible that the disposition of
kings and princes to show favor to the people of God, like all else that
is good in this world, is to be traced to an influence from above; and
it is not contrary to any of the laws of analogy, or anything with which
we are acquainted pertaining to the spiritual world, to suppose that
angelic interposition may be employed in any case in bringing about what
is good.

Lo, the prince of Grecia shall come - Hebrew - יון yâvân. There can be
no doubt that Greece is intended. The word properly denotes Ionia
(derived from this word), "the name of which province," says Gesenius,
"as being adjacent to the East, and better known, was extended so as to
comprehend the whole of Greece, as is expressly said by Greek writers
themselves." - Lexicon By the "prince of Greece" here, there can be no
doubt that there is reference to Alexander the Great, who conquered
Persia. See [Dan 11:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#001). The meaning
here is, that when he should come, and conquer Persia, the opposition
which the Hebrews had encountered from that country would cease, and
there would then be no need of the interposition of the angel at the
Persian court. The matter of fact was, that the Hebrews were favored by
Alexander the Great, and that whatever there was in the Persian or
Chaldean power which they had had reason to dread was then brought to an
end, for all those Eastern governments were absorbed in the empire of
Alexander - the Macedonian monarchy.

[Daniel 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">dan 10:21</span></span>

But I will show thee what is noted in, the scripture of truth - The word
noted here means "written, or recorded." The scripture of truth means
the true writing, and the reference is doubtless to the Divine purposes
or decrees in this matter - for

\(a\) there is no other writing where these things were then found;

\(b\) the angel came to make known what could be known in no other way,
and therefore what was not yet found in any book to which man had
access;

\(c\) this language accords with common representations in the
Scriptures respecting future events.

They are described as written down in a book that is in the hands of
God, in which are recorded all future events - the names of those that
shall be saved - and all the deeds of men. Compare [Deu
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#034); [Mal
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#016); [Psa
139:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#016); [Rev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001). The representation is figurative,
of course; and the meaning is, that, in the view of the Divine mind, all
future events are as certain as if they were actually recorded as
history, or as if they were now all written down. The angel came that he
might unfold a portion of that volume, and disclose the contents of its
secret pages; that is, describe an important series of events of great
interest to the Jewish people and to the world at large.

And there is none that holdeth with me in, these things - Margin,
"strengtheneth himself." So the Hebrew. The idea is, that there was none
that rendered aid in this matter, or that stood by him, and would
accomplish the designs which he was meditating in their behalf
pertaining to Persia. The angel saw that there were powerful influences
against the interests of the Hebrew people at work in the court of
Persia; that it was necessary that they should be counteracted; that
unless this were done, fearful calamities would come upon the Jewish
people, and they would be subjected to great embarrassments in their
efforts to rebuild their city and temple, and he says that there was no
one whose aid could be permanently and certainly relied on but that of
Michael. He himself was to return to the court of Persia to endeavor to
counteract the influence of the "prince of Persia," but, as in the
former case when on his way to Daniel [Dan
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013), he would not have been able to
counteract the machinations of that prince if it had not been for the
interposition of Michael, so he felt now that reliance was still to be
placed on his assistance in the matter.

But Michael your prince - See the notes at [Dan
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013). The patron, or guardian of your
people, and of their interests. The idea intended to be conveyed here
undoubtedly is, that Michael was a guardian angel for the Jewish people;
that he had special charge of their affairs; that his interposition
might be depended on in the time of trouble and danger, and that, under
him, their interests would be safe. No one can prove that this is not
so; and as on earth some of the most important favors that we enjoy are
conferred by the instrumentality of others; as we are often defended
when in danger by them; as we are counseled and directed by them; as God
raises up for the orphan, and the widow, and the insane, and the
sorrowful, and the feeble, those of wealth, and power, and learning, who
can better guard their interests than they could themselves, and as
these relations are often sustained, and these favors conferred by those
who are invisible to the recipients, so it gives, in a higher sense, a
new beauty to the arrangements of the universe to suppose that this
benevolent office is often undertaken and discharged by angelic beings.

Thus they may defend us from danger; ward off the designs of our
enemies; defeat their machinations, and save us from numberless evils
that would otherwise come upon us. This view receives additional
confirmation, if it be admitted that there are evil angels, and that
that seek the ruin of mankind. They are malignant; they tempt the race
of man; they have power far superior to our own; they can set in
operation a train of evil influences which we can neither foresee nor
counteract; and they can excite the minds of wicked men to do us injury
in a way which we cannot anticipate, and against which we cannot defend
ourselves. In these circumstances, anyone can perceive that there is
concinnity and propriety in the supposition that there are good beings
of a higher order who feel an interest in the welfare of man, and who
come to us, on their benevolent errand, to defend us from danger, and to
aid us in our efforts to escape from the perils of our fallen condition,
and to reach the kingdom of heaven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 11](dan011)

</div>
