<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu010)  [Next](deu012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#001.md)

[Deuteronomy 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 11:2</span></span>

And know ... - Render it: And own ye this day (for I have not to do with
your children which have not known and which have not seen) the
chastisement of the Lord, his greatness, etc.

The "chastisement" consisted in the many mighty acts, both of punishment
and mercy, through which God had guided them from Egypt to the borders
of the promised land.

[Deuteronomy 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 11:6</span></span>

See the margin. literally, "every living thing at their feet." The
expression does not mean their goods, which would be included in their
"households and tents," but their followers [Num
16:32](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#032.md).

[Deuteronomy 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 11:10</span></span>

Another motive for fidelity is added, namely, the entire dependence of
the promised land upon God for its fertility. It was "a land flowing
with milk and honey;" yet this its richness was not, as was that of
Egypt, the reward of truman skill and labor, but was, on the contrary,
the gift of God simply and entirely; the effect of "the former and the
latter rains" sent by Him. The spiritual significance of these and many
other such peculiarities of the promised land must not be overlooked.

Egypt and Canaan are distinguished in this and the following verses, by
certain of their most remarkable physical traits. Canaan as a
mountainous country (compare [Deu 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#025.md)
note) was well watered, but by the rains of heaven, on which it
absolutely depended for its crops. Artificial irrigation could do
nothing to remedy this dependence. Hence, it was a land on which, so
long as God's people were faithful and consequently prosperous, "the
eyes of God" would always be: i. e., He would supply at each successive
season (compare [Deu 11:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#014).md) the
useful conditions of productiveness. But Egypt, fit emblem here as
elsewhere of the world of nature in distinction from the world of grace,
though of course deriving its all ultimately from the Giver of all good
things, yet directly and immediately owed its riches and plenty to human
ingenuity and capital. It enjoyed no rain worth speaking of, but drew
its water supply from the annum overflowing of the Nile. This only lasts
about a hundred days; but is rendered available for agricultural
purposes throughout the year by an elaborate and costly system of tanks,
canals, forcing machines, etc. To these mechanical appliances allusion
is made in [Deu 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#010.md). The inhabitants
of Egypt probably watered "with the foot" in two ways, namely, by means
of tread-wheels working sets of pumps, and by means of artificial
channels connected with reservoirs, and opened, turned, or closed by the
feet. Both methods are still in use in Egypt.

[Deuteronomy 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 11:14</span></span>

The first rain and the latter rain - The former is the proper term for
the autumn rain, falling about the time of sowing, and which may be
named "the former," as occurring in the early part of the Hebrew civil
year, namely, in October and November. The other word is applied to the
spring rain, which falls in March and April, because it fits the earth
for the ingathering of harvest. Between these two wet periods, and
except them, there was little or no rain in Canaan.

[Deuteronomy 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 11:21</span></span>

The sense is: "Keep the covenant faithfully, and so shall your own and
your children's days be multiplied as long as the heaven covers the
earth." The promise of Canaan to Israel was thus a perpetual promise,
but also a conditional one.

[Deuteronomy 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 11:29</span></span>

Thou shalt put the blessing upon mount Gerizim - literally, thou shalt
give, i. e., "give" utterance to it. On the ceremony see [Deu
27:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#014.md) ff.

Mount Gerizim, barren like Ebal, was probably selected as the hill of
benediction because it was the southernmost of the two, the south being
the region, according to Hebrew ideas, of light, and so of life and
blessing. The situation of the mountains is described more accurately in
[Deu 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#030.md). The words "by the way
where the sun goeth down," should run, beyond the road of the west; i.
e., on the further side of the main track which ran from Syria and
Damascus to Jerusalem and Egypt through the center of Palestine. This is
called "the way of the west" in contrast to the ether main route from
Damascus to the south which passed through the district east of Jordan.
The further specifications "Gilgal" and "the plains (rather, the oaks,
compare [Gen 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006) note.md) of Moreh," are
added to define more particularly the section of Canaanites intended.

This Gilgal is perhaps to be found in Jiljilia, a large village about
twelve miles south of Gerizim.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 12](deu012.md)

</div>
