<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](num036)  [Next](deu001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001.md)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Deuteronomy

The ordinary name of the book is derived, through the Septuagint and
Vulgate from that sometimes employed by the Jews, "repetition of the
Law," and indicates correctly enough the character and contents of the
book.

The bulk of Deuteronomy consists of addresses spoken within the space of
40 days, and beginning on the first day of the 11th month in the 40th
year.

The speeches exhibit an unity of style and character which is strikingly
consistent with such circumstances. They are pervaded by the same vein
of thought, the same tone and tenor of feeling, the same peculiarities
of conception and expression. They exhibit matter which is neither
documentary nor traditional, but conveyed in the speaker's own words.

Their aim is strictly hortatory; their style is earnest, heart-stirring,
and impressive. In some passages it is sublime, but rhetorical
throughout. They keep constantly in view the circumstances present at
that time and the crisis to which the fortunes of Israel had at last
been brought throught. Moses had before him not the men to whom by God's
command he delivered the law at Sinai, but the following generation
which had grown up in the wilderness. Large portions of the Law
necessarily stood in abeyance during the years of wandering; and of his
present hearers many must have been strangers to various prescribed
observances and ordinances. Now, however, upon their entry into settled
homes in Canaan a thorough discharge of the various obligations laid on
them by the covenant would become imperative; and it is to this state of
things that Moses addresses himself. He speaks to hearers neither wholly
ignorant of the Law, nor yet fully versed in it. Much is assumed and
taken for granted in his speeches; but in other matters he goes into
detail, knowing that instruction in them was needed. Sometimes little
opportunity is taken of promulgating regulations which are supplementary
or auxiliary to those of the preceding books; some few modifications
arising out of different or altered circumstances are now made; and the
whole Mosaic system is completed by the addition of several enactments
in Deut. 12-26 of a social, civil, and political nature. These would
have been wholly superfluous during the nomadic life of the desert; but
now that the permanent organization of Israel as a nation was to be
accomplished, they could not be longer deferred. Accordingly, the
legislator, at the command of God, completes his great work by supplying
them. Thus, he provides civil institutions for his people accredited by
the same divine sanctions as had been vouchsafed to their religious
rites.

The preceding books displayed Moses principally in the capacity of
legislator or annalist. Deuteronomy sets him before us in that of a
prophet. And he not only warns and teaches with an authority and energy
which the sublimest pages of the four greater prophets cannot surpass,
but he delivers some of the most notable and incontrovertible
predictions to be found in the Old Testament. The prophecy in [Deu
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#018.md) had no doubt its partial
verifications in successive ages, but its terms are satisfied in none of
them. The prospect opened by it advances continually until it finds its
rest in the Messiah, who stands alone as the only complete counterpart
of Moses, and as the greater than he. Deut. 28 and Deut. 32 furnish
other and no less manifest examples.

It is generally allowed that Deuteronomy must, in substance, have come
from one hand. The book presents, the last four chapters excepted, an
undeniable unity in style and treatment; it is cast, so to speak, in one
mould; its literary characteristics are such that we cannot believe the
composition of it to have been spread over any long period of time: and
these facts are in full accord with the traditional view which ascribes
the Book to Moses.

Assertions as to the spuriousness of Deuteronomy, though put forward
very positively, appear when sifted to rest upon most insufficient
arguments. The alleged anachronisms, discrepancies, and difficulties
admit for the most part of easy and complete explanation; and no serious
attempt has ever been made to meet the overwhelming presumption drawn
from the unanimous and unwavering testimony of the ancient Jewish Church
and nation that Moses is the author of this book.

Deuteronomy has in a singular manner the attestation of the apostles and
of our Lord. Paul, in [Rom 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#008.md); [Rom
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#011.md) argues from it at some length,
and expressly quotes it as written by Moses; Peter and Stephen [Act
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#022.md); [Act
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#037.md) refer to the promise of "a
prophet like unto" Moses, and regard it as given, as it professes to be,
by Moses himself; our Lord, wielding "the sword of the Spirit which is
the word of God" against the open assaults of Satan, thrice resorts to
Deuteronomy for the texts with which He repels the tempter, [Mat
4:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004.md). To urge in reply that the
inspiration of the apostles, and even the indwelling of the Spirit
"without measure" in the Saviour, would not necessarily preserve them
from mistakes on such subjects as the authorship of ancient writings, or
to fortify such assertions by remarking that our Lord as the Son of Man
was Himself ignorant of some things, is to overlook the important
distinction between ignorance and error. To be conscious that much truth
lies beyond the range of the intelligence is compatible with the
perfection of the creature: but to be deceived by the fraud of others
and to fall into error, is not so. To assert then that He who is "the
Truth" believed Deuteronomy to be the work of Moses and quoted it
expressly as such, though it was in fact a forgery introduced into the
world seven or eight centuries after the Exodus, is in effect, even
though not in intention, to impeach the perfection and sinlessness of
His nature, and seems thus to gainsay the first principles of
Christianity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 1](deu001.md)

</div>
