<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo000)  [Next](exo002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

[Exodus 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 1:1</span></span>

Now - Literally, "And," indicating a close connection with the preceding
narrative. In fact this chapter contains a fulfillment of the
predictions recorded in [Gen 46:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#003) and
in [Gen 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013).

Every man and his household - It may be inferred from various notices
that the total number of dependents was considerable, a point of
importance in its bearings upon the history of the Exodus (compare [Gen
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#006); [Gen
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014)).

[Exodus 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 1:5</span></span>

Seventy - See [Gen 46:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#027). The object
of the writer in this introductory statement is to give a complete list
of the heads of separate families at the time of their settlement in
Egypt. See the note at [Num 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#005).

[Exodus 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 1:7</span></span>

In no province does the population increase so rapidly as in that which
was occupied by the Israelites. See the note at [Gen
47:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#006). At present it has more flocks
and herds than any province in Egypt, and more fishermen, though many
villages are deserted. Until the accession of the new king, the
relations between the Egyptians and the Israelites were undoubtedly
friendly. The expressions used in this verse imply the lapse of a
considerable period after the death of Joseph.

The land was filled with them - i. e. the district allotted to them [Gen
45:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#010).

[Exodus 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 1:8</span></span>

The expressions in this verse are special and emphatic. "A new king" is
a phrase not found elsewhere. It is understood by most commentators to
imply that he did not succeed his predecessor in the natural order of
descent and inheritance. He "arose up over Egypt," occupying the land,
as it would seem, on different terms from the king whose place he took,
either by usurpation or conquest. The fact that he knew not Joseph
implies a complete separation from the traditions of Lower Egypt. At
present the generality of Egyptian scholars identify this Pharaoh with
Rameses II, but all the conditions of the narrative are fulfilled in the
person of Amosis I (or, Aahmes), the head of the 18th Dynasty. He was
the descendant of the old Theban sovereigns, but his family was
tributary to the Dynasty of the Shepherds, the Hyksos of Manetho, then
ruling in the North of Egypt. Amosis married an Ethiopian princess, and
in the third year of his reign captured Avaris, or Zoan, the capital of
the Hyksos, and completed the expulsion of that race.

[Exodus 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 1:10</span></span>

Any war - The Northeastern frontier was infested by the neighboring
tribes, the Shasous of Egyptian monuments, and war was waged with Egypt
by the confederated nations of Western Asia under the reigns of the
successors of Amosis. These incursions were repulsed with extreme
difficulty. In language, features, costume, and partly also in habits,
the Israelites probably resembled those enemies of Egypt.

Out of the land - The Pharaohs apprehended the loss of revenue and
power, which would result from the withdrawal of a peaceful and
industrious race.

[Exodus 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 1:11</span></span>

Taskmasters - The Egyptian "Chiefs of tributes." They were men of rank,
superintendents of the public works, such as are often represented on
Egyptian monuments, and carefully distinguished from the subordinate
overseers. The Israelites were employed in forced labor, probably in
detachments, but they were not reduced to slavery, properly speaking,
nor treated as captives of war. Amosis had special need of such
laborers, as proved by the inscriptions.

Treasure cities - "Magazines," depots of ammunition and provisions [Kg1
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#019); [Ch2
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#004); [Ch2
32:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#028).

Pithom and Raamses - Both cities were situated on the canal which was
dug or enlarged in the 12th Dynasty. The former is known to have existed
under the 18th Dynasty. Both were in existence at the beginning of the
reign of Rameses II, by whom they were fortified and enlarged. The name
"Pithom" means "House or temple of Tum," the Sun God of Heliopolis (see
[Exo 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#020)). The name of Raamses, or
Rameses, is generally assumed to have been derived from Rameses II, the
Sesostris of the Greeks, but it was previously known as the name of the
district. See [Gen 45:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#010); [Gen
47:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#011).

[Exodus 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 1:14</span></span>

The use of brick, at all times common in Egypt, was especially so under
the 18th Dynasty. An exact representation of the whole process of
brickmaking is given in a small temple at Thebes, erected by Tothmosis
III, the fourth in descent from Amosis. Immense masses of brick are
found at Belbeis, the modern capital of Sharkiya, i. e. Goshen, and in
the adjoining district.

All manner of service in the field - Not merely agricultural labor, but
probably the digging of canals and processes of irrigation which are
peculiarly onerous and unhealthy.

[Exodus 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 1:15</span></span>

Hebrew midwifes - Or "midwives of the Hebrew women." This measure at
once attested the inefficacy of the former measures, and was the direct
cause of the event which issued in the deliverance of Israel, namely,
the exposure of Moses. The women bear Egyptian names, and were probably
Egyptians.

[Exodus 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 1:16</span></span>

Upon the stools - Literally, "two stones." The word denotes a special
seat, such as is represented on monuments of the 18th Dynasty, and is
still used by Egyptian midwives.

[Exodus 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 1:21</span></span>

Made them houses - i. e. they married Hebrews and became mothers in
Israel. The expression is proverbial. See the margin reference.

[Exodus 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 1:22</span></span>

The extreme cruelty of the measure does not involve improbability.
Hatred of strangers was always a characteristic of the Egyptians (see
[Gen 43:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#032)), and was likely to be
stronger than ever after the expulsion of an alien race.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 2](exo002)

</div>
