<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo007)  [Next](exo009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#001.md)

[Exodus 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 8:2</span></span>

With frogs - Some months appear to have elapsed between this and the
former plague, if the frogs made their appearance at the usual time,
that is in September. The special species mentioned here is of Egyptian
origin. This plague was, like the preceding, in general accordance with
natural phenomena, but marvelous both for its extent and intensity, and
for its direct connection with the words and acts of God's messengers.
It had also apparently, like the other plagues, a direct bearing upon
Egyptian superstitions. There was a female deity with a frog's head, and
the frog was connected with the most ancient forms of nature-worship in
Egypt.

[Exodus 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 8:3</span></span>

Into thine house - This appears to have been special to the plague, as
such. It was especially the visitation which would be felt by the
scrupulously-clean Egyptians.

Kneadingtroughs - Not dough, as in the margin. See [Exo
12:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#034.md).

[Exodus 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 8:7</span></span>

The magicians would seem to have been able to increase the plague, but
not to remove it; hence, Pharaoh's application to Moses, the first
symptoms of yielding.

[Exodus 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 8:9</span></span>

Glory over me - See the margin, "have honor over me," i. e. have the
honor, or advantage over me, directing me when I shall entreat God for
thee and thy servants.

When - Or by when; i. e. for what exact time. Pharaoh's answer in [Exo
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#010.md) refers to this, by tomorrow. The
shortness of the time would, of course, be a test of the supernatural
character of the transaction.

[Exodus 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 8:13</span></span>

Villages - Literally, enclosures, or courtyards.

[Exodus 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 8:16</span></span>

It is observed by Hebrew commentators that the nine plagues are divided
into three groups: distinct warnings are given of the first two plagues
in each group; the third in each is inflicted without any previous
notice; namely, the third, lice, the sixth, boils, the ninth, darkness.

The dust of the land - The two preceding plagues fell upon the Nile.
This fell on the earth, which was worshipped in Egypt as the father of
the gods. An special sacredness was attached to the black fertile soil
of the basin of the Nile, called Chemi, from which the ancient name of
Egypt is supposed to be derived.

Lice - The Hebrew word occurs only in connection with this plague. These
insects are generally identified with mosquitos, a plague nowhere
greater than in Egypt. They are most troublesome toward October, i. e.
soon after the plague of frogs, and are dreaded not only for the pain
and annoyance which they cause, but also because they are said to
penetrate into the body through the nostrils and ears.

[Exodus 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 8:19</span></span>

The finger of God - This expression is thoroughly Egyptian; it need not
imply that the magicians recognized Yahweh, the God who performed the
marvel. They may possibly have referred it to as a god that was hostile
to their own protectors.

[Exodus 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 8:20</span></span>

Cometh forth to the water - See the [Exo
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#015.md) note. It is not improbable that
on this occasion Pharaoh went to the Nile with a procession in order to
open the solemn festival, which was held 120 days after the first rise,
at the end of October or early in November. At that time the inundation
is abating and the first traces of vegetation are seen on the deposit of
fresh soil.

The plague now announced may be regarded as connected with the
atmosphere, also an object of worship.

[Exodus 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 8:21</span></span>

Swarms of flies - Generally, supposed to be the dog-fly, which at
certain seasons is described as a plague far worse than mosquitos.
Others, however, adopt the opinion that the insects were a species of
beetle, which was reverenced by the Egyptians as a symbol of life, of
reproductive or creative power. The sun-god, as creator, bore the name
Chepera, and is represented in the form, or with the head, of a beetle.

[Exodus 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 8:22</span></span>

I will sever ... - This severance constituted a specific difference
between this and the preceding plagues. Pharaoh could not of course
attribute the exemption of Goshen from a scourge, which fell on the
valley of the Nile, to an Egyptian deity, certainly not to Chepera (see
the last note), a special object of worship in Lower Egypt.

[Exodus 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 8:25</span></span>

To your God - Pharaoh now admits the existence and power of the God whom
he had professed not to know; but, as Moses is careful to record, he
recognizes Him only as the national Deity of the Israelites.

In the land - i. e. in Egypt, not beyond the frontier.

[Exodus 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 8:26</span></span>

The abomination - i. e. an animal which the Egyptians held it
sacrilegious to slay. The ox, bull, or cow, is meant. The cow was never
sacrificed in Egypt, being sacred to Isis, and from a very early age the
ox was worshipped throughout Egypt, and more especially at Heliopolis
and Memphis under various designations, Apis, Mnevis, Amen-Ehe, as the
symbol or manifestation of their greatest deities, Osiris, Atum, Ptah,
and Isis.

[Exodus 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 8:27</span></span>

Three days' journey - See the [Exo
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#018.md) note.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 9](exo009.md)

</div>
