<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](gen050)  [Next](exo001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Exodus

1\. The book of Exodus consists of two distinct portions. The first Exo.
1-19 gives a detailed account of the circumstances under which the
deliverance of the Israelites was accomplished. The second Exo. 20-40
describes the giving of the law, and the institutions which completed
the organization of the people as "a kingdom of priests, and an holy
nation" [Exo 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006).

The name "Exodus" (ἔξοδος exodos), i. e. "the going forth," assigned to
it by the Alexandrian Jews, applies rather to the former portion than to
the whole book.

The narrative is closely connected with that of Genesis, and shows not
only that it was written by the same author, but that it formed part of
one general plan. Still it is a distinct section. The first events which
it relates are separated from the last chapter in Genesis by a
considerable interval, and it presents the people of Israel under
totally different circumstances. Its termination is marked with equal
distinctness, winding up with the completion of the tabernacle.

The book is divided into many smaller sections; each of which has the
marks which throughout the Pentateuch indicate a subdivision. They are
of different lengths, and were probably written on separate parchments
or papyri, the longest not exceeding the dimensions of contemporary
documents in Egypt. They were apparently thus arranged for the
convenience of public reading.

This general view of the structure of the book is what might have been
expected.

2\. Some of the most convincing evidences of the Mosaic authorship are
supplied by the contents of this book.

One argument is drawn from the representation of the personal character
and qualifications of Moses, a representation perfectly intelligible as
proceeding from Moses himself.

What other men have seen in Moses is - the chief agent in the greatest
work ever entrusted to man, an agent whose unique and unparalleled
qualifications are admitted alike by those who accept and by those who
deny the divine interposition: what the writer himself sees in Moses is
- a man whose only qualification is an involuntary and reluctant
surrender to the will of God. The only rational account of the matter
is, that we have Moses' own history of himself and of his work.

Another argument rests on external facts. The Book of Exodus could not
have been written by any man who had not passed many years in Egypt, and
who did not also have a thorough knowledge, such as could only be
acquired by personal observation, of the Sinaitic Peninsula.

We have no probable alternative but to admit that the narrative in its
substance came from Moses, or from a contemporary; and we can have
little hesitation as to our choice between these alternatives, when we
consider that none of the contemporaries of Moses had equal
opportunities of observation, and that none were likely to have received
the education and training which would have enabled them to record the
events.

3\. A weighty argument is drawn from the accounts of the miracles, by
which Moses was expressly commanded to attest his mission, and by which
he was enabled to accomplish the deliverance of his people.

We have throughout the miracles the characteristics of local coloring,
of adaptation to the circumstances of the Israelites, and of repeated
announcements followed by repeated postponements, which enabled and
indeed compelled the Israelites to complete that organization of their
nation, without which their departure might have been, as it has been
often represented, a mere disorderly flight.

There are some who fear to compromise the miraculous character of events
by admitting any operation of natural causes to a share of them. Yet the
inspired writer does not fail to record that it was by the east wind
that the Lord brought the locusts [Exo
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#013) and sent back the sea [Exo
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021), and, by the mighty strong west
wind [Exo 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#019), took back the plague
that he had sent. Nor is the miracle at all lessened, because the winds
of heaven were made God's messengers and instruments in the doing of it.
The miracles in Egypt were supernatural in their greatness, in their
concentration upon one period, in their coming and going according to
the phases of the conflict between the tyrant and the captive race, in
their measured gradation from weak to strong, as each weaker wonder
failed to break Pharoah's stubborn heart. King and people so regarded
them; they were accustomed perhaps to frogs and lice and locusts; but to
such plagues, so intense, so threatened, accomplished, and withdrawn, as
it were so disciplined to a will, they were not accustomed; and they
rightly saw them as miraculous and divinely sent. And further it will be
noticed that the phenomena that are put to this use are such as mark the
country where this great history is laid. No Jewish writer, who had
lived in Palestine alone, could have imagined a narrative so Egyptian in
its marks. All evidence tends to prove that the history was written by
someone who was well conversant with Egypt; and we shall look in vain
for anyone, other than Moses himself, who possessed this qualification
for writing the history of the emancipation of the Israelites under
divine guidance.

The narrative which records them, remarkable as it is for artlessness
and simplicity, is moreover not one which could have been concocted from
documents of different ages, constructed on different principles, and
full of internal discrepancies and contradictions. It is the production
of one mind, written by one man, and by one who had alone witnessed all
the events which it records, who alone was at that time likely to
possess the knowledge or ability required to write the account.

4\. The portion of the book, which follows the account of the departure
from Egypt, has characteristics marked with equal distinctness, and
bearing with no less force upon the question of authorship. These
chapters also are pervaded by a unique tone, a local coloring, an
atmosphere so to speak of the desert, which has made itself felt by all
those who have explored the country.

Modern travelers point out the following coincidences between the
narrative and their own experiences. Absence of water where no sources
now exist, abundance of water where fountains are still found, and
indications of a far more copious supply in former ages; tracts,
occupying the same time in the journey, in which food would not be
found; and, in some districts, a natural production similar to manna,
most abundant in rainy seasons (such as several notices show the season
of the Exodus to have been), but not sufficient for nourishment, nor fit
for large consumption, without such modifications in character and
quantity as are attributed in the narrative to a divine intervention.
The late explorations of the Peninsula of Sinai have thrown much light
upon the fact that the route taken by the Israelites was probably
determined by conditions agreeing with incidental notices in the
history; and when we come to the chapters in which the central event in
the history of Israel, the delivery of God's law, is recorded, we find
localities and scenery which travelers concur in declaring to be such as
fully correspond to the exigencies of the narrative, and which in some
accounts (remarkable at once for scientific accuracy and graphic power)
are described in terms which show that they correspond, so far as mere
outward accessories can correspond, to the grandeur of the
manifestation.

5\. A very valuable argument of the same evidential character is drawn
from the account of the tabernacle. In form, structure, and materials
the tabernacle belongs altogether to the wilderness. The whole was a
tent, not a fixed structure, such as would naturally have been set up,
and in point of fact was set up very soon in Palestine. The metals,
bronze, silver and gold, were those which the Israelites knew, and
doubtless brought with them from Egypt; the names of many of the
materials and implements which they used, and the furniture and
accessories of the tabernacle, the dress and ornaments of the priests,
are Egyptian; and it is also certain that the arts required for the
construction of the tabernacle, and for all its accessories, were
precisely those for which the Egyptians had been remarkable for ages;
such as artizans who had lived under the influence of Egyptian
civilization would naturally have learned.

Two separate accounts of the erection of the tabernacle are given. In
the first Moses relates the instructions which he received, in the
second he describes the accomplishment of the work. Nothing would be
less in accordance with the natural order of a history written at a
later period than this double account. It is however fully accounted for
by the obvious hypothesis that each part of the narrative was written at
the time, and on the occasion, to which it immediately refers.

6\. The chronology of Exodus involves two questions, the duration of the
sojourn of the Israelites in Egypt, and the date of their departure. So
far as regards the direct statements in the Hebrew text, the answers to
both questions are positive and unambiguous. [Exo
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#040) gives 430 years for the sojourn,
[Gen 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013) gives 400 years for the
whole, or the greater portion, of the same period. Again, the First Book
of Kings, [Kg1 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001), fixes the Exodus
at 480 years before the building of the Temple in the fourth year of
Solomon's reign. This would settle the date within a few years - about
1490 b.c., a date which appears, on the whole, to be reconcileable with
the facts of history, and to rest on higher authority than any other
which has been proposed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 1](exo001)

</div>
