<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo001)  [Next](exo003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#001)

[Exodus 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 2:1</span></span>

A man ... a daughter of Levi - Amram and Jochebed. See [Exo
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#020).

[Exodus 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 2:2</span></span>

Bare a son - Not her firstborn; Aaron and Miriam were older than Moses.
The object of the writer is simply to narrate the events which led to
the Exodus, and he mentions nothing that had no direct bearing upon his
purpose.

A goodly child - See the marginal references. Probably Jochebed did not
call in a midwife [Exo 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#015), and she
was of course cautious not to show herself to Egyptians. The hiding of
the child is spoken of as an act of faith in [Heb
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#023). It was done in the belief that
God would watch over the child.

[Exodus 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 2:3</span></span>

The ark was made of the papyrus which was commonly used by the Egyptians
for light and swift boats. The species is no longer found in the Nile
below Nubia. It is a strong rush, like the bamboo, about the thickness
of a finger, three cornered, and attains the height of 10 to 15 feet. It
is represented with great accuracy on the most ancient monuments of
Egypt.

Slime and pitch - The "slime" is probably the mud, of which bricks were
usually made in Egypt, and which in this case was used to bind the
stalks of the papyrus into a compact mass, and perhaps also to make the
surface smooth for the infant. The pitch or bitumen, commonly used in
Egypt, made the small vessel water-tight.

In the flags - This is another species of the papyrus, called tuff, or
sufi (an exact equivalent of the Hebrew סוּף sûph), which was less in
size and height than the rush of which the ark was made.

[Exodus 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 2:5</span></span>

The traditions which give a name to the daughter of Pharaoh are merely
conjectural. Egyptian princesses held a very high and almost independent
position under the ancient and middle empire, with a separate household
and numerous officials. This was especially the case with the daughters
of the first sovereigns of the 18th Dynasty.

Many facts concur in indicating that the residence of the daughter of
Pharaoh and of the family of Moses, was at Zoan, Tanis, now San, the
ancient Avaris ([Exo 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#008) note), on the
Tanitic branch of the river, near the sea, where crocodiles are never
found, and which was probably the western boundary of the district
occupied by the Israelites. The field of Zoan was always associated by
the Hebrews with the marvels which preceded the Exodus. See [Psa
78:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#043).

To wash - It is not customary at present for women of rank to bathe in
the river, but it was a common practice in ancient Egypt. The habits of
the princess, as well as her character, must have been well known to the
mother of Moses, and probably decided her choice of the place.

[Exodus 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 2:6</span></span>

She had compassion on him - The Egyptians regarded such tenderness as a
condition of acceptance on the day of reckoning. In the presence of the
Lord of truth each spirit had to answer, "I have not afflicted any man,
I have not made any man weep, I have not withheld milk from the mouths
of sucklings" ('Funeral Ritual'). There was special ground for
mentioning the feeling, since it led the princess to save and adopt the
child in spite of her father's commands.

[Exodus 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 2:10</span></span>

He became her son - See the margin reference. His training and education
was, humanly speaking, all but indispensable to the efficient
accomplishment of his work as the predestined leader and instructor of
his countrymen. Moses probably passed the early years of his life in
Lower Egypt, where the princess resided. However, there may be
substantial grounds for the tradition in Josephus that he was engaged in
a campaign against the Ethiopians, thus showing himself, as Stephen
says, "mighty in word and deed."

Moses - The Egyptian origin of this word is generally admitted. The name
itself is not uncommon in ancient documents. The exact meaning is "son,"
but the verbal root of the word signifies "produce," "draw forth." The
whole sentence in Egyptian would exactly correspond to our King James
Version. She called his name Moses, i. e. "son," or "brought forth,"
because she brought him forth out of the water.

[Exodus 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 2:11</span></span>

Went out unto his brethren - At the end of 40 years. The Egyptian
princess had not concealed from him the fact of his belonging to the
oppressed race, nor is it likely that she had debarred him from contact
with his foster-mother and her family, whether or not she became aware
of the true relationship.

An Egyptian - This man was probably one of the overseers of the workmen,
natives under the chief superintendent [Exo
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#011). They were armed with long heavy
scourges, made of a tough pliant wood imported from Syria.

[Exodus 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 2:12</span></span>

The slaying of the Egyptian is not to be justified, or attributed to a
divine inspiration, but it is to be judged with reference to the
provocation, the impetuosity of Moses' natural character, perhaps also
to the habits developed by his training at the court of Pharaoh. The act
involved a complete severance from the Egyptians, but, far from
expediting, it delayed for many years the deliverance of the Israelites.
Forty years of a very different training prepared Moses for the
execution of that appointed work.

[Exodus 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 2:13</span></span>

Thy fellow - "Thy neighbor." the reproof was that of a legislator who
established moral obligations on a recognized principle. Hence, in the
following verse, the offender is represented as feeling that the
position claimed by Moses was that of a Judge. The act could only have
been made known by the Hebrew on whose behalf Moses had committed it.

[Exodus 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 2:15</span></span>

No Egyptian king would have left; such an offence unpunished. But the
position of Moses, as an adopted son of a princess, made it necessary
even for a despotic sovereign to take unusual precautions.

The land of Midian - The Midianites occupied an extensive district from
the eastern coast of the Red Sea to the borders of Moab.

[Exodus 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 2:16</span></span>

The Priest of Midian - Reuel [Exo
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#018). His name, and the detailed
notices in Exo. 18, prove that he was a priest of the one true God who
was known to the patriarchs especially under the name El. The great bulk
of his tribe, certainly those who lived farther north and more closely
in contact with the Hamites of Canaan, were already plunged in idolatry.
The conduct of the shepherds [Exo 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#017)
may indicate that his person and office were lightly regarded by the
idolatrous tribes in his immediate neighborhood.

[Exodus 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 2:18</span></span>

Reuel - Or, as in [Num 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#029),
"Raguel." The name means "friend of God." It appears to have been not
uncommon among Hebrews and Edomites; e. g. [Gen
36:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#004), [Gen
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#010). If Reuel be identified with
Jethro, a point open to grave objection (see [Exo
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001)), then Reuel was his proper name,
and Jether or Jethro, which means "excellency," was his official
designation.

[Exodus 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 2:19</span></span>

An Egyptian - They judged from his costume, or language.

[Exodus 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 2:21</span></span>

Moses tells us nothing of what he may have learned from his
father-in-law, but he must have found in him a man conversant with the
traditions of the family of Abraham; nor is there any improbability in
the supposition that, as hereditary priest, Reuel may have possessed
written documents concerning their common ancestors.

[Exodus 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 2:22</span></span>

Gershom - The first syllable "Ger" is common to Hebrew and Egyptian, and
means "sojourner." The second syllable "Shom" answers exactly to the
Coptic "Shemmo," which means "a foreign or strange land."

[Exodus 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 2:23</span></span>

In process of time - Nearly forty years [Act
7:30](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#030). This verse marks the beginning
of another section. We now enter at once upon the history of the Exodus.

Their cry came up unto God - This statement, taken in connection with
the two following verses, proves that the Israelites retained their
faith in the God of their Fathers. The divine name, "God," אלהים
'ĕlohı̂ym, is chosen because it was that which the Israelites must have
used in their cry for help, that under which the covenant had been
ratified with the Patriarchs (compare [Jam
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#004)).

[Exodus 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 2:24</span></span>

Remembered - This means that God was moved by their prayers to give
effect to the covenant, of which an essential condition was the faith
and contrition involved in the act of supplication. The whole history of
Israel is foreshadowed in these words: God heard, remembered, looked
upon, and knew them. It evidently indicates the beginning of a crisis
marked by a personal intervention of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 3](exo003)

</div>
