<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze000)  [Next](eze002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

The first three chapters of Ezekiel contain the account of Ezekiel's
call.

A mighty whirlwind issues from the north, and a dark cloud appears in
that quarter of the heavens. In the midst of the cloud is an area of
dazzling brightness surrounded by encircling flames. Therein are seen
four beings of strange and mysterious shape standing so as to form a
square, below their feet are four wheels, and over their heads a throne
on which is seated the likeness of a man dimly seen, while a voice
issuing from the throne summons the prophet to his office.

[Ezekiel 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 1:1</span></span>

The thirtieth year - being closely connected with as I, is rather in
favor of considering this a personal date. It is not improbable that
Ezekiel was called to his office at the age prescribed in the Law for
Levites [Num 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#023), [Num
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#030), at which age both John the
Baptist and our Lord began their ministry. His call is probably to be
connected with the letter sent by Jeremiah to the captives Jer. 29
written a few months previously. Some reckon this date from the
accession of Nabopolassar, father of Nebuchadnezzar, 625 b.c., and
suppose that Ezekiel here gives a Babylonian, as in [Eze
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#002) a Jewish, date; but it is not
certain that this accession formed an era in Babylon and Ezekiel does
not elsewhere give a double date, or even a Babylonian date. Others date
from the 18th year of Josiah, when Hilkiah discovered the Book of the
Law (supposed to be a jubilee year): this would give 594 b.c. as the
30th year, but there is no other instance in Ezekiel of reckoning from
this year.

The captives - Not in confinement, but restricted to the place of their
settlement.

The fourth month - "Month" is not expressed in the original. This is the
common method. Before the captivity the months were described not by
proper names but by their order, "the first, the second," etc.; the
first month corresponding nearly with our "April." After the captivity,
the Jews brought back with them the proper names of the months, "Nisan"
etc. (probably those used in Chaldaea).

Chebar - The modern "Khabour" rises near Nisibis and flows into the
Euphrates near "Kerkesiah," 200 miles north of Babylon.

Visions of God - The exposition of the fundamental principles of the
existence and nature of a Supreme God, and of the created angels, was
called by the rabbis "the Matter of the Chariot" (compare [Ch1
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#018)) in reference to the form of
Ezekiel's vision of the Almighty; and the subject was deemed so
mysterious as to call for special caution in its study. The vision must
be compared with other manifestations of the divine glory Exo. 3; [Exo
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#010); [Isa
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001); [Dan
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009); [Rev
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#002). Each of these visions has some of
the outward signs or symbols here recorded. If we examine these symbols
we shall find them to fall readily into two classes,

\(1\) Those which we employ in common with the writers of all ages and
countries. "Gold, sapphire, burnished brass," the "terrible crystal" are
familiar images of majestic glory, "thunders, lightnings" and "the
rushing storm" of awful power. But

\(2\) We come to images to our minds strange and almost grotesque. That
the "Four Living Creatures" had their groundwork in the cherubim there
can be no doubt. And yet their shapes were very different. Because they
were symbols not likenesses, they could yet be the same though their
appearance was varied.

Of what are they symbolic? They may, according to the Talmudists, have
symbolized orders of Angels and not persons; according to others they
were figures of the Four Gospels actuated by one spirit spread over the
four quarters of the globe, upon which, as on pillars, the Church is
borne up, and over whom the Word of God sits enthroned. The general
scope of the vision gives the best interpretation of the meaning.

Ezekiel saw "the likeness of the glory of God." Here His glory is
manifested in the works of creation; and as light and fire, lightning
and cloud, are the usual marks which in inanimate creation betoken the
presence of God [Psa 18:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#006) - so the
four living ones symbolize animate creation. The forms are typical, "the
lion" and "the ox" of the beasts of the field (wild and tame), "the
eagle" of the birds of the air, while "man" is the rational being
supreme upon the earth. And the human type predominates over all, and
gives character and unity to the four, who thus form one creation.
Further, these four represent the constitutive parts of man's nature:
"the ox" (the animal of sacrifice), his faculty of suffering; "the lion"
(the king of beasts), his faculty of ruling; "the eagle" (of keen eye
and soaring wing), his faculty of imagination; "the man," his spiritual
faculty, which actuates all the rest.

Christ is the Perfect Man, so these four in their perfect harmony typify
Him who came to earth to do His Father's will; and as man is lord in the
kingdom of nature, so is Christ Lord in the kingdom of grace. The
"wings" represent the power by which all creation rises and falls at
God's will; the "one spirit," the unity and harmony of His works; the
free motion in all directions, the universality of His Providence. The
number "four" is the symbol of the world with its "four quarters;" the
"veiled" bodies, the inability of all creatures to stand in the presence
of God; the "noise of the wings," the testimony borne by creation to God
[Psa 19:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001); the "wheels" connect the
vision with the earth, the wings with heaven, while above them is the
throne of God in heaven. Since the eye of the seer is turned upward, the
lines of the vision become less distinct. It is as if he were struggling
against the impossibility of expressing in words the object of his
vision: yet on the summit of the throne is He who can only be described
as, in some sort, the form of a man. That Yahweh, the eternal God, is
spoken of, we cannot doubt; and such passages as [Col
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015); [Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003); [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014); [Joh
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#041), justify us in maintaining that
the revelation of the divine glory here made to Ezekiel has its
consummation or fulfillment in the person of Christ, the only-begotten
of God (compare [Rev 1:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#017)).

The vision in the opening chapter of Ezekiel is in the most general form
- the manifestation of the glory of the living God. It is repeated more
than once in the course of the book (compare [Eze
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#002), [Eze
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#004); [Eze
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#003); 10; [Eze
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#022); [Eze
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#003)). The person manifested is always
the same, but the form of the vision is modified according to special
circumstances of time and place.

[Ezekiel 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 1:2</span></span>

The Jewish date. This verse and [Eze
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#003), which seem rather to interrupt
the course of the narrative, may have been added by the prophet when he
revised and put together the whole book. The word "captivity" (as in
[Eze 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)) refers to the
"transportation" of the king and others from their native to foreign
soil. This policy of settling a conquered people in lands distant from
their home, begun by the Assyrians, was continued by the Persians and by
Alexander the Great. The Jews were specially selected for such
settlements, and this was no doubt a Providential preparation for the
Gospel, the dispersed Jews carrying with them the knowledge of the true
God and the sacred Scriptures, and thus paving the way for the
messengers of the kingdom of Christ.

[Ezekiel 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 1:3</span></span>

Came expressly - The phrase marks that it was in truth a heaven-sent
vision.

The hand of the Lord - A phrase in all prophecy implying a
"constraining" power, because the spirit "constrains" the prophet
independently of his own will.

[Ezekiel 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 1:4</span></span>

Out of the north - From this quarter the Assyrian conquerors came upon
the holy land. The vision, though seen in Chaldaea, had reference to
Jerusalem, and the seer is to contemplate judgment as it is coming upon
the holy land. Others consider the words expressive of the special seat
of the power of Yahweh. The high mountain range of Lebanon that closed
in the holy land on the north naturally connected to the inhabitants of
that country the northern region with the idea of height reaching to
heaven, from which such a vision as this might be supposed to come.

Infolding itself - Forming a circle of light - flames moving round and
round and following each other in rapid succession, to be as it were the
framework of the glorious scene.

Amber - The original word occurs only in Ezekiel. The Septuagint and the
Vulgate have "electrum," a substance composed by a mixture of silver and
gold, which corresponds very well to the Hebrew word. The brightness,
therefore, is that of shining metal, not of a transparent gum. Render
it: "out of the midst thereof," like [Eze
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#007) burnished gold out of the midst of
fire.

[Ezekiel 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 1:5</span></span>

Living creatures - The Hebrew word answers very nearly to the English
"beings," and denotes those who live, whether angels, men (in whom is
the breath of life), or inferior creatures.

[Ezekiel 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 1:6</span></span>

In the Revelation of John each "beast" has its own distinctive
character, here each unites in itself the four characters; there each
has six wings, like the Seraphim [Isa
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002), here only four.

[Ezekiel 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 1:7</span></span>

The "foot" seems here to mean the lower part of the leg, including the
knee, and this was "straight," i. e. upright like a man's. The "sole" is
the "foot" as distinguished from the "leg," the leg terminated in a
solid calf's hoof. This was suitable for a being which was to present a
front on each of its four sides. Ezekiel was living in a country on the
walls of whose temples and palaces were those strange mixed figures,
human heads with the bodies of lions and the feet of calves, and the
like, which we see in the Babylonian and Assyrian monuments. These
combinations were of course symbolic, and the symbolism must have been
familiar to Ezekiel. But the prophet is not constructing his cherubim in
imitation of these figures, the Spirit of God is revealing forms
corresponding to the general rules of eastern symbolism.

[Ezekiel 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 1:8</span></span>

Or, "They had the hands of a man under their wings on all four sides,
just as they had wings and faces on all four sides."

[Ezekiel 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 1:9</span></span>

Two of the wings were in the act of flying, so stretched out that the
extremity of each touched a wing of a neighboring living creature,
similarly stretched out. This was only when they were in motion. See
[Eze 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#024).

They went every one straight forward - The four together formed a
square, and never altered their relative position. From each side two
faces looked straight out, one at each corner - and so all moved
together toward any of the four quarters, toward which each one had one
of its four faces directed; in whatsoever direction the whole moved the
four might be said all to go "straight forward."

[Ezekiel 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 1:10</span></span>

Each living creature had four faces, in front the face of a man, that of
a lion on the right side, that of an ox on the left side, and that of an
eagle behind, and the "chariot" would present to the beholder two faces
of a man, of a lion, of an eagle, and of an ox, according to the quarter
from which he looked upon it.

[Ezekiel 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 1:11</span></span>

Thus ... - Rather, And their faces and their wings were separated above.
All four formed a whole, yet the upper parts of each, the heads and the
wings (though touching), rose distinct from one another. Two wings of
each, as in the case of Isaiah's Seraphim, were folded down over the
body: and two were in their flight [Eze
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#009) "stretched upward" parted) so as
to meet, each a wing of the neighboring living creature, just as the
wings of the cherubim touched one another over the mercy-seat of the
ark.

[Ezekiel 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 1:12</span></span>

The "chariot," though composed of distinct parts, was to be considered
as a whole. There was one spirit expressive of one conscious life
pervading the whole, and guiding the motions of the whole in perfect
harmony.

[Ezekiel 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 1:13</span></span>

Lamps - "like the appearance of" flames. Omit the "and" before "like."
The "bright flames" resembled "coals of fire."

It went up - i. e. "fire went up."

[Ezekiel 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 1:15</span></span>

Translate it: "one wheel upon the earth by" each of "the liviing
creatures" on his four sides (i. e. on the four sides of each of the
living creatures). There was a wheel to "each" of the living creatures:
it was set "by," i. e. immediately "beneath" the feet of the living
creature, and was constructed for direct motion in any of the four lines
in which the creatures themselves moved. Their "work" or make, i. e.
their construction, was "a wheel in the middle of a wheel;" the wheel
was composed of two circumferences set at right angles to each other,
like the equator and meridian upon a globe. A wheel so placed and
constructed did its part alike on each side of the living creature
beneath which it stood. The "ten bases" of the temple [Kg1
7:27-36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#027) were constructed with lions,
oxen, and cherubim, between the ledges and wheels at the four corners
attached beneath so as to move like the wheels of a chariot.

[Ezekiel 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 1:17</span></span>

Upon their four sides - i. e. straight in the direction toward which
their faces looked. Since the four quarters express all directions, the
construction of the living creatures was such that they could move in
each direction alike.

[Ezekiel 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 1:18</span></span>

Rings - The felloes (circumference) of the wheels: they were both high
and terrible. The "eyes" may have been no more than dazzling spots
adding to their brilliancy. But it seems more likely that they had a
symbolic meaning expressing either the universal fulfillment of God's
will through His creation ([Ch2 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#009);
compare [Eze 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#012)), or the constant
and unceasing praise which His works are ever rendering to Him [Rev
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008). The power of nature is no blind
force. it is employed in the service of God's Providence, and the stamp
of reason is impressed all over it. It is this very thing that makes the
power of nature terrible to him who is at enmity with God.

[Ezekiel 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 1:20</span></span>

Whithersoever the spirit of the four living creatures was to go, the
wheels went - there was the spirit of the wheels to go. All four
creatures together with their wheels are here called "the living
creature," because they formed a whole, one in motion, and in will, for
one spirit was in them.

[Ezekiel 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 1:22</span></span>

"The color" (Hebrew, "eye") "of the terrible crystal" refers to the
dazzling brightness of the "firmament," a clear bright expanse between
the "throne" and the "living creatures," separating heaven from earth.

[Ezekiel 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 1:23</span></span>

Every one had two, which covered ... - Or, each one had two wings
covering his body on either side.

[Ezekiel 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 1:24</span></span>

The voice of the Almighty - Thunder.

The voice of speech - Rendered in [Jer
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#016) "a great tumult." Some take it
to describe the rushing of a storm.

[Ezekiel 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 1:25</span></span>

A voice from the firmament - Compare [Eze
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#012); in the midst of the tumult, are
heard articulate sounds declaring the glory of God.

[Ezekiel 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 1:26</span></span>

Sapphire - Clear heavenly blue.

The appearance of a man - Deeply significant is the form of this
manifestation. Here is no angel conveying God's message to man, but the
glory of the Lord Himself. We recognize in this vision the prophetic
annunciation of the Holy Incarnation. We are told little of the extent
to which the human form was made evident to the prophet. For the vision
was rather to the mind than to the bodily eye, and even inspired
language was inadequate to convey to the hearer the glory which eye hath
not seen or ear heard, and which only by special revelation it hath
entered into the heart of man to conceive.

[Ezekiel 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">eze 1:28</span></span>

The rainbow is not simply a token of glory and splendor. The "cloud" and
the "day of rain" point to its original message of forgiveness and
mercy, and this is especially suited to Ezekiel's commission, which was
first to denounce judgment, and then promise restoration.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 2](eze002)

</div>
