<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze040)  [Next](eze042) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 41](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 41:0</span></span>

The temple [Eze 41:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#001). See Plan I.

[Ezekiel 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 41:1</span></span>

The Temple - Properly the holy place (a), as distinguished from the
porch (G) and the holy of holies (B) [Kg1
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#017); [Kg1
7:50](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#050).

The posts - The outer wall of the temple was six cubits thick [Eze
41:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#005). The eastern posts of this wall
forming part of the front of the temple were ornamented with pillars,
six cubits on each side.

He measured the breadth - This breadth was twenty cubits [Eze
41:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#002). Omit "which was." "tabernacle"
is here the interior (the covered portion) of the temple.

[Ezekiel 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 41:2</span></span>

The measurements are internal, the same as in the Temple of Solomon.

[Ezekiel 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 41:3</span></span>

Went he inward - Toward the holy of holies. It is not said, "he brought
me in," but "he went in," because the holy of holies was not to be
entered even by a priest like Ezekiel, but only by the high priest once
a year. So the "angel" enters and announces: the measurements.

The post of the door - On either side of the entrance was a pillar, the
two together making up two cubits. The first measurement of the door was
from "post to post," six cubits; and the second measurement, the
"breadth of the door," was the breadth of the actual doors which shut
off the holy of holies [Eze 41:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#023), and
which may have been so, hung that each of the "posts" projected half a
cubit beyond the hinge of the door (which opened inwards), so as to
secure the complete closure of the holy of holies.

[Ezekiel 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 41:4</span></span>

The Temple - here is the holy place as distinguished from the most holy,
"the Oracle," which is "before" the holy place, inwards.

[Ezekiel 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 41:5</span></span>

The wall of the house - This was the outer wall of the temple itself.
Its thickness of six cubits corresponds with the colossal proportions of
the architecture of the east.

Every side chamber - the side-chambers (D). These were a marked feature
in Solomon's Temple, and were probably used as storehouses for the
furniture and property of the temple. The arrangement of these
side-chambers differed in some respects from that of Solomon's Temple,
the object of Ezekiel's vision being throughout to bring all things to a
more exact proportion.

[Ezekiel 41:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 41:6</span></span>

Three, one over another, and thirty in order - i. e., there were three
stories, and each story was divided into thirty chambers.

The wall which was of the house for the side chambers - Not the wall of
the temple but another wall [Eze 41:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#009)
parallel to it, which might be said to be "of the house," i. e.,
belonging to it. The side-chambers of Solomon's Temple were built
against the temple-wall, but in Ezekiel's vision the desire to keep the
temple still more separate and holy led to a fresh arrangement, namely,
that another wall should be built at such a distance from the
temple-wall as to allow of chambers being built against it, facing the
temple-wall, and opening into a passage or corridor (F), separating them
from the temple itself.

That they might have hold, but they had not hold in the wall of the
house - that they might have hold but not have hold on the wall of the
house, i. e., entirely separating the chambers from the temple-wall
proper.

[Ezekiel 41:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 41:7</span></span>

An enlarging - The "wall for the side-chambers" had for the ground story
its full thickness of five cubits [Eze
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#009) - then it was diminished one
cubit, so as to form a ledge whereon to rest the beams of the floor of
the second story, and again was further diminished one cubit for the
floor of the third story. Thus there was an "enlarging" of the second
story of the chambers by one cubit, and of the third story by two cubits
beyond the breadth of the chambers on the ground-floor.

A winding about still upward - Winding stairs led "upward" from one
story to another.

The winding about of the house - A collective expression for the various
winding staircases to the side-chambers which extended on the north,
west, and south sides.

And so increased ... - Rather, "and the lowest story was such that one
went by the middle story up to the highest." The winding stairs were not
visible outside, so that one could not go to the upper story without
passing through the middle story.

[Ezekiel 41:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 41:8</span></span>

The foundations of the side chambers - Therefore the height of the
side-chambers from the floor was six cubits there being three stories,
which corresponds sufficiently with the twenty cubits which was the
height of the temple. "A great cubit" is probably an architectural term
to denote the line of junction between two stories, which would be that
of the ceiling of the lower and the floor of the upper story.

[Ezekiel 41:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 41:9</span></span>

And that which was left - i. e., the passage (F) between the
side-chambers and the temple-wall, was five cubits [Eze
41:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#011).

The place of the side chambers that were within - Within the
side-chambers which belong to the house. The seer is giving first the
height of the side-chambers [Eze 41:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#008),
and then the breadth, from the outside of the wall of these chambers to
the temple-wall.

[Ezekiel 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 41:10</span></span>

See H, Plan I.

[Ezekiel 41:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 41:11</span></span>

The doors of the side-chambers opened on to the passage or corridor,
between the chambers and the temple-wall.

[Ezekiel 41:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 41:12</span></span>

The separate place - See F, Plan II. The word occurs only in this
chapter. The name, which seems one of discredit, has led to the
conjecture that the purpose of this place and its building was to
receive the offal of the sacrifices and sweepings of the courts, to be
carried thence by a postern gate (compare [Eze
43:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#021)). The building itself was, we
are told, seventy cubits wide, with walls five cubits thick (eighty
cubits in all), leaving ten cubits on each side to make up the 100
cubits from north to south. The length was ninety cubits, which, adding
as before the thickness of the walls, gives 100 cubits in length. The
whole temple-building was 500 cubits from west to east, and from north
to south, 500 cubits.

[Ezekiel 41:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 41:14</span></span>

Toward the east - The separate place was measured on its eastern side,
for the western was not approachable for the purpose of measurement.

[Ezekiel 41:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 41:15</span></span>

The description of certain details is introduced by a summary statement
of what had been already done.

Galleries - On either side of the eastern front of the building on the
separate place was a gallery of ten feet, under which was an approach to
the building, by which the refuse was to be carried in by openings in
the north and south, and then carried out by a western postern.

[Ezekiel 41:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 41:16</span></span>

Galleries - The upper story of the side-chambers was probably built in
the form of an open gallery.

Over against the door - The rows of the side-chambers extended to the
front of the temple, so that they were "over against" the opening, but
did not extend so far as the porch.

Cieled - Overlaid. Pillars, galleries, narrow windows were overlaid with
wood [Kg1 6:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#015).

Were covered - With wood.

[Ezekiel 41:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 41:17</span></span>

To that ... - Over above the door ..."within and without" was "by
measure." This verse asserts that all the overlaying was done by careful
measurement.

[Ezekiel 41:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 41:18</span></span>

On the symbolism of the "cherubim" see [Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001) note ...

Every cherub had two faces - Not as in Ezek. 1, "four faces."
Convenience of delineation upon a wall may have suggested the
alteration. The cherubic devices on the curtains of the tabernacle [Exo
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#001); [Exo
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo036.htm#008) were no doubt like the cherubim
over the ark, of which we have no reason to suppose that each had "two
faces." The symbolic character here admitted of the deviation.

[Ezekiel 41:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 41:21</span></span>

The posts - Not the word used before (see [Eze
40:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#009) note). These "posts" are rather
pilasters forming part of the inner walls.

The appearance ... other - i. e., the appearance in this vision was the
same as in the actual temple (compare [Eze
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#003)); (or, according to others, the
front of the sanctuary resembled, the front of the holy place).

[Ezekiel 41:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 41:22</span></span>

The altar of wood - The altar for incense (marginal reference); "altar
of gold" (see [Kg1 7:48](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#048)).

Walls - The corner pieces of the altar, rising into projections called
in Exodus horns, here corners.

Table - "table and altar" were convertible terms [Mal
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#007).

[Ezekiel 41:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 41:23</span></span>

See the marginal reference.

[Eze 41:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#025)

Thick planks - Others render it: leaves in wood (and in [Eze
41:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#026)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 42](eze042)

</div>
