<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezra Index](ezr.md)  
  [Previous](ch2036)  [Next](ezr001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001.md)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Ezra

Though the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah were undoubtedly regarded as one
book in two parts, both by the Jewish Church and by the early Christian
Fathers, yet the judgment of modern criticism that Ezra and Nehemiah
were originally two distinct works, seems to be, on the whole, deserving
of acceptance.

The object of the writer of Ezra is to give an account of the return
from the captivity, and of the subsequent fortunes of the Palestinian
Jews until the eighth year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, 457 B.C. - The
matters to which he directs attention are only three:

\(1\) The number, family, and (to some extent) the names of those who
returned from Babylonia with Ezra and with Zerubbabel Ezra 2; 8:1-20;

\(2\) The rebuilding of the temple and the circumstances connected with
it [Ezr 1:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001.md); Ezra 3-7; and

\(3\) The misconduct of the returned Jews with respect to mixed
marriages, and the steps taken by Ezra in consequence Ezra 9-10.

The Book of Ezra is made up of two completely distinct sections:

\(a\) In Ezra 1-6, the writer treats of the return from the captivity
and of the events following (538-516 B.C.), or a period of 23 years. It
belongs to the time when Zerubbabel was governor of Judaea, Jeshua was
high priest, and Zechariah and Haggai were prophets.

\(b\) Ezra 7-10. This relates the commission given to Ezra by Artaxerxes
in the seventh year of his reign (458 B.C.), the journey of Ezra to
Jerusalem, and his proceedings there (April 458 B.C. - April 457 B.C.).
There is thus a gap of 57 years between the first section of the book
and the second; from which it appears that the writer of the second
portion cannot well have been a witness of the events recorded in the
first.

Jewish tradition ascribes the authorship of the whole book to Ezra.
Modern critics generally admit that Ezra was the original and sole
author of the entire second section Ezra 7-10, but consider him the
compiler of the first Ezra 1-6 from state documents, national records,
and lists. It is probable that the Book of Ezra was composed soon after
the arrangements with respect to the mixed marriages had been completed;
i. e. in 457 or 456 B.C..

In character the Book of Ezra is historical, and like Chronicles, it
lays great stress on the externals of religion; it gives special
prominence to the Levites, and exhibits a genealogical bias; it lays
down very distinctly the general principle of a special Providence [Ezr
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#022.md); and it applies this principle to
particular points of the history not unfrequently.

In style, Ezra more resembles Daniel than any other book of Scripture,
always excepting Chronicles. This may be accounted for by these two
writers being both Babylonian Jews. The work contains also a
considerable number of proper names and words which are either known or
suspected to be Persian, and altogether, the language is such as might
have been looked for under the circumstances of the time, when the
contact into which the Jews had been brought with the Babylonians and
the Persians had naturally introduced among them a good many foreign
words and modes of speech.

The text of Ezra is not in a good condition. The general bearing of the
narrative is, however, untouched by slight blemishes which affect
chiefly such minute points as the names and numbers of those who
returned from the captivity, the weight and number of the sacrificial
vessels, and the like.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 1](ezr001.md)

</div>
