<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal001)  [Next](gal003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001)

[Galatians](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gal 2:0</span></span>

The second chapter is closely connected in sense with the first, and is
indeed a part of the same argument. Injury has been done by the division
which is made. The proper division would have been at the close of [Gal
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#010). The general scope of the
chapter, like the first, is to show that he did not receive the gospel
from man; that he had not derived it from the apostles; that he did not
acknowledge his indebtedness to them for his views of the Christian
religion; that they had not even set up authority over him; but that
they had welcomed him as a fellow-laborer, and acknowledged him as a
co-adjutor in the work of the apostleship. In confirmation of this, he
states [Gal 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001) that he had indeed
gone to Jerusalem, but that he had done it by express revelation [Gal
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002); that he was cordially received by
the apostles there - especially by those who were pillars in the church;
and that so far from regarding himself as inferior to the other
apostles, he had resisted Peter to his face at Antioch on a most
important and vital doctrine.

The chapter, therefore, may be regarded as divided into two portions,
namely:

I. "The account of his visit to Jerusalem and of what occurred there,"
[Gal 2:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001).

\(a\) He had gone up 14 years after his conversion, after having labored
long among the Gentiles in his own way, and without having felt his
dependence upon the apostles at Jerusalem, [Gal
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001).

\(b\) When he was there, there was no attempt made to compel him to
submit to the Jewish rites and customs; and what was conclusive in the
case was, that they had not even required Titus to be circumcised, thus
proving that they did not assert jurisdiction over Paul, and that they
did not intend to impose the Mosaic rites on the converts from among the
Gentiles, [Gal 2:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003).

\(c\) The most distinguished persons among the apostles at Jerusalem, he
says, received him kindly, and admitted him to their confidence and
favor without hesitation. They added no heavy burdens to him [Gal
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006); they saw evidence that he had
been appointed to bear the gospel to the Gentiles [Gal
2:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#007); they gave to him and Barnabas
the right hand of fellowship [Gal 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009);
and they asked only that they should remember and show kindness to the
poor saints in Judea, and thus manifest an interest in those who had
been converted from Judaism, or contribute their proper proportion to
the maintenance of all, and show that they were not disposed to abandon
their own countrymen, [Gal 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#010). In
this way they gave the fullest proof that they approved the course of
Paul, and admitted him into entire fellowship with them as an apostle.

II\. "The scene at Antioch, where Paul rebuked Peter for his
dissimulation;" [Gal 2:11-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011). The main
object of mentioning this seems to be to show, first, that he did not
regard himself as inferior to the other apostles, or that he had not
derived his views of the gospel from them; and, secondly, to state that
the observance of the Jewish rites was not necessary to salvation, and
that he had maintained that from the beginning. He had strongly urged it
in a controversy with Peter, and in a case where Peter was manifestly
wrong; and it was no new doctrine on the subject of justification which
he had preached to the Galatians. He states, therefore:

\(a\) That he had opposed Peter at Antioch, because he had dissembled
there, and that even Barnabas had been carried away with the course
which Peter had practiced; [Gal
2:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011).

\(b\) That the Jews must be justified by faith, and not by dependence on
their own law; [Gal 2:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015).

\(c\) That they who are justified by faith should act consistently, and
not attempt to build again the things which they had destroyed; [Gal
2:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#017).

\(d\) That the effect of justification by faith was to make one dead to
the Law that he might live unto God; that the effect of it was to make
one truly alive and devoted to the cause of true religion; and to show
this, he appeals to the effect of his own heart and life [Gal
2:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019).

\(e\) And that if justification could be obtained by the Law, then
Christ had died in vain; [Gal 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#021). He
thus shows that the effect of teaching the necessity of the observance
of the Jewish rites was to destroy the gospel, and to render it vain and
useless.

[Galatians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 2:1</span></span>

Then fourteen years after - That is, 14 years after his first visit
there subsequent to his conversion. Some commentators, however, suppose
that the date of the fourteen years is to be reckoned from his
conversion. But the more obvious construction is, to refer it to the
time of his visit there, as recorded in the previous chapter; [Gal
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#018). This time was spent in Asia
Minor chiefly in preaching the gospel.

I went up again to Jerusalem - It is commonly supposed that Paul here
refers to the visit which he made as recorded in Acts 15. The
circumstances mentioned are substantially the same; and the object which
he had at that time in going up was one whose mention was entirely
pertinent to the argument here. He went up with Barnabas to submit a
question to the assembled apostles and elders at Jerusalem, in regard to
the necessity of the observance of the laws of Moses. Some persons who
had come among the Gentile converts from Judea had insisted on the
necessity of being circumcised in order to be saved. Paul and Barnabas
had opposed them; and the dispute had become so warm that it was agreed
to submit the subject to the apostles and elders at Jerusalem. For that
purpose Paul and Barnabas had been sent, with certain others, to lay the
case before all the apostles. As the question which Paul was discussing
in this Epistle was about the necessity of the observance of the laws of
Moses in order to justification, it was exactly in point to refer to a
journey when this very question had been submitted to the apostles. Paul
indeed had made another journey to Jerusalem before this with the
collection for the poor saints in Judea [Act
11:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#029); [Act
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#025), but he does not mention that
here, probably because he did not then see the other apostles, or more
probably because that journey furnished no illustration of the point now
under debate. On the occasion here referred to Acts 15, the very point
under discussion here constituted the main subject of inquiry, and it
was definitely settled.

And took Titus with me also - Luke, in the Acts of the Apostles [Act
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002), says, that there were others
with Paul and Barnabas on that journey to Jerusalem, but who they were
he does not mention. It is by no means certain that Titus was appointed
by the church to go to Jerusalem; but the contrary is more probable.
Paul seems to have taken him with him as a private affair; but the
reason is not mentioned. It may have been to show his Christian liberty,
and his sense of what he had a right to do; or it may have been to
furnish a case on the subject of inquiry, and submit the matter to them
whether Titus was to be circumcised. He was a Greek; but he had been
converted to Christianity. Paul had not circumcised him; but had
admitted him to the full privileges of the Christian church. Here then
was a case in point; and it may have been important to have had such a
case before them, so that they might fully understand it. This, as
Doddridge properly remarks, is the first mention which occurs of Titus.
He is not mentioned by Luke in the Acts of the Apostles, and though his
name occurs several times in the Second Epistle to the Corinthians [Co2
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#013); [Co2
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#006); [Co2
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#006), [Co2
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#016), [Co2
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#023); [Co2
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#018), yet it is to be remembered that
that Epistle was written a considerable time after this to the
Galatians. Titus was a Greek, and was doubtless converted by the labors
of Paul, because he calls him his own "son," [Tit
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#004). He attended Paul frequently in
his travels; was employed by him in important services (see 2
Corinthians in the places referred to above); was left by him in Crete
to set in order the things that were missing, and to ordain elders there
[Tit 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005); subsequently, he went into
Dalmatia [Ti2 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#010), and is supposed to
have returned again to Crete, where it is said he propagated the gospel
in the neighboring islands, and died at the age of 94 - Calmet.

[Galatians 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gal 2:2</span></span>

And I went up by revelation - Not for the purpose of receiving
instruction from the apostles there in regard to the nature of the
Christian religion. It is to be remembered that the design for which
Paul states this is, to show that he had not received the gospel from
human beings. He is careful, therefore, to state that he went up by the
express command of God. He did not go up to receive instructions from
the apostles there in regard to his own work, or to be confirmed by them
in his apostolic office, but he went to submit an important question
pertaining to the church at large. In [Act
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002), it is said that Paul and
Barnabas went up by the appointment of the church at Antioch. But there
is no discrepancy between that account and this, for though he was
designated by the church there, there is no improbability in supposing
that he was directed by a special revelation to comply with their
request. The reason why he says that he went up by direct revelation
seems to be to show that he did not seek instruction from the apostles;
he did not go of his own accord to consult with them as if he were
dependent upon them; but even in a case when he went to advise with them
he was under the influence of express and direct revelation, proving
that he was commissioned by God as much as they were.

And communicated unto them that gospel ... - Made them acquainted with
the doctrines which he preached among the pagans. He stated fully the
principles on which he acted; the nature of the gospel which he taught;
and his doctrine about the exemption of the Gentiles from the
obligations of the Law of Moses. He thus satisfied them in regard to his
views of the gospel; and showed them that he understood the system of
Christianity which had been revealed. The result was, that they had
entire confidence in him, and admitted him to entire fellowship with
them; [Gal 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009).

But privately - Margin, "Severally." Greek (κατ ̓ ἰδίαν kat' idian. The
phrase means that he did it not in a public manner; not before a general
assembly; not even before all the apostles collected together, but in a
private manner to a few of the leaders and chief persons. He made a
private explanation of his motives and views, so that they might
understand it before it became a matter of public discussion. The point
on which Paul made this private explanation was not whether the gospel
was to be preached to the Gentiles, for upon that they had no doubt
after the revelation to Peter Acts 10; but whether the rites of the Jews
were to be imposed on the Gentile converts. Paul explained his views and
his practice on that point, which were that he did not impose those
rites on the Gentiles; that he taught that people might be justified
without their observance; and that they were not necessary in order to
salvation. The reasons why he sought this private interview with the
leading men in Jerusalem he has not stated. But we may suppose that they
were something like the following:

\(1\) The Jews in general had very strong attachment to their own
customs, and this attachment was found in a high degree among those who
were converted from among them to the Christian faith. They would be
strongly excited, therefore, by the doctrine that those customs were not
necessary to be observed.

\(2\) if the matter were submitted to a general assembly of converts
from Judaism, it could not fail to produce great excitement. They could
not be made readily to understand the reasons why Paul acted in this
manner; there would be no possibility in an excited assemblage to offer
the explanations which might be desirable; and after every explanation
which could be given in this manner, they might have been unable to
understand all the circumstances of the case.

\(3\) if a few of the principal men were made to understand it, Paul
felt assured that their influence would be such as to prevent any great
difficulty. He therefore sought an early opportunity to lay the case
before them in private, and to secure their favor; and this course
contributed to the happy issue of the whole affair; see Acts 15. There
was indeed much disputation when the question came to be submitted to
"the apostles and elders" [Act 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007);
many of the sect of the Pharisees in that assembly maintained that it
was needful to teach the Gentiles that the Law of Moses was to be kept
[Act 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#005); and no one can tell what
would have been the issue of that discussion among the excitable minds
of the converts from Judaism had not Paul taken the precaution, as he
here says, to have submitted the case in private to those who were of
"reputation." and if Peter and James had not in this manner been
satisfied and had not submitted the views which they did, as recorded in
[Act 15:7-21](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007), and which terminated the
whole controversy.

We may just remark here that this fact furnishes an argument such as
Paley has dwelt so much on in his Horae Paulinae - though he has not
referred to this - of what he calls undesigned coincidences. The affair
in Acts 15 and the course of the debate, looks very much as if Peter and
James had had some conference with Paul in private, and had had an
opportunity of understanding fully his views on the subject before the
matter came before the "apostles and elders" in public, though no such
private conference is there referred to by Luke. But on turning to the
Epistle to the Galatians, we find in fact that he had on one occasion
before seen the same Peter and James [Gal
1:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018); and that he had had a private
interview with those "of reputation" on these very points, and
particularly that James, Peter, and John had approved his course, and
given to him and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship; [Gal
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009). Thus understood, the case here
referred to was one of the most consummate instances of prudence that
occurred in the life of Paul; and from this case we may learn:

\(1\) That when a difficulty is to be settled involving great
principles, and embracing a great many points, it is better to seek an
opportunity of private explanation than to submit it to a general
multitude or to public debate. It is not well to attempt to settle
important points when the passions of a general assembly may be excited,
and where prejudices are strong. It is better to do it by private
explanations, when there is an opportunity coolly to ask questions and
to state the facts just as they are.

\(2\) the importance of securing the countenance of influential men in a
popular assembly; of having men in the assembly who would understand the
whole case. It was morally certain that if such men as Peter and James
were made to understand the case, there would be little difficulty in
arriving at an amicable adjustment of the difficulty.

\(3\) though this passage does not refer to preaching the gospel in
general, since the gospel here submitted to the men of reputation was
the question referred to above, yet we may remark, that great prudence
should be used in preaching; in stating truths that may excite
prejudices, or when we have reason to apprehend prejudices; and that it
is often best to preach the gospel to men of reputation κατ ̓ ἰδίαν kat'
idian "separately," or "privately." In this way the truth can be made to
bear on the conscience; it may be better adapted to the character of the
individual; he may put himself less in a state of defense, and guard
himself less against the proper influences of truth. And especially is
this true in conversing with persons on the subject of religion. It
should be if possible alone, or privately. Almost any person may be
approached on the subject of religion if it is done when he is alone;
when he is at leisure, and if it is done in a kind spirit. Almost
anybody will become irritated if you address him personally in a general
assembly, or even with his family around him. I have never in more than
in one or two instances been unkindly treated when I have addressed an
individual on the subject of religion if he was alone; and though a
minister should never shrink from stating the truth, and should never be
afraid of man, however exalted his rank, or great his talents, or vast
his wealth, yet he will probably meet with most success when he
discourses privately to "them which are of reputation."

To them which were of reputation - Meaning here the leading men among
the apostles. Tyndale renders this, "which are counted chefe."
Doddridge, "those of greatest note in the church." The Greek is,
literally, "those who seem," more fully in [Gal
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006); "who seem to be something," that
is, who are persons of note, or who are distinguished.

Lest by any means I should run, or had run in vain - Lest the effects of
my labors and journeys should be lost. Paul feared that if he did not
take this method of laying the case before them privately, they would
not understand it. Others might misrepresent him, or their prejudices
might be excited, and when the case came before the assembled apostles
and elders, a decision might be adopted which would go to prove that he
had been entirely wrong in his views, or which would lead those whom he
had taught, to believe that he was, and which would greatly hinder and
embarrass him in Iris future movements. In order to prevent this,
therefore, and to secure a just decision, and one which would not hinder
his future usefulness, he had sought this private interview, and thus
his object was gained.

[Galatians 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gal 2:3</span></span>

But neither Titus, who was with me - Paul introduces this case of Titus
undoubtedly to show that circumcision was not necessary for salvation.
It was a case just in point. He had gone up to Jerusalem with the
express reference to this question. Here was a man whom he had admitted
to the Christian church without circumcising him. He claimed that he had
a right to do so; and that circumcision was not necessary in order for
salvation. If it were necessary, it would have been proper that Titus
should have been compelled to submit to it. But Paul that says this was
not demanded; or if demanded by anyone, the point was yielded, and he
was not compelled to be circumcised. It is to be remembered that this
was at Jerusalem; that it was a case submitted to the apostles there;
and that consequently the determination of this case settled the whole
controversy about the obligation of the Mosaic laws on the Gentile
converts.

It is quite evident from the whole statement here that Paul did not
intend that Titus should be circumcised; that he maintained that it was
not necessary; and that he resisted it when it was demanded; [Gal
2:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#004). Yet on another occasion he
himself performed the act of circumcision upon Timothy; [Act
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003). But there is no inconsistency in
Paul's conduct. In the case of Titus, it was demanded as a matter of
right and as obligatory upon him, and Paul resisted the principle as
dangerous. In the case of Timothy, it was a voluntary compliance on his
part with the usual customs of the Jews, where it was not pressed as a
matter of obligation, and where it would not be understood as
indispensable to salvation. No danger would follow from compliance with
the custom, and it might do much to conciliate the favor of the Jews,
and he therefore submitted to it. Paul would not have hesitated to have
circumcised Titus in the same circumstances in which it was done to
Timothy; but the circumstances were different; and when it was insisted
upon as a matter of principle and of obligation, it became a matter of
principle and of obligation with him to oppose it.

Being a Greek - Born of Gentile parents, of course he had not been
circumcised. Probably both his parents were Greeks. The case with
Timothy was somewhat different. His mother was a Jewess, but his father
was a Greek [Act 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003).

Was compelled to be circumcised - I think it is implied here that this
was demanded and insisted on by some that he should be circumcised. It
is also implied that Paul resisted it, and the point was yielded, thus
settling the great and important principle that it was not necessary in
order for salvation; see [Gal 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#005).

[Galatians 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gal 2:4</span></span>

And that because of false brethren - Who these false brethren were is
not certainly known, nor is it known whether he refers to those who were
at Jerusalem or to those who were at Antioch. It is probable that he
refers to Judaizing Christians, or persons who claimed to be Christians
and to have been converted from Judaism. Whether they were dissemblers
and hypocrites, or whether they were so imperfectly acquainted with
Christianity, and so obstinate, opinionated, and perverse, though really
in some respects good men, that they were conscientious in this, it is
not easy to determine. It is clear, however, that they opposed the
apostle Paul; that they regarded him as teaching dangerous doctrines;
that they perverted and misstated his views; and that they claimed to
have clearer views of the nature of the true religion than he had. Paul
met such adversaries everywhere [Co2
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#026); and it required all his tact
and skill to meet their plausible representations.

It is evident here that Paul is assigning a reason for something which
he had done, and that reason was to counteract the influence of the
"false brethren" in the case. But what is the thing concerning which he
assigns a reason? It is commonly supposed to have been on account of the
fact that he did not submit to the circumcision of Titus, and that he
means to say that he resisted that in order to counteract their
influence and to defeat their designs. But I would submit whether [Gal
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003) is not to be regarded as a
parenthesis, and whether the fact for which he assigns a reason is not
that he sought a private interview with the leading men among the
apostles? [Gal 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002). The reason of his
doing that would be obvious. In this way he could more easily counteract
the influence of the false brethren. He could make a full statement of
his doctrines. He could meet their inquiries, and anticipate the
objections of his enemies. He could thus secure the influence of the
leading apostles in his favor, and effectually prevent all the efforts
of the false brethren to impose the Jewish rites on Gentile converts.

Unawares brought in - The word rendered "unawares" (παρεισάκτους
pareisaktous) is derived from a verb meaning to lead in by the side of
others, to introduce along with others; and then to lead or bring in by
stealth, to smuggle in - Robinson, Lexicon. The verb occurs nowhere in
the New Testament but in [Pe2 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001),
where it is applied to heresies, and is rendered "Who privily shall
bring in." Here it refers probably to men who had been artfully
introduced into the ministry, who made pretensions to piety, but who
were either strangers to it, or who were greatly ignorant of the true
nature of the Christian system; and who were disposed to take every
advantage, and to impose on others the observance of the special rites
of the Mosaic economy. Into what they were brought, the apostle does not
say. It may have been that they had been introduced into the ministry in
this manner (Doddridge); or it may be that they were introduced into the
"assembly" where the apostles were collected to deliberate on the
subject - Chandler. I think it probable that Paul refers to the
occurrences in Jerusalem, and that these false brethren had been
introduced from Antioch or some other place where Paul had been
preaching, or that they were persons whom his adversaries had introduced
to demand that Titus should be circumcised, under the plausible pretence
that the laws of Moses required it, but really in order that there might
be such proof as they desired that this rite was to be imposed upon the
Gentile converts. If Paul were compelled to submit to this; if they
could carry this point, it would be just such an instance as they
needed, and would settle the whole inquiry, and prove that the Mosaic
laws were to be imposed upon the Gentile converts. This was the reason
why Paul so strenuously opposed it.

To spy out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus - In the practice
of the Christian religion. The liberty referred to was, doubtless, the
liberty from the painful, expensive, and onerous rites of the Jewish
religion; see [Gal 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001). Their object
in spying out the liberty which Paul and others had, was, undoubtedly,
to be witnesses of the fact that they did not observe the special rites
of the Mosaic system; to make report of it; to insist upon their
complying with those customs, and thus to secure the imposition of those
rites on the Gentile converts. Their first object was to satisfy
themselves of the fact that Paul did not insist on the observance of
their customs; and then to secure, by the authority of the apostles, an
injunction or order that Titus should be circumcised, and that Paul and
the converts made under his ministry should be required to comply with
those laws.

That they might bring us into bondage - Into bondage to the laws of
Moses; see the note at [Act 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#010).

[Galatians 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gal 2:5</span></span>

To whom we gave place by subjection, no, not for an hour - We did not
submit to this at all. We did not yield even for the shortest time. We
did not waver in our opposition to their demands, or in the slightest
degree become subject to their wishes. We steadily opposed their claims,
in order that the great principle might be forever settled, that the
laws of Moses were not to be imposed as obligatory on the Gentile
converts. This I take to be the clear and obvious sense of this passage,
though there has been a great variety of opinions on it. A considerable
number of manuscripts omit the words οἵς οὐδὲ hois oude), "to whom
neither" (see Mill, Koppe, and Griesbach), and then the sense would be
reversed, that Paul did yield to them for or after a short time, in
order that he might in this way better consult the permanent interests
of the gospel. This opinion has been gaining ground for the last
century, that the passage here has been corrupted; but it is by no means
confirmed. The ancient versions (the Syriac, the Vulgate, and the
Arabic) accord with the usual reading of the text. So also do by far the
largest portion of mss., and such, it seems to me, is the sense demanded
by the connection. Paul means, in the whole passage, to say, that a
great principle was settled. That the question came up fairly whether
the Mosaic rites were to be imposed upon Gentile converts. That false
brethren were introduced who demanded it; and that he steadily
maintained his ground. He did not yield a moment. He felt that a great
principle was involved; and though on all proper occasions he was
willing to yield and to become all things to all men, yet here he did
not court them, or temporize with them in the least. The phrase "by
subjection" here means, that he did not suffer himself to be compelled
to yield. The phrase "for an hour" is equivalent to the shortest period
of time. He did not waver, or yield at all.

That the truth of the gospel might continue with you - That the great
principle of the Christian religion which had been taught you might
continue, and that you might enjoy the full benefit of the pure gospel,
without its being intermingled with any false views. Paul had defended
these same views among the Galatians, and he now sought that the same
views might be confirmed by the clear decision of the college of
apostles at Jerusalem.

[Galatians 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 2:6</span></span>

But of those who seemed to be somewhat - See [Gal
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002). This undoubtedly refers to those
who were the most eminent among the apostles at Jerusalem. There is an
apparent harshness in our common translation which is unnecessary. The
word used here (δοκούντων dokountōn) denotes those who were thought to
be, or who were of reputation; that is, men who were of note and
influence among the apostles. The object of referring to them here is,
to show that he had the concurrence and approbation of the most eminent
of the apostles to the course which he had pursued.

Whatsoever they were, it maketh no matter to me - Tyndale renders this,
"What they were in time passed, it maketh no matter to me." The idea
seems to be this. Paul means to say that whatever was their real rank
and standing, it did not in the least affect his authority as an
apostle, or his argument. While he rejoiced in their concurrence, and
while he sought their approbation, yet he did not admit for a moment
that he was inferior to them as an apostle, or dependent on them for the
justness of his views What they were, or what they might be thought to
be, was immaterial to his claims as an apostle, and immaterial to the
authority of his own views as an apostle. He had derived his gospel from
the Lord Jesus; and he had the fullest assurance that his views were
just. Paul makes this remark evidently in keeping with all that he had
said, that he did not regard himself as in any manner dependent on them
for his authority. He did not treat them with disrespect; but he did not
regard them as having a right to claim an authority over him.

God accepteth no man's person - See the [Act
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034) note; [Rom
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#011) note. This is a general truth,
that God is not influenced in His judgment by a regard to the rank, or
wealth, or external condition of anyone. Its particular meaning here is,
that the authority of the apostles was not to be measured by their
external rank, or by the measure of reputation which they had among men.
If, therefore, it were to be admitted that he himself were not in
circumstances of so much external honor as the other apostles, or that
they were esteemed to be of more elevated rank than he was, still he did
not admit that this gave them a claim to any higher authority. God was
not influenced in His judgment by any such consideration; and Paul
therefore claimed that all the apostles were in fact on a level in
regard to their authority.

In conference - When I conferred with them, [Gal
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002). They did not then impose upon me
any new obligations; they did not communicate anything to me of which I
was previously ignorant.

[Galatians 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 2:7</span></span>

The gospel of the uncircumcision - The duty of preaching the gospel to
the uncircumcised part of the world; that is, to the Gentiles Paul had
received this as his unique office when he was converted and called to
the ministry (see [Act 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015); [Act
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#021)); and they now perceived that he
had been specially intrusted with this office, from the remarkable
success which had attended his labors. It is evidently not meant here
that Paul was to preach only to the Gentiles and Peter only to the Jews,
for Paul often preached in the synagogues of the Jews, and Peter was the
first who preached to a Gentile Acts 10; but it is meant that it was the
main business of Paul to preach to the Gentiles, or that this was
especially entrusted to him.

As the gospel of the circumcision - As the office of preaching the
gospel to the Jews.

Was unto Peter - Peter was to preach principally to the circumcised
Jews. It is evident that until this time Peter had been principally
employed in preaching to the Jews. Paul selects Peter here particularly,
doubtless because he was the oldest of the apostles, and in order to
show that he was himself regarded as on a level in regard to the
apostleship with the most aged and venerable of those who had been
called to the apostolic office by the personal ministry of the Lord
Jesus.

[Galatians 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gal 2:8</span></span>

For he that wrought effectually in Peter ... - Or by the means or agency
of Peter. The argument here is, that the same effects had been produced
under the ministry of Paul among the Gentiles which had been under the
preaching of Peter among the Jews. It is inferred, therefore, that God
had called both to the apostolic office; see this argument illustrated
in the notes at [Act 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#017).

The same was mighty in me ... - In enabling me to work miracles, and in
the success which attended the ministry.

[Galatians 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gal 2:9</span></span>

And when James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be pillars - That is,
pillars or supports in the church. The word rendered "pillars" (στύλοι
stuloi) means properly firm support; then persons of influence and
authority, as in a church, or that support a church as a pillar or
column does an edifice. In regard to James, see the note at [Gal
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019); compare [Act
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#013). Cephas or Peter was the most
aged of the apostles, and regarded as at the head of the apostolical
college. John was the beloved disciple, and his influence in the church
must of necessity have been great. Paul felt that if he had the
countenance of these men, it would be an important proof to the churches
of Galatia that he had a right to regard himself as an apostle. Their
countenance was expressed in the most full and decisive manner.

Perceived the grace that was given unto me - That is, the favor that had
been shown to me by the great Head of the church, in so abundantly
blessing my labors among the Gentiles.

They gave unto me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship - The
right-hand in token of fellowship or favor. They thus publicly
acknowledged us as fellow-laborers, and expressed the utmost confidence
in us. To give the right-hand with us is a token of friendly salutation,
and it seems that it was a mode of salutation not unknown in the times
of the apostles. They were thus recognised as associated with the
apostles in the great work of spreading the gospel around the world.
Whether this was done in a public manner is not certainly known; but it
was probably in the presence of the church, or possibly at the close of
the council referred to in Acts 15.

That we should go unto the heathen - To preach the gospel, and to
establish churches. In this way the whole matter was settled, and
settled as Paul desired it to be. A delightful harmony was produced
between Paul and the apostles at Jerusalem; and the result showed the
wisdom of the course which he had adopted. There had been no harsh
contention or strife. No jealousies had been suffered to arise. Paul had
sought an opportunity of a full statement of his views to them in
private [Gal 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002), and they had been
entirely satisfied that God had called him and Barnabas to the work of
making known the gospel among the pagan. Instead of being jealous at
their success, they had rejoiced in it; and instead of throwing any
obstacle in their way, they cordially gave them the right hand. How easy
would it be always to prevent jealousies and strifes in the same way! If
there was, on the one hand, the same readiness for a full and frank
explanation; and if, on the other, the same freedom from envy at
remarkable success, how many strifes that have disgraced the church
might have been avoided! The true way to avoid strife is just that which
is here proposed. Let there be on both sides perfect frankness; let
there be a willingness to explain and state things just as they are; and
let there be a disposition to rejoice in the talents, and zeal, and
success of others, even though it should far outstrip our own, and
contention in the church would cease, and every devoted and successful
minister of the gospel would receive the right-hand of fellowship from
all - however venerable by age or authority - who love the cause of true
religion.

[Galatians 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 2:10</span></span>

Only they would that we should remember the poor - That is, as I
suppose, the poor Christians in Judea. It can hardly be supposed that it
would be necessary to make this an express stipulation in regard to the
converts from among the Gentiles, and it would not have been very
pertinent to the case before them to have done so. The object was, to
bind together the Christians from among the pagan and from among the
Jews, and to prevent alienation and unkind feeling. It might have been
alleged that Paul was disposed to forget his own countrymen altogether;
that he regarded himself as so entirely the apostle of the Gentiles that
he would become wholly alienated from those who were his "kinsmen
according to the flesh," and thus it might be apprehended that
unpleasant feelings would be engendered among those who had been
converted from among the Jews. Now nothing could be better adapted to
allay this than for him to pledge himself to feel a deep interest in the
poor saints among the Jewish converts; to remember them in his prayers;
and to endeavor to secure contributions for their needs.

Thus he would show that he was not alienated from his countrymen; and
thus the whole church would be united in the closest bonds. It is
probable that the Christians in Judea were at that time suffering the
ills of poverty arising either from some public persecution, or from the
fact that they were subject to the displeasure of their countrymen. All
who know the special feelings of the Jews at that time in regard to
Christians, must see at once that many of the followers of Jesus of
Nazareth would be subjected to great inconveniences on account of their
attachment to him. Many a wife might be disowned by her husband; many a
child disinherited by a parent; many a man might be thrown out of
employment by the fact that others would not countenance him; and hence,
many of the Christians would be poor. It became, therefore, an object of
special importance to provide for them; and hence, this is so often
referred to in the New Testament. In addition to this, the church in
Judea was afflicted with famine; compare [Act
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#030); [Rom
15:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025); [Co1
16:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001); [Co2
8:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001).

The same which I also was forward to do - See the passages just referred
to. Paul interested himself much in the collection for the poor saints
at Jerusalem, and in this way he furnished the fullest evidence that he
was not alienated from them, but that he felt the deepest interest in
those who were his kindred. One of the proper ways of securing union in
the church is to have the poor with them and depending on them for
support; and hence, every church has some poor persons as one of the
bonds of union. The best way to unite all Christians, and to prevent
alienation, and jealousy, and strife, is to have a great common object
of charity, in which all are interested and to which all may contribute.
Such a common object for all Christians is a sinful world. All who bear
the Christian name may unite in promoting its salvation, and nothing
would promote union in the now divided and distracted church of Christ
like a deep and common interest in the salvation of all mankind.

[Galatians 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 2:11</span></span>

But when Peter was come to Antioch - On the situation of Antioch, see
the note at [Act 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019). The design for
which Paul introduces this statement here is evident. It is to show that
he regarded himself as on a level with the chief apostles, and that he
did not acknowledge his inferiority to any of them. Peter was the
oldest, and probably the most honored of the apostles. Yet Paul says
that he did not hesitate to resist him in a case where Peter was
manifestly wrong, and thus showed that he was an apostle of the same
standing as the others. Besides, what he said to Peter on that occasion
was exactly pertinent to the strain of the argument which he was
pursuing with the Galatians, and he therefore introduces it [Gal
2:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014) to show that he had held the
same doctrine all along, and that he had defended it in the presence of
Peter, and in a case where Peter did not reply to it. The time of this
journey of Peter to Antioch cannot be ascertained; nor the occasion on
which it occurred. I think it is evident that it was after this visit of
Paul to Jerusalem, and the occasion may have been to inspect the state
of the church at Antioch, and to compose any differences of opinion
which may have existed there. But everything in regard to this is mere
conjecture; and it is of little importance to know when it occurred.

I withstood him to the face - I openly opposed him, and reproved him.
Paul thus showed that he was equal with Peter in his apostolical
authority and dignity. The instance before us is one of faithful public
reproof; and every circumstance in it is worthy of special attention, as
it furnishes a most important illustration of the manner in which such
reproof should be conducted. The first thing to be noted is, that it was
done openly, and with candor. It was reproof addressed to the offender
himself. Paul did not go to others and whisper his suspicions; he did
not seek to undermine the influence and authority of another by slander;
he did not calumniate him and then justify himself on the ground that
what he had said was no more than true: he went to him at once, and he
frankly stated his views and reproved him in a case where he was
manifestly wrong. This too was a case so public and well known that Paul
made his remarks before the church [Gal
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014) because the church was interested
in it, and because the conduct of Peter led the church into error.

Because he was to be blamed - The word used here may either mean because
he had incurred blame, or because he deserved blame. The essential idea
is, that he had done wrong, and that he was by his conduct doing injury
to the cause of religion.

[Galatians 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gal 2:12</span></span>

For before that certain came - Some of the Jews who had been converted
to Christianity. They evidently observed in the strictest manner the
rites of the Jewish religion.

Came from James - See the note at [Gal
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019). Whether they were sent by James,
or whether they came of their own accord, is unknown. It is evident only
that they had been intimate with James at Jerusalem, and they doubtless
pleaded his authority. James had nothing to do with the course which
they pursued; but the sense of the whole passage is, that James was a
leading man at Jerusalem, and that the rites of Moses were observed
there. When they came down to Antioch, they of course observed those
rites, and insisted that others should do it also. It is very evident
that at Jerusalem the special rites of the Jews were observed for a long
time by those who became Christian converts. They would not at once
cease to observe them, and thus needlessly shock the prejudices of their
countrymen; see the notes at [Act
21:21-25](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#021).

He did eat with the Gentiles - Peter had been taught that in the
remarkable vision which he saw as recorded in Acts 10. He had learned
that God designed to break down the wall of partition between the Jews
and the Gentiles, and he familiarly associated with them, and partook
with them of their food. He evidently disregarded the special laws of
the Jews about meats and drinks, and partook of the common food which
was in use among the Gentiles. Thus he showed his belief that all the
race was henceforward to be regarded as on a level, and that the special
institutions of the Jews were not to be considered as binding, or to be
imposed on others.

But when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself - He withdrew
from the Gentiles, and probably from the Gentile converts to
Christianity. The reason why he did this is stated. He feared those who
were of the circumcision, or who had been Jews. Whether they demanded
this of him; whether they encountered him in debate; or whether he
silently separated himself from the Gentiles without their having said
anything to him, is unknown. But he feared the effect of their
opposition; he feared their reproaches; he feared the report which would
be made to those at Jerusalem; and perhaps he apprehended that a tumult
would be excited and a persecution commenced at Antioch by the Jews who
resided there. This is a melancholy illustration of Peter's
characteristic trait of mind. We see in this act the same Peter who
trembled when he began to sink in the waves; the same Peter who denied
his Lord. Bold, ardent, zealous, and forward; he was at the same time
timid and often irresolute; and he often had occasion for the deepest
humility, and the most poignant regrets at the errors of his course. No
one can read his history without loving his ardent and sincere
attachment to his Master; and yet no one can read it without a tear of
regret that he was left thus to do injury to his cause. No man loved the
Saviour more sincerely than he did, yet his constitutional timidity and
irresolutehess of character often led him to courses of life suited
deeply to wound his cause.

[Galatians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 2:13</span></span>

And the other Jews - That is, those who had been converted to
Christianity. It is probable that they were induced to do it by the
example of Peter, as they would naturally regard him as a leader.

Dissembled likewise with him - Dissembled or concealed their true
sentiments. That is, they attempted to conceal from those who had come
down from James the fact that they had been in the habit of associating
with the Gentiles, and of eating with them. From this it would appear
that they intended to conceal this wholly from them, and that they
withdrew from the Gentiles before anything had been said to them by
those who came down from James.

Insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away ... - Concerning Barnabas,
see the note at [Act 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036). Barnabas
was the intimate friend of Paul. He had been associated with him in very
important labors; and the fact, therefore, that the conduct of Peter was
exciting so unhappy an influence as even to lead so worthy and good a
man as he was into hypocrisy and error, made it the more proper that
Paul should publicly notice and reprove the conduct of Peter. It could
not but be a painful duty, but the welfare of the church and the cause
of religion demanded it, and Paul did not shrink from what was so
obvious a duty.

[Galatians 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gal 2:14</span></span>

But when I saw that they walked not uprightly - To walk, in the
Scriptures, is usually expressive of conduct or deportment; and the idea
here is, that their conduct in this case was not honest.

According to the truth of the gospel - According to the true spirit and
design of the gospel. That requires perfect honesty and integrity; and
as that was the rule by which Paul regulated his life, and by which he
felt that all ought to regulate their conduct, he felt himself called on
openly to reprove the principal person who had been in fault. The spirit
of the world is crafty, cunning, and crooked. The gospel would correct
all that wily policy, and would lead man in a path of entire honesty and
truth.

I said unto Peter before them all - That is, probably, before all the
church, or certainly before all who had offended with him in the case.
Had this been a private affair, Paul would doubtless have sought a
private interview with Peter, and would have remonstrated with him in
private on the subject. But it was public. It was a case where many were
involved, and where the interests of the church were at stake. It was a
case where it was very important to establish some fixed and just
principles, and he therefore took occasion to remonstrate with him in
public on the subject. This might have been at the close of public
worship; or it may have been that the subject came up for debate in some
of their public meetings, whether the rites of the Jews were to be
imposed on the Gentile converts. This was a question which agitated all
the churches where the Jewish and Gentile converts were intermingled;
and it would not be strange that it should be the subject of public
debate at Antioch. The fact that Paul reproved Peter before "them all,"
proves:

\(1\) That he regarded himself, and was so regarded by the church, as on
an equality with Peter, and as having equal authority with him.

\(2\) that public reproof is right when an offence has been public, and
when the church at large is interested, or is in danger of being led
into error; compare [Ti1 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#020), "Them
that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear."

\(3\) that it is a duty to reprove those who err. It is a painful duty,
and one much neglected; still it is a duty often enjoined in the
Scriptures, and one that is of the deepest importance to the church. He
does a favor to another man who, in a kind spirit, admonishes him of his
error, and reclaims him from a course of sin. He does another the
deepest injury, who suffers sin unrebuked to lie upon him, and who sees
him injuring himself and others, and who is at no pains to admonish him
for his faults.

\(4\) if it is the duty of one Christian to admonish another who is an
offender, and to do it in a kind spirit, it is the duty of him who has
offended to receive the admonition in a kind spirit, and with
thankfulness. Excitable as Peter was by nature, yet there is no evidence
that he became angry here, or that he did not receive the admonition of
his brother Paul with perfect good temper, and with an acknowledgment
that Paul was right and that he was wrong. Indeed, the case was so
plain, as it usually is if men would be honest, that he seems to have
felt that it was right, and to have received the rebuke as became a
Christian. Peter, unhappily, was accustomed to rebukes; and he was at
heart too good a man to be offended when he was admonished that he had
done wrong. A good man is willing to be reproved when he has erred, and
it is usually proof that there is much that is wrong when we become
excited and irritable if another admonishes us of our faults. It may be
added here that nothing should be inferred from this in regard to the
inspiration or apostolic authority of Peter. The fault was not that he
taught error of doctrine, but that he sinned in conduct. Inspiration,
though it kept the apostles from teaching error, did not keep them
necessarily from sin. A man may always teach the truth, and yet be far
from perfection in practice. The case here proves that Peter was not
perfect, a fact proved by his whole life; it proves that he was
sometimes timid, and even, for a period, timeserving, but it does not
prove that what he wrote for our guidance was false and erroneous.

If thou, being a Jew - A Jew by birth.

Livest after the manner of the Gentiles - In eating, etc., as he had
done before the Judaizing teachers came from Jerusalem, [Gal
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#012).

And not as do the Jews - Observing their special customs, and their
distinctions of meats and drinks.

Why compellest thou the Gentiles ... - As he would do, if he insisted
that they should be circumcised, and observe the special Jewish rites.
The charge against him was gross inconsistency in doing this. "Is it not
at least as lawful for them to neglect the Jewish observances, as it was
for thee to do it but a few days ago?" Doddridge. The word here rendered
"compellest," means here moral compulsion or persuasion. The idea is,
that the conduct of Peter was such as to lead the Gentiles to the belief
that it was necessary for them to be circumcised in order to be saved.
For similar use of the word, see [Mat
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#022); [Luk
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#023); [Act
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#019).

[Galatians 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 2:15</span></span>

We who are Jews by nature - It has long been a question whether this and
the following verses are to be regarded as a part of the address of Paul
to Peter, or the words of Paul as a part of the Epistle to the
Galatians. A great variety of opinion has prevailed in regard to this.
Grotius says, "Here the narrative of Paul being closed, he pursues his
argument to the Galatians." In this opinion Bloomfield and many others
concur. Rosenmuller and many others suppose that the address to Peter is
continued to [Gal 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#021). Such seems to
be the most obvious interpretation, as there is no break or change in
the style, nor any vestige of a transfer of the argument to the
Galatians. But, on the other hand, it may be urged:

\(1\) That Paul in his writings often changes his mode of address
without indicating it - Bloomfield.

\(2\) that it is rather improbable that he should have gone into so long
a discourse with Peter on the subject of justification. His purpose was
answered by the reproof of Peter for his dissimulation; and there is
something incongruous, it is said, in his instructing Peter at such
length on the subject of man's justification. Still it appears to me
probable that this is to be regarded as a part of the discourse of Paul
to Peter, to the close of [Gal 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#021).

The following reasons seem to me to require this interpretation:

\(1\) It is the most natural and obvious - usually a safe rule of
interpretation. The discourse proceeds as if it were an address to
Peter.

\(2\) there is a change at the beginning of the next chapter, where Paul
expressly addresses himself to the Galatians.

\(3\) as to the impropriety of Paul's addressing Peter at length on the
subject of justification, we are to bear in mind that he did not address
him alone.

The reproof was addressed to Peter particularly, but it was "before them
all" [Gal 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014); that is, before the
assembled church, or before the persons who had been led astray by the
conduct of Peter, and who were in danger of error on the subject of
justification. Nothing, therefore, was more proper than for Paul to
continue his discourse for their benefit, and to state to them fully the
doctrine of justification. And nothing was more pertinent or proper for
him now titan to report this to the Galatians as a part of his argument
to them, showing that he had always, since his conversion, held and
defended the same doctrine on the subject of the way in which people are
to be justified in the sight of God. It is, therefore, I apprehend, to
be regarded as an address to Peter and the other Jews who were present.
"We who were born Jews."

By nature - By birth; or, we were born Jews. We were not born in the
condition of the Gentiles.

And not sinners of the Gentiles - This cannot mean that Paul did not
regard the Jews as sinners, for his views on that subject he has fully
expressed in Rom. 2; 3. But it must mean that the Jews were not born
under the disadvantages of the Gentiles in regard to the true knowledge
of the way of salvation. They were not left wholly in ignorance about
the way of justification, as the Gentiles were. They knew, or they might
know, that men could not be saved by their own works. It was also true
that they were under more restraint than the Gentiles were, and though
they were sinners, yet they were not abandoned to so gross and open
sensuality as was the pagan world. They were not idolaters, and wholly
ignorant of the Law of God.

[Galatians 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gal 2:16</span></span>

Knowing - We who are Jews by nature, or by birth. This cannot mean that
all the Jews knew this, or that he who was a Jew knew it as a matter of
course, for many Jews were ignorant of it, and many opposed it. But it
means that the persons here referred to, those who had been born Jews,
and who had been converted to Christianity, had had an opportunity to
learn and understand this, which the Gentiles had not. This gospel had
been preached to them, and they had professedly embraced it. They were
not left to the gross darkness and ignorance on this subject which
pervaded the pagan world, and they had had a better opportunity to learn
it than the converts from the Gentiles. They ought, therefore, to act in
a manner becoming their superior light, and to show in all their conduct
that they fully believed that a man could not be justified by obedience
to the Law of Moses. This rendered the conduct of Peter and the other
Jews who "dissembled" with him so entirely inexcusable. They could not
plead ignorance on this vital subject, and yet they were pursuing a
course, the tendency of which was to lead the Gentile converts to
believe that it was indispensable to observe the laws of Moses, in order
to be justified and saved.

That a man is not justified by the works of the law - See the notes at
[Rom 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017); [Rom
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020), [Rom
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026); [Rom
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005).

But by the faith of Jesus Christ - By believing on Jesus Christ; see the
[Mar 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016) note; [Rom
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022) note.

Even we have believed in Jesus Christ - We are therefore justified. The
object of Paul here seems to be to show, that as they had believed in
the Lord Jesus, and thus had been justified, there was no necessity of
obeying the Law of Moses with any view to justification. The thing had
been fully done without the deeds of the Law, and it was now
unreasonable and unnecessary to insist on the observance of the Mosaic
rites.

For by the works of the law ... - See the notes at [Rom
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020), [Rom
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#027). In this verse, the apostle has
stated in few words the important doctrine of justification by faith -
the doctrine which Luther so justly called, Articulus stantis, vel
cadentis ecclesioe. In the notes referred to above, particularly in the
notes at the Epistle to the Romans, I have stated in various places what
I conceive to be the true doctrine on this important subject. It may be
useful, however, to throw together in one connected view, as briefly as
possible, the leading ideas on the subject of justification, as it is
revealed in the gospel.

I. Justification is properly a word applicable to courts of justice, but
is used in a similar sense in common conversation among people. An
illustration will show its nature. A man is charged, e. g., with an act
of trespass on his neighbor's property. Now there are two ways which he
may take to justify himself, or to meet the charge, so as to be regarded
and treated as innocent. He may:

\(a\) Either deny that he performed the act charged on him, or he may,

\(b\) Admit that the deed was done, and set up as a defense that he had
a right to do it.

In either case, if the point is made out, he will be just or innocent in
the sight of the Law. The Law will have nothing against him, and he will
be regarded and treated in the premises as an innocent man; or he has
justified himself in regard to the charge brought against him.

II\. Charges of a very serious nature are brought against man by his
Maker. He is charged with violating the Law of God; with a want of love
to his Maker; with a corrupt, proud, sensual heart; with being entirely
alienated from God by wicked works; in one word, with being entirely
depraved. This charge extends to all people; and to the entire life of
every unrenewed person. It is not a charge merely affecting the external
conduct, nor merely affecting the heart; it is a charge of entire
alienation from God; a charge, in short, of total depravity; see,
especially, Rom. 1; 2; 3. That this charge is a very serious one, no one
can doubt. That it deeply affects the human character and standing, is
as clear. It is a charge brought in the Bible; and God appeals in proof
of it to the history of the world, to every man's conscience, and to the
life of every one who has lived; and on these facts, and on his own
power in searching the hearts, and in knowing what is in man, he rests
the proofs of the charge.

III\. It is impossible for man to vindicate himself from this charge. He
can neither show that the things charged have not been committed, nor
that, having been committed, he had a right to do them. He cannot prove
that God is not right in all the charges which he has made against him
in his word; and he cannot prove that it was right for him to do as he
has done. The charges against him are facts which are undeniable, and
the facts are such as cannot be vindicated. But if he can do neither of
these things, then he cannot be justified by the Law. The Law will not
acquit him. It holds him guilty. It condemns him. No argument which he
can use will show that he is right, and that God is wrong. No works that
he can perform will be any compensation for what he has already done. No
denial of the existence of the facts charged will alter the ease; and he
must stand condemned by the Law of God. In the legal sense he cannot be
justified; and justification, if it ever exist at all, must be in a mode
that is a departure from the regular operation of law, and in a mode
which the Law did not contemplate, for no law makes any provision for
the pardon of those who violate it. It must be by some system which is
distinct from the Law, and in which man may be justified on different
principles than those which the Law contemplates.

IV\. This other system of justification is that which is revealed in the
gospel by the faith of the Lord Jesus. It does not consist in either of
the following things:

\(1\) It is not a system or plan where the Lord Jesus takes the part of
the sinner against the Law or against God. He did not come to show that
the sinner was right, and that God was wrong. He admitted most fully,
and endeavored constantly to show, that God was right, and that the
sinner was wrong; nor can an instance be referred to where the Saviour
took the part of the sinner against God in any such sense that he
endeavored to show that the sinner had not done the things charged on
him, or that he had a right to do them.

\(2\) it is not that we are either innocent, or are declared to be
innocent. God justifies the "ungodly," [Rom
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005). We are not innocent; we never
have been; we never shall be; and it is not the design of the scheme to
declare any such untruth as that we are not personally undeserving. It
will be always true that the justified sinner has no claims to the mercy
and favor of God.

\(3\) it is not that we cease to be undeserving personally. He that is
justified by faith, and that goes to heaven, will go there admitting
that he deserves eternal death, and that he is saved wholly by favor and
not by desert.

\(4\) it is not a declaration on the part of God that we have worked out
salvation, or that we have any claim for what the Lord Jesus has done.
Such a declaration would not be true, and would not be made.

\(5\) it is not that the righteousness of the Lord Jesus is transferred
to his people.

Moral character cannot be transferred. It adheres to the moral agent as
much as color does to the rays of light which cause it. It is not true
that we died for sin, and it cannot be so reckoned or imputed. It is not
true that we have any merit, or any claim, and it cannot be so reckoned
or imputed. All the imputations of God are according to truth; and he
will always reckon us to be personally undeserving and sinful. But if
justification is none of these things, it may be asked, what is it? I
answer - It is the declared purpose of God to regard and treat those
sinners who believe in the Lord Jesus Christ as if they had not sinned,
on the ground of the merits of the Saviour. It is not mere pardon. The
main difference between pardon and justification respects the sinner
contemplated in regard to his past conduct, and to God's future dealings
with him. Pardon is a free forgiveness of past offences.

It has reference to those sins as forgiven and blotted out. It is an act
of remission on the part of God. Justification has respect to the Law,
and to God's future dealings with the sinner. It is an act by which God
determines to treat him hereafter as a righteous man, or as if he had
not sinned. The ground or reason of this is, the merit of the Lord Jesus
Christ; merit such that we can plead it as if it were our own. The
rationale of it is that the Lord Jesus has accomplished by his death the
same happy effects in regard to the Law and the government of God, which
would have been accomplished by the death of the sinner himself. In
other words, nothing would be gained to the universe by the everlasing
punishment of the offender himself, which will not be secured by his
salvation on the ground of the death of the Lord Jesus. He has taken our
place, and died in our stead; and he has met the descending stroke of
justice, which would have fallen on our own head if he had not
interposed (see my notes at Isa. 53) and now the great interests of
justice will be as firmly secured if we are saved, as they would be if
we were lost.

The Law has been fully obeyed by one who came to save us, and as much
honor has been done to it by his obedience as could have been by our
own; that is, it as much shows that the Law is worthy of obedience to
have it perfectly obeyed by the Lord Jesus, as it would if it were
obeyed by us. It as much shows that the Law of a sovereign is worthy of
obedience to have it obeyed by an only son and an heir to the crown, as
it does to have it obeyed by his subjects. And it has as much shown the
evil of the violation of the Law to have the Lord Jesus suffer death on
the cross, as it would if the guilty had died themselves. If
transgression whelm the innocent in calamity; if it extends to those who
are perfectly guiltless, and inflicts pain and woe on them, it is as
certainly an expression of the evil of transgression as if the guilty
themselves suffer. And an impression as deep has been made of the evil
of sin by the sufferings of the Lord Jesus in our stead, as if we had
suffered ourselves.

He endured on the cross as intense agony as we can conceive it possible
for a sinner ever to endure; and the dignity of the person who suffered,
the incarnate God, is more than an equivalent for the more lengthened
sorrows which the penalty of the Law exacts in hell. Besides, from the
very dignity of the sufferer in our place, an impression has gone abroad
on the universe more deep and important than would have been by the
sufferings of the individual himself in the world of woe. The sinner who
is lost will be unknown to other worlds. His name may be unheard beyond
the gates of the prison of despair. The impression which will be made on
distant worlds by his individual sufferings will be as a part of the
aggregate of woe, and his individual sorrows may make no impression on
distant worlds. But not so with him who took our place. He stood in the
center of the universe. The sun grew dark, and the dead arose, and
angels gazed upon the scene, and from his cross an impression went
abroad to the farthest part of the universe, showing the tremendous
effects of the violation of law, when not one soul could be saved from
its penalty without such sorrows of the Son of God. In virtue of all
this, the offender, by believing on him, may be treated as if he had not
sinned; and this constitutes justification. God admits him to favor as
if he had himself obeyed the Law, or borne its penalty, since as many
good results will now follow from His salvation as could be derived from
his punishment; and since all the additional happy results will follow
which can be derived from the exercise of pardoning mercy. The character
of God is thus revealed. His mercy is shown. His determination to
maintain his law is evinced. The truth is maintained; and yet he shows
the fulness of his mercy and the richness of his benevolence.

(The reader will find the above objections to the doctrine of imputation
fully considered in the supplementary notes on [Rom
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005); see especially the note at [Rom
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003), in which it is observed, that
almost every objection against the imputation of righteousness may be
traced to two sources. The first of these is the idea that Christ's
righteousness becomes ours, in the same sense that it is his, namely, of
personal achievement; an idea continually rejected by the friends, and
as often proceeded on by the enemies, of imputation. The second source
is the idea that imputation involves a transference of moral character,
whereas the imputing and the infusing of righteousness are allowed to be
two very different things. Now, in this place, the commentator
manifestly proceeds on these mistaken views. What does he mean by
"transference of the righteousness of Christ" when he says,
"justification is not that the righteousness of the Lord Jesus is
transferred to his people?" What follows, at once explains. "Moral
character," he continues, "cannot be transferred. It adheres to the
moral agent, as much as color does to the rays of light which cause it."
But this is quite aside from the subject, and proves what never had been
denied. The same remarks apply with equal force to what is said about
our being "always personally undeserving," and never regarded as having
ourselves actually "wrought out salvation." These objections belong to
the first source of misconception noticed above.

It has been asked a thousand times, and the question is most pertinent,
How can God treat believers as innocent, if there be not some sense in
which they are so? "The imputations of God are according to truth," so
is his treatment. The author tells us, that the ground of justification
is the "merits of the Saviour," which phrase he prefers throughout, to
the more scriptural and more appropriate one of the righteousness of
Christ; more appropriate, because the subject if forensic, belonging to
judicature and dealing in matters of law; see Hervey's reply to Wesley,
vol. iv. p. 33. Yet if these merits, or this righteousness, be not
imputed to us - held as ours - how can we be justified on any such
ground? "I would further observe," says Mr. Hervey, replying to Wesley
in the publication just quoted, "that you have dropped the word
'imputed,'" which inclines me to suspect you would cashier the thing.
But let me ask, Sir, how can we be justified by the merits of Christ,
unless they are imputed to us? Would the payment made by a surety
procure a discharge for the debtor, unless it were placed to his
account? It is certain the sacrifices of old could not make an
atonement, unless they were imputed to each offerer respectively. This
was an ordinance settled by Yahweh himself, [Lev
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#018). And were not the sacrifices, was
not their imputation, typical of Christ and things pertaining to Christ,
the former prefiguring his all-sufficient expiation; the latter
shadowing forth the way whereby we are partakers of its efficacy?

The language of President Edwards, the prince of American clergymen,
indeed of theologians universally, is decisive enough, and one would
think that the opinion of this master in reasoning should have its
weight on the other side of the Atlantic. "It is absolutely necessary,"
says he, "that in order to a sinner's being justified, the righteousness
of some other should be reckoned to his account; for it is declared,
that the person justified is looked on as, in himself, ungodly: but God
neither will nor can justify a person without a righteousness; for
justification is manifestly a forensic term, as the word is used in
scripture, and a judicial thing or the act of a judge; so that if a
person should be justified without a righteousness, the judgment would
not be according to truth. The sentence of justification would be a
false sentence, unless there be a righteousness performed, that is, by
the Judge properly looked upon as his."

Nor are we sure, if our author's distinction between pardon and
justification be altogether accurate. By those who deny imputed
righteousness, justification is frequently said to consist in the mere
remission of sin. In a recent American publication, the views of the
"new school party" are thus given: "Though they retain the word
justification, they make it consist in mere pardon. In the eye of the
Law, the believer, according to their views, is not justified at all,
and never will be throughout eternity. Though on the ground of what
Christ has done, God is pleased to forgive the sinner upon his
believing, Christ's righteousness is not reckoned in any sense as his,
or set down to his account. He believes, and his faith or act of
believing is accounted to him for righteousness; that is, faith is so
reckoned to His account that God treats him as if he were righteous" -
Old and New Theology, by James Wood. Now Mr. Barnes does not exactly say
that justification and pardon are the same, for he makes a distinction.
"The main difference between the two respects the sinner contemplated in
regard to his past conduct, and to God's future dealings with him."
"Pardon is a free forgiveness of least offences. Justification has
respect to the Law and to God's future dealings."

But this difference is not respecting the nature of the things. It is
simply a matter of time, of past and future; and justification, after
all, is neither more nor less than pardon of sins past and to come. A
criminal is often pardoned while his guilt is still allowed. To exalt
pardon to justification there most be supposed a righteousness on the
ground of which not only is sin forgiven, but the person accepted and
declared legally righteous. And in this lies the main difference between
the two. In the case of the believer however these are never found
apart. Whoever is pardoned is at the same time justified. Earthly
princes sometimes remit the punishment of crime, but seldom or never
dream of honoring the criminal; but wherever God pardons, he dignifies
and ennobles.

[Galatians 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 2:17</span></span>

But if, while we seek to be justified by Christ - The connection here is
not very clear, and the sense of the verse is somewhat obscure.
Rosenmuller supposes that this is an objection of a Jew, supposing that
where the Law of Moses is not observed there is no rule of life, and
that therefore there must be sin; and that since the doctrine of
justification by faith taught that there was no necessity of obeying the
ceremonial law of Moses, therefore Christ, who had introduced that
system, must be regarded as the author and encourager of sin. To me it
seems probable that Paul here has reference to an objection which has in
all ages been brought against the doctrine of justification by faith,
and which seems to have existed in his time, that the doctrine leads to
licentiousness. The objections are that it does not teach the necessity
of the observance of the Law in order to acceptance with God. That it
pronounces a man justified and accepted who is a violator of the Law.
That his acceptance does not depend on moral character.

That it releases him from the obligation of law, and that it teaches
that a man may be saved though he does not conform to law. These
objections existed early, and have been found everywhere where the
doctrine of justification by faith has been preached. I regard this
verse, therefore, as referring to these objections, and not as being
especially the objection of a Jew. The idea is, "You seek to be
justified by faith without obeying the Law. You professedly reject that,
and do not hold that it is necessary to yield obedience to it. If now it
shall turn out that you are sinners; that your lives are not holy; that
you are free from the wholesome restraint of the Law, and are given up
to lives of sin, will it not follow that Christ is the cause of it; that
he taught it; and that the system which he introduced is responsible for
it? And is not the gospel therefore responsible for introducing a system
that frees from the restraint of the Law, and introduces universal
licentiousness?" To this Paul replies by stating distinctly that the
gospel has no such tendency, and particularly by referring in the
following verses to his own case, and to the effect of the doctrine of
justification on his own heart and life.

We ourselves are found sinners - If it turns out that we are sinners, or
if others discover by undoubted demonstration that we lead lives of sin;
if they see us given up to a lawless life, and find us practicing all
kinds of evil; if it shall be seen not only that we are not pardoned and
made better by the gospel, but are actually made worse, and are freed
from all moral restraint.

Is therefore Christ the minister of sin? - Is it to be traced to him? Is
it a fair and legitimate conclusion that this is the tendency of the
gospel? Is it to be charged on him, and on the plan of justification
through him, that a lax morality prevails, and that people are freed
from the wholesome restraints of law?

God forbid - It is not so. This is not the proper effect of the gospel
of Christ, and of the doctrine of justification by faith. The system is
not suited to produce such a freedom from restraint, and if such a
freedom exists, it is to be traced to something else than the gospel.

[Galatians 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gal 2:18</span></span>

For if I build again the things which I destroyed - Paul here uses the
first person; but he evidently intends it as a general proposition, and
means that if anyone does it he becomes a transgressor. The sense is,
that if a man, having removed or destroyed that which was evil, again
introduces it or establishes it, he does wrong, and is a transgressor of
the Law of God. The particular application here, as it seems to me, is
to the subject of circumcision and the other rites of the Mosaic law.
They had been virtually abolished by the coming of the Redeemer, and by
the doctrine of justification by faith. It had been seen that there was
no necessity for their observance, and of that Peter and the others had
been fully aware. Yet they were lending their influence again to
establish them or to build them up again. They complied with them, and
they insisted on the necessity of their observance. Their conduct,
therefore, was that of building up again that which had once been
destroyed, destroyed by the ministry, and toils, and death of the Lord
Jesus, and by the fair influence of his gospel. To rebuild that again;
to re-establish those customs, was wrong, and now involved the guilt of
a transgression of the Law of God. Doddridge supposes that this is an
address to the Galatians, and that the address to Peter closed at the
previous verse. But it is impossible to determine this; and it seems to
me more probable that this is all a part of the address to Peter; or
rather perhaps to the assembly when Peter was present; see the note at
[Gal 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015).

[Galatians 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gal 2:19</span></span>

For I through the law - On this passage the commentators are by no means
agreed. It is agreed that in the phrase "am dead to the law," the Law of
Moses is referred to, and that the meaning is, that Paul had become dead
to that as a ground or means of justification. He acted as though it
were not; or it ceased to have influence over him. A dead man is
insensible to all around him. He hears nothing; sees nothing; and
nothing affects him. So when we are said to be dead to anything, the
meaning is, that it does not have an influence over us. In this sense
Paul was dead to the Law of Moses. He ceased to observe it as a ground
of justification. It ceased to be the grand aim and purpose of his life,
as it had been formerly, to obey it. He had higher purposes than that,
and truly lived to God; see the note at [Rom
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002). But on the meaning of the phrase
"through the law" (διὰ νόμου dia nomou) there has been a great variety
of opinion.

Bloomfield, Rosenmuller, and some others suppose that he means the
Christian religion, and that the meaning is, "by one law, or doctrine, I
am dead to another;" that is, the Christian doctrine has caused me to
cast aside the Mosaic religion. Doddridge, Clarke, Chandler, and most
others, however, suppose that he here refers to the Law of Moses, and
that the meaning is, that by contemplating the true character of the Law
of Moses itself; by considering its nature and design; by understanding
the extent of its requisitions, he had become dead to it; that is, he
had laid aside all expectations of being justified by it. This seems to
me to be the correct interpretation. Paul had formerly expected to be
justified by the Law. He had endeavored to obey it. It had been the
object of his life to comply with all its requisitions in order to be
saved by it; [Phi 3:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#004). But all this
while he had not fully understood its nature; and when he was made fully
to feel and comprehend its spiritual requirements, then all his hopes of
justification by it died, and he became dead to it; see this sentiment
more fully explained in the note at [Rom
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#009).

That I might live unto God - That I might be truly alive, and might be
found engaged in his service. He was dead to the Law, but not to every
thing. He had not become literally inactive and insensible to all
things, like a dead man, but he had become truly sensible to the
commands and appeals of God, and had consecrated himself to his service;
see the note at [Rom 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011).

[Galatians 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gal 2:20</span></span>

I am crucified with Christ - In the previous verse, Paul had said that
he was dead. In this verse he states what he meant by it, and shows that
he did not wish to be understood as saying that he was inactive, or that
he was literally insensible to the appeals made to him by other beings
and objects. In respect to one thing he was dead; to all that was truly
great and noble he was alive. To understand the remarkable phrase, "I am
crucified with Christ," we may remark:

\(1\) That this was the way in which Christ was put to death. He
suffered on a cross, and thus became literally dead.

\(2\) in a sense similar to this, Paul became dead to the Law, to the
world, and to sin. The Redeemer by the death of the cross became
insensible to all surrounding objects, as the dead always are. He ceased
to see, and hear, and was as though they were not. He was laid in the
cold grave, and they did not affect or influence him. So Paul says that
he became insensible to the Law as a means of justification; to the
world; to ambition and the love of money; to the pride and pomp of life,
and to the dominion of evil and hateful passions. They lost their power
over him; they ceased to influence him.

\(3\) this was with Christ, or by Christ. It cannot mean literally that
he was put to death with him, for that is not true. But it means that
the effect of the death of Christ on the cross was to make him dead to
these things, in like manner as he, when he died, became insensible to
the things of this busy world. This may include the following things:

\(a\) There was an intimate union between Christ and his people, so that
what affected him, affected them; see [Joh
15:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005).

\(b\) The death of the Redeemer on the cross involved as a consequence
the death of his people to the world and to sin; see [Gal
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#024); [Gal
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014). It was like a blow at the root
of a vine or a tree, which would affect every branch and tendril or like
a blow at the head which affects every member of the body.

\(c\) Paul felt identified with the Lord Jesus; and he was willing to
share in all the ignominy and contempt which was connected with the idea
of the crucifixion. He was willing to regard himself as one with the
Redeemer. If there was disgrace attached to the manner in which he died,
he was willing to share it with him. He regarded it as a matter to be
greatly desired to be made just like Christ in all things, and even in
the manner of his death. This idea he has more fully expressed in [Phi
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010), "That I may know him, (that is,
I desire earnestly to know him,) and the power of his resurrection, and
the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his
death;" see also [Col 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024); compare
[Pe1 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#013).

Nevertheless I live - This expression is added, as in [Gal
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019), to prevent the possibility of
mistake. Paul, though he was crucified with Christ, did not wish to be
understood that he felt himself to be dead. He was not inactive; not
insensible, as the dead are, to the appeals which are made from God, or
to the great objects which ought to interest an immortal mind. He was
still actively employed, and the more so from the fact that he was
crucified with Christ. The object of all such expressions as this is, to
show that it was no design of the gospel to make people inactive, or to
annihilate their energies. It was not to cause people to do nothing. It
was not to paralyze their powers, or stifle their own efforts. Paul,
therefore, says, "I am not dead. I am truly alive; and I live a better
life than I did before." Paul was as active after conversion as he was
before. Before, he was engaged in persecution; now, he devoted his great
talents with as much energy, and with as untiring zeal, to the cause of
the great Redeemer. Indeed, the whole narrative would lead us to suppose
that he was more active and zealous after his conversion than he was
before. The effect of religion is not to make one dead in regard to the
putting forth of the energies of the soul. True religion never made one
lazy man; it has converted many a man of indolence, and effeminacy and
self-indulgence to a man actively engaged in doing good. If a professor
of religion is less active in the service at God than he was in the
service of the world; less laborious, and zealous. and ardent than he
was before his supposed conversion, he ought to set it down as full
proof that he is an utter stranger to true religion.

Yet not I - This is also designed to prevent misapprehension. In the
previous clause he had said that he lived, or was actively engaged. But
lest this should he misunderstood, and it should be inferred that he
meant to say it was by his own energy or powers, he guards it, and says
it was not at all from himself. It was by no native tendency; no power
of his own; nothing that could be traced to himself. He assumed no
credit for any zeal which he had shown in the true life. He was disposed
to trace it all to another. He had ample proof in his past experience
that there was no tendency in himself to a life of true religion, and he
therefore traced it all to another.

Christ liveth in me - Christ was the source of all the life that he had.
Of course this cannot be taken literally that Christ had a residence in
the apostle, but it must mean that his grace resided in him; that his
principles actuated him: and that he derived all his energy, and zeal,
and life from his grace. The union between the Lord Jesus and the
disciple was so close that it might be said the one lived in the other.
So the juices of the vine are in each branch, and leaf, and tendril, and
live in them and animate them; the vital energy of the brain is in each
delicate nerve - no matter how small - that is found in any part of the
human frame. Christ was in him as it were the vital principle. All his
life and energy were derived from him.

And the life which I now live in the flesh - As I now live on the earth
surrounded by the cares and anxieties of this life. I carry the
life-giving principles of my religion to all my duties and all my
trials.

I live by the faith of the Son of God - By confidence in the Son of God,
looking to him for strength, and trusting in his promises, and in his
grace. Who loved me, etc. He felt under the highest obligation to him
from the fact that he had loved him, and given himself to the death of
the cross in his behalf. The conviction of obligation on this account
Paul often expresses; see the [Rom
6:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008); 8:35-39 notes; [Co2
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#015) note. There is no higher sense of
obligation than that which is felt toward the Saviour; and Paul felt
himself bound, as we should, to live entirely to him who had redeemed
him by his blood.

[Galatians 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gal 2:21</span></span>

I do not frustrate the grace of God - The word rendered "frustrate"
(ἀθετῶ athetō) means properly to displace, abrogate, abolish; then to
make void, to render null; [Mar 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#009);
[Luk 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#030); [Co1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#019). The phrase "the grace of God,"
here refers to the favor of God manifested in the plan of salvation by
the gospel, and is another name for the gospel. The sense is, that Paul
would not take any measures or pursue any course that would render that
vain or inefficacious. Neither by his own life, by a course of conduct
which would show that it had no influence over the heart and conduct,
nor by the observance of Jewish rites and customs, would he do anything
to render that inefficacious. The design is to show that he regarded it
as a great principle that the gospel was efficacious in renewing and
saving man, and he would do nothing that would tend to prevent that
impression on mankind. A life of sin, of open depravity and
licentiousness, would do that. And in like manner a conformity to the
rites of Moses as a ground of justification would tend to frustrate the
grace of God, or to render the method of salvation solely by the
Redeemer nugatory. This is to be regarded, therefore as at the same time
a reproof of Peter for complying with customs which tended to frustrate
the plan of the gospel, and a declaration that he intended that his own
course of life should be such as to confirm the plan, and show its
efficacy in pardoning the sinner and rendering him alive in the service
of God.

For if righteousness come by the law - If justification can be secured
by the observance of any law - ceremonial or moral - then there was no
need of the death of Christ as an atonement. This is plain. If man by
conformity to any law could be justified before God, what need was there
of an atonement? The work would then have been wholly in his own power,
and the merit would have been his. It follows from this, that man cannot
be justified by his own morality, or his alms-deeds, or his forms of
religion, or his honesty and integrity. If he can, he needs no Saviour;
he can save himself. It follows also that when people depend on their
own amiableness, and morality, and good works, they would feel no need
of a Saviour; and this is the true reason why the mass of people reject
the Lord Jesus. They suppose they do not deserve to be sent to hell.
They have no deep sense of guilt. They confide in their own integrity,
and feel that God ought to save them. Hence, they feel no need of a
Saviour; for why should a person in health employ a physician? And
confiding in their own righteousness, they reject the grace of God, and
despise the plan of justification through the Redeemer. To feel the need
of a Saviour it is necessary to feel that we are lost and ruined
sinners; that we have no merit upon which we can rely; and that we are
entirely dependent on the mercy of God for salvation. Thus feeling, we
shall receive the salvation of the gospel with thankfulness and joy, and
show that in regard to us Christ is not "dead in vain."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 3](gal003)

</div>
