<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen030)  [Next](gen032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#001)

\- Jacob's Flight from Haran

19\. תרפים terāpı̂ym, Teraphim. This word occurs fifteen times in the Old
Testament. It appears three times in this chapter, and nowhere else in
the Pentateuch. It is always in the plural number. The root does not
appear in Biblical Hebrew. It perhaps means "to live well,"
intransitively (Gesenius, Roedig.), "to nourish," transitively (Furst).
The teraphim were symbols or representatives of the Deity, as Laban
calls them his gods. They seem to have been busts (προτομαί protomai,
Aquila) of the human form, sometimes as large as life [Sa1
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#013). Those of full size were
probably of wood; the smaller ones may have been of metal. In two
passages [Jdg 17:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#001); 18; [Hos
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004) they are six times associated with
the ephod. This intimates either that they were worn on the ephod, like
the Urim and Thummim, or more probably that the ephod was worn on them;
in accordance with which they were employed for the purposes of
divination [Gen 30:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#027); [Zac
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#002). The employment of them in the
worship of God, which Laban seems to have inherited from his fathers
[Jos 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#002), is denounced as idolatry
[Sa1 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#023); and hence, they are
classed with the idols and other abominations put away by Josiah [Kg2
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#024).

47\. שׂהדוּתא יגר yegar-śâhădûtā', Jegar-sahadutha, "cairn of witness"
in the Aramaic dialect of the old Hebrew or Shemite speech. גלעד gal‛ēd,
Gal'ed; and גלעד gı̂l‛ād, Gil'ad, "cairn of witness" in Hebrew especially
so called (see [Gen 11:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#001)).

49\. מצפה mı̂tspâh, Mizpah, "watch-tower."

Jacob had now been twenty years in Laban's service, and was therefore,
ninety-six years of age. It has now become manifest that he cannot
obtain leave of Laban to return home. He must, therefore, either come
off by the high hand, or by secret flight. Jacob has many reasons for
preferring the latter course.

[Gen 31:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#001)

Circumstances at length induce Jacob to propose flight to his wives. His
prosperity provokes the envy and slander of Laban's sons, and Laban
himself becomes estranged. The Lord now commands Jacob to return, and
promises him his presence to protect him. Jacob now opens his mind fully
to Rachel and Leah. Rachel, we observe, is put first. Several new facts
come out in his discourse to them. Ye know - Jacob appeals to his wives
on this point - "that with all my might I served your father." He means,
of course, to the extent of his engagement. During the last six years he
was to provide for his own house, as the Lord permitted him, with the
full knowledge and concurrence of Laban. Beyond this, which is a fair
and acknowledged exception, he has been faithful in keeping the cattle
of Laban. "Your father deceived me, and changed my wages ten times;"
that is, as often as he could.

If, at the end of the first year, he found that Jacob had gained
considerably, though he began with nothing, he might change his wages
every following half-year, and so actually change them ten times in five
years. In this case, the preceding chapter only records his original
expedients, and then states the final result. "God suffered him not to
hurt me." Jacob, we are to remember, left his hire to the providence of
God. He thought himself bound at the same time to use all legitimate
means for the attainment of the desired end. His expedients may have
been perfectly legitimate in the circumstances, but they were evidently
of no avail without the divine blessing. And they would become wholly
ineffectual when his wages were changed. Hence, he says, God took the
cattle and gave them to me. Jacob seems here to record two dreams, the
former of which is dated at the rutting season. The dream indicates the
result by a symbolic representation, which ascribes it rather to the God
of nature than to the man of art. The second dream makes allusion to the
former as a process still going on up to the present time. This appears
to be an encouragement to Jacob now to commit himself to the Lord on his
way home. The angel of the Lord, we observe, announces himself as the
God of Bethel, and recalls to Jacob the pillar and the vow. The angel,
then, is Yahweh manifesting himself to human apprehension.

[Gen 31:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#014)

His wives entirely accord with his view of their father's selfishness in
dealing with his son-in-law, and approve of his intended departure.
Jacob makes all the needful preparations for a hasty and secret flight.
He avails himself of the occasion when Laban is at a distance probably
of three or more days' journey, shearing his sheep. "Rachel stole the
teraphim." It is not the business of Scripture to acquaint us with the
kinds and characteristics of false worship. Hence, we know little of the
teraphim, except that they were employed by those who professed to
worship the true God. Rachel had a lingering attachment to these objects
of her family's superstitious reverence, and secretly carried them away
as relics of a home she was to visit no more, and as sources of safety
to herself against the perils of her flight.

[Gen 31:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#020)

Laban hears of his flight, pursues, and overtakes him. "Stole the
heart," κλέπτειν νοῦν kleptein noun. The heart is the seat of the
understanding in Scripture. To steal the heart of anyone is to act
without his knowledge. The river. The Frat, near which, we may conclude,
Jacob was tending his flocks. Haran was about seventy miles from the
river, and therefore, Laban's flocks were on the other side of Haran.
"Toward mount Gilead;" about three hundred miles from the Frat. "On the
third day." This shows that Laban's flocks kept by his sons were still
three days' journey apart from Jacob's. His brethren - his kindred and
dependents. "Seven days' journey." On the third day after the arrival of
the messenger, Laban might return to the spot whence Jacob had taken his
flight. In this case, Jacob would have at least five days of a start;
which, added to the seven days of pursuit, would give him twelve days to
travel three hundred English miles. To those accustomed to the pastoral
life this was a possible achievement. God appears to Laban on behalf of
Jacob, and warns him not to harm him. "Not to speak from good to bad" is
merely to abstain from language expressing and prefacing violence.

[Gen 31:25-32](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#025)

Laban's expostulation and Jacob's reply. What hast thou done? Laban
intimates that he would have dismissed him honorably and affectionately,
and therefore, that his flight was needless and unkind; and finally
charges him with stealing his gods. Jacob gives him to understand that
he did not expect fair treatment at his hands, and gives him leave to
search for his gods, not knowing that Rachel had taken them.

[Gen 31:33-42](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#033)

After the search for the teraphim has proved vain, Jacob warmly upbraids
Laban. "The camel's saddle." This was a pack-saddle, in the recesses of
which articles might be deposited, and on which was a seat or couch for
the rider. Rachel pleads the custom of women as an excuse for keeping
her seat; which is admitted by Laban, not perhaps from the fear of
ceremonial defilement [Lev 15:19-27](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#019),
as this law was not yet in force, but from respect to his daughter and
the conviction that in such circumstances she would not sit upon the
teraphim. "My brethren and thy brethren" - their common kindred. Jacob
recapitulates his services in feeling terms. "By day the drought;"
caused by the heat, which is extreme during the day, while the cold is
not less severe in Palestine during the night. "The fear of Isaac" - the
God whom Isaac fears. Judged - requited by restraining thee from
wrong-doing.

[Gen 31:43-47](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#043)

Laban, now pacified, if not conscience-stricken, proposes a covenant
between them. Jacob erects a memorial pillar, around which the clan
gather a cairn of stones, which serves by its name for a witness of
their compact. "Jegar-sahadutha." Here is the first decided specimen of
Aramaic, as contradistinguished from Hebrew. Its incidental appearance
indicates a fully formed dialect known to Jacob, and distinct from his
own. Gilead or Galeed remains to this day in Jebel Jel'ad, though the
original spot was further north.

[Gen 31:48-54](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#048)

The covenant is then completed. And Mizpah. This refers to some
prominent cliff from which, as a watch-tower, an extensive view might be
obtained. It was in the northern half of Gilead [Deu
3:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#012), and is noticed in [Jdg
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#029). It is not to be confounded with
other places called by the same name. The reference of this name to the
present occurrence is explained in these two verses. The names Gilead
and Mizpah may have arisen from this transaction, or received a new turn
in consequence of its occurrence. The terms of the covenant are now
formally stated. I have cast. The erection of the pillar was a joint act
of the two parties; in which Laban proposes, Jacob performs, and all
take part. "The God of Abraham, Nahor, and Terah." This is an
interesting acknowledgment that their common ancestor Terah and his
descendants down to Laban still acknowledged the true God even in their
idolatry. Jacob swears by the fear of isaac, perhaps to rid himself of
any error that had crept into Laban's notions of God and his worship.
The common sacrifice and the common meal ratify the covenant of
reconciliation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 32](gen032)

</div>
