<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen009)  [Next](gen011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#001)

[Genesis 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 10:1</span></span>

\- Section VIII - The Nations

\- Japheth

2\. גמר gomer, "Gomer, completion; related: complete;" Κιμμέριοι
Kimmerioi. מגוג māgôg, "Magog, Caucasian, Skyth." מדי māday, "Madai,
middle: Mede." יון yāvān, "Javan"; Ἰάων Iaōn; "Sanskrit, Javana; Old
Persian, Juna." תבל tubāl, "Tubal"; Τιβαρηνοὶ Tibareenoi. משׁך meshek,
"Meshek, drawing possession, valor"; Μόσχοι Moschoi, תירס tı̂yrās,
"Tiras;" Θρᾷξ Thrax.

3\. אשׁכנו 'ashkenaz, "Ashkenaz," Ἀσκάνιος Askanios. ריפת rı̂ypat,
"Riphath," ὄρη Ῥίπαια oree Ripaia, תגרמה togarmâh "Togarmah, Thorgom,
ancestor of the Armenians."

4\. אלישׁה 'elı̂yshâh, "Elishah;" Ἧλις Eelis, Ἑλλὰς Hellas, Αἰολεῖς
Aioleis. תדשׁישׁ tarshı̂ysh, "Tarshish, breaking, fastness: Tartessus,
Tarsus, Tyrseni." כתים kı̂tı̂ym, "Kittim, smiters; Citienses;" Κᾶρες
Kares; דדנים dodānı̂ym, "Dodanim, Dodona, Dardani."

5\. אי 'ı̂y, "meadow, land reached by water, island; related: be marked
off or bounded (by a water line)." גוי gôy, "nation; related: be born;"
γεγάασι gegaasi.

The fifth document relates to the generations of the sons of Noah. It
presents first a genealogy of the nations, and then an account of the
distribution of mankind into nations, and their dispersion over the
earth. This is the last section which treats historically of the whole
human race. Only in incidental, didactic, or prophetic passages do we
again meet with mankind as a whole in the Old Testament.

The present chapter signalizes a new step in the development of the
human race. They pass from the one family to the seventy nations. This
great process covers the space of time from Noah to Abraham. During this
period the race was rapidly increasing under the covenant made with
Noah. From Shem to Abraham were ten generations inclusive; and,
therefore, if we suppose the same rate of increase after as we have
supposed before, there would be about fifteen million inhabitants when
Abraham was thirty years of age. If, however, we take eight as the
average of a family, and suppose eleven generations after Shem at the
one hundredth year of Abraham's life, we have about thirty million
people on the earth. The average of the three sons of Noah is higher
than this; for they had sixteen sons, and we may suppose as many
daughters, making in all thirty-two, and, therefore, giving ten children
to each household. The present chapter does not touch on the religious
aspect of human affairs: it merely presents a table of the primary
nations, from which all subsequent nationalities have been derived.

[Gen 10:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#001)

The sons of Japheth. - Japheth is placed first, because he was, most
probably, the oldest brother [Gen
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#024); [Gen
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021), and his descendants were the
most numerous and most widely spread from the birthplace of mankind. The
general description of their territory is "the isles of the nations."
These were evidently maritime countries, or such as were reached by sea.
These coastlands were pre-eminently, but not exclusively, the countries
bordering on the north side of the Mediterranean and its connected
waters. They are said to belong to the nations, because the national
form of association was more early and fully developed among them than
among the other branches of the race. There is, probably, a relic of
Japheth in the, Ιαπετὸς Iapetos, Japetus of the Greeks, said to be the
son of Uranus (heaven), and Gaea (earth), and father of Prometheus, and
thus in some way connected with the origin or preservation of the human
race.

Fourteen of the primitive nations spring from Japheth. Seven of these
are of immediate descent.

\(1\) Gomer is mentioned again, in Ezekiel [Eze
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#006), as the ally of Gog, by which the
known existence of the nation at that period is indicated. Traces of
this name are perhaps found in the Κιμμέριοι Kimmerioi, (Homer, Odyssey
[Eze 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#014); Herodotus [Eze
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015); [Eze
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#012)), who lay in the dark north, in
the Krimea, the Kimbri who dwelt in north Germany, the Kymry, Cambri,
and Cumbri who occupied Britain. These all belong to the race now called
Keltic, the first wave of population that reached the Atlantic. Thus,
the Γομαρεῖς Gomareis, of Josephus (Ant. 1:6.1) may even be identified
with the Galatae. This nation seems to have lain to the north of the
Euxine, and to have spread out along the southern coasts of the Baltic
into France, Spain, and the British Isles.

\(2\) Magog is mentioned, by Ezekiel [Eze
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#006), as the people of which Gog was
the prince. It is introduced in the Apocalypse [Rev
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008), as a designation of the remote
nations who had penetrated to the ends or corners of the earth. This
indicates a continually progressing people, occupying the north of
Europe and Asia, and crossing, it may be, over into America. They seem
to have been settled north of the Caspian, and to have wandered north
and east from that point. They are accordingly identified by Josephus
(Ant. 1:6.1) with the Skyths, and include the Mongols among other
Skythic tribes.

\(3\) Madai has given name to the Medes, who occupied the southern shore
of the Caspian. From this region they penetrated southward to Hindostan.

\(4\) Javan is traced in the Ιάονες Iaones, Iones, who settled in the
coasts of the Aegean, in Peloponnesus, Attica, and subsequently on the
coast of Asia Minor, and accordingly denotes the Greeks in the language
of the Old Testament [Isa 66:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#019); [Eze
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#013); [Dan
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#021). The name Yunau is found in the
cuneiform inscriptions of the times of Sargon, referring to a western
people.

\(5\) Tubal and (6) Meshek are generally associated. ([Eze
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#013); 38; 39) connects them, on the
one hand, with Magog, and on the other, with Javan. Josephus (Ant.
1:6.1) finds Tubal in Iberia, and Meshek in Cappadocia, tracing the name
in Mazaca. Their names are seemingly detected in the Tibareni and
Moschi, and their seat was probably between the Euxine and the Caspian,
whence they spread themselves northward and westward. The names of the
rivers Tobal and Mosqua bear a strong resemblance to these patriarchal
names.

\(7\) Tiras is referred by Josephus to Thrace. The name is perhaps
discernible in the Tyras or Dniester. The seat of the nation was east of
the Euxine, whence it spread to the north. Thus, we have the original
starting-points of these seven nations about the Caspian, the Euxine,
and the Aegean Seas.

[Gen 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#003)

Gomer has three sons, who are the founders of as many nations.

\(8\) Ashkenaz is supposed to have lain south of the Euxine, and to be
traceable in its original name ἄξενος axenos, and in the Ascanius and
Ascania of Bithynia, perhaps in Scandinavia. Part of the nation may have
migrated to Germany, which is called Ashkenaz by the Jews, and where the
word Sachsen (Saxon) occurs. It perhaps contains the root of the name
Asia.

\(9\) Riphath seems to have travelled north, and left his name in the
Rhipaean mountains. Josephus, however, places him in Paphlagonia, where
the name Tobata occurs (Diphath) [Ch1
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#006).

\(10\) Togarmah is said to have been settled in Armenia. By a tradition
in Moses Chorenensis, Haik, the ancestor of the Armenians, is the son of
Thorgom, the son of Gomer. At all events, the Black Sea might convey
colonies from Gomer to Asia Minor and Armenia.

[Gen 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#004)

Javan has four sons, who are the heads of nations.

\(11\) Elishah is noted by Ezekiel [Eze
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#007) as a nation whose maritime
country produced purple, which agrees with the coast of Laconia or the
Corinthian Gulf. The name has been variously sought in Elis, Hellas, and
Aeolis. The last is due to Josephus. It is possible that Elea or Velia,
in the south of Italy, may contain some reference to the name.

\(12\) Tarshish is conjectured by Josephus to be the people of Cilicia;
which, he affirms, was anciently called Tharsus, and the capital of
which was Tarsus. But whether this be the primitive seat of Tarshish or
not, it is almost certain that Spain retains the name, if not in
Tarraco, at least in Tartessus.

\(13\) Kittim is discovered, by Josephus, in Cyprus, where we meet with
the town of Citium Κίτιον Kition. He adds, however, that all the islands
and the greater part of the seacoasts are called Χεδίμ Chedim by the
Hebrews. We may therefore presume that the Kittim spread into northern
Greece, where we have a Κίτιον Kition in Macedonia, and ultimately into
Italy, which is designated as "the isles of Kittim" [Num
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#024); [Isa
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001); [Jer
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010); [Eze
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#006); [Dan
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#030).

\(14\) Dodanim leaves a trace, perhaps, in Dodona, an ancient site of
the Hellenes in Epirus, and perhaps in Dardania, a district of
Illyricum.

[Gen 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#005)

Thus, we have discovered the ancient seats of Japheth, Iapetos - ,
around the Caspian, the Euxine, the Aegean, and the north of the
Mediterranean. From these coastlands they seem to have spread over
Europe, northern, western, and southern Asia, and, both by Behring's
Straits and the Atlantic, they at length poured into America. So true is
it that Japheth was enlarged, and that by them were "the isles of the
nations divided."

In their nations. - We here note the characteristics of a nation. First.
It is descended from one head. Others may be occasionally grafted on the
original stock by intermarriage. But there is a vital union subsisting
between all the members and the head, in consequence of which the name
of the head is applied to the whole body of the nation. In the case of
Kittim and Dodanim we seem to have the national name thrown back upon
the patriarchs, who may have themselves been called Keth and Dodan.
Similar instances occur in the subsequent parts of the genealogy.
Second. A nation has a country or "land" which it calls its own. In the
necessary migrations of ancient tribes, the new territories appropriated
by the tribe, or any part of it, were naturally called by the old name,
or some name belonging to the old country. This is well illustrated by
the name of Gomer, which seems to reappear in the Cimmerii, the Cimbri,
the Cymri, the Cambri, and the Cumbri. Third. A nation has its own
"tongue." This constitutes at once its unity in itself and its
separation from others. Many of the nations in the table may have spoken
cognate tongues, or even originally the same tongue. Thus, the
Kenaanite, Phoenician, and Punic nations had the same stock of languages
with the Shemites. But it is a uniform law, that one nation has only one
speech within itself. Fourth. A nation is composed of many "families,"
clans, or tribes. These branch off from the nation in the same manner as
it did from the parent stock of the race.

[Genesis 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 10:6</span></span>

\- XXXII. Ham

6\. מצרים mı̂tsrayı̂m, "Mitsraim." מצר mētser, "straitness, limit,
pressure." מצור mātsôr, "distress, siege, mound, bulwark; Egypt." מצרים
mı̂tsrayı̂m, "perhaps double Egypt, lower and upper." פוּט pûṭ, "Put,
troubled."

7\. סבא sebā', "Seba, drinking (man, Ethiopian)." סבתה sabtâh, "Sabtah."
רעמה ra‛mâh, "Ra'mah, shaking, trembling." סבתכא sabtekā', "Sabtekha."
שׁבא shēbā', "Sheba, captive?" דדן dedān, "Dedan, going slowly?"

8\. נמרד nı̂mrod, "Nimrod, strong, rebel."

10\. בבל bābel, "Babel; related: pour, mingle, confound." ארך 'erek,
"Erek, length." אכד 'akad, "Akkad, fortress." כלנה kalneh, "Kalneh."
שׁנער shı̂n‛ār, "Shin'ar."

11\. נינוה nı̂ynevēh, "Nineveh, dwelling?" עיר רחבח rechobot 'ı̂yr,
"Rechoboth 'ir, streets of a city." כלח kelach, "Kelach, completion,
end, age."

12\. רסן resen, "Resen, bridle, bit."

13\. לוּדים lûdı̂ym, "Ludim, born?" ענמים ‛ǎnāmı̂ym, "'Anamim, possession,
sheep. להבים lı̂hābı̂ym, "Lehabim, fiery, flaming?" נפתהים naptuchı̂ym,
"Naphtuchim, opening."

14\. פתרסים patrusı̂ym, "Pathrusim." כסלחים kasluchı̂ym, "Kasluchim."
פלשׁתים pelı̂shtı̂ym, "Pelishtim", Αλλόφυλοι Allophuloi, "related: break,
scatter; Aethiopic "migrate." כפתרים kaptorı̂ym, "Kaphtorim; related:
crown, capital."

15\. צידון tsı̂ydon, "Tsidon, hunting." צת chēt, "Cheth, breaking,
affrighting."

16\. יבוּסי yebûsı̂y, "Jebusi; related: tread." אמרי 'emorı̂y, "Emori;
related: Say, be high." גגשׁי gı̂rgāshı̂y, "Girgashi; related: clay,
clod."

17\. צוּי chı̂vı̂y, "Chivvi; related: live." ערקי ‛arqı̂y, "'Arqi; related:
gnaw, sting." סיני sı̂ynı̂y, "Sini; related: mud, clay."

18\. ארודי 'arvādı̂y, "Arvadi; related: roam, ramble." צמרי; tsemārı̂y,
"Tsemari; noun: wool; verb: cover." חמתי chāmātı̂y, "Chamathi; noun:
fastness; verb: guard."

19\. גרר gerār, "Gerar; related: draw, saw, abide." עזה 'azâh, 'Azzah,
strong." סדם sedom, "Sodom; related: shut, stop." עמרה 'amorâh,
"'Amorah; noun: sheaf; verb: bind." אדמה 'admâh, "Admah; adjective: red;
noun: soil." צבים tseboyı̂m, "Tseboim, gazelles; verb: go forth, shine."
לשׁע lesha‛, "Lesha; verb: pierce, cleave."

[Gen 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#006)

And the sons of Ham. - Ham the youngest of the three brothers [Gen
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#024), is placed here because he agrees
with Japheth in becoming estranged from the true God, and because the
last place as the more important is reserved for Shem. As the name of
Japheth is preserved in the Ιαπετος Iapetos of the Greeks, so Chain is
supposed to appear in Chemi of the Coptic, χημία cheemia of Plutarch,
Chine of the Rosetta Stone, an old name of Egypt. This country is also
called the land of Ham in Scripture [Psa
78:51](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#051); [Psa
105:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#023), [Psa
105:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#027); [Psa
106:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#022). But this term was of more
comprehensive import, as we find some ancient inhabitants of a region in
the south of Judah, said to have come from Ham [Ch1
4:40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#040). Thirty primitive nations sprang
from Ham. Of these, only four were immediate descendants.

\(15\) Kush has left traces of his name perhaps in the Caucasus, the
Caspian, and the Cossaei of Khusistan. There is an allusion in Amos
([Amo 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007)) to his migration to the
land south of Egypt which bears his name. This name is preserved in
Gheez, the name of the ancient language of the people, and some say even
in Habesh. It is possible, that some of the Kushites went toward India.
To Ethiopia, however, the name generally refers in Scripture. The
Ethiopians were called by Homer (Odyssey I. 23), ἔσχατοι ἀνδρῶν eschatoi
andrōn, "remotest of men."

\(16\) Mizraim is the ordinary name for Egypt in the Hebrew scriptures.
The singular form, Mazor, is found in later books [Kg2
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#024); [Isa
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#006); [Isa
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#025).

\(17\) Put has with one consent been placed beyond Egypt, in the north
of the continent of Africa. He is mentioned along with Lubim as the
helper of Nineveh (Nab. [Isa 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#009)), and
with Kush, as forming part of the army of Neko [Jer
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#009). His descendants penetrated far
westward. A river bearing the name of Phutes has been mentioned in
Mauretania, and an inland country is designated by the name of Futa. The
name may be preserved also in Buto, the capital of lower Egypt, on the
Sebennytic mouth of the Nile.

\(18\) Kenaan settled in the country called after his name. There are
some grounds for believing that this land was previously inhabited by
Shemites, as the land was Shemitic. If so, the Kenaanites came in as
intruders, and followed the language of their predecessors. But of this
hereafter.

[Gen 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#007)

Kush had five sons and two grandsons, who were reckoned among the
founders of nations.

\(19\) Seba is associated with Kush [Isa
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003); [Isa
45:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#014). Josephus (Ant. I. 6, 2; II. 10,
2) places him in Meroe, a country almost insulated by the Nile and its
branches, the Astapus (Blue Nile) and Astaboras (Atbarah).

\(20\) Havilah occurs as the name of a country in the antediluvian
times. The present Havilah may refer to a tribe in Africa, called
Avalitae, lying south of Bab-el-mandeb, which corresponds very well with
the situation of Kush and Seba. This nation, however, may also have a
representative in the Χαυλοταῖοι Chaulotaioi of Strabo (xvi. 728),
situated on the Persian Gulf, where some other Kushites were to be
found. The fragments of this nation may have separated by migration, and
left its name in both localities.

\(21\) Sabtah, Josephus finds in the Astaborans of Ethiopia, others in
Sabota, a town in southwest Arabia.

\(22\) Ramah is traced in Rhegma on the southeast of Arabia.

\(23\) Sabteka is the third name, beginning with the same syllable. Such
names are frequent from the Persian Gulf to the coast of Africa. Some
find this place on the coast of Abyssinia, others in Samydake on the
east side of the Persian Gulf. From Ramah are two tribes descended.

\(24\) Sheba, and (25) Dedan, lying in the south of Arabia or on the
Persian Gulf. Daden, an island in the gulf, now Barhein, may represent
the latter.

[Gen 10:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#008)

In this episode [Gen 10:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#008), the
author turns aside from the table of nations to notice the origin of the
first great empires that were established on the earth. "And Kush begat
Nimrod." The author had before enumerated the sons of Kush, who were
heads of nations. Here he singles out one of his sons or descendants,
who became the first potentate of whom we have any record. He notices
his qualities for rising to this position among men. "He began to be a
mighty one in the land. He was mighty in hunting, before the Lord."
Hunting is a comprehensive term, indicating the taking of any species of
animal, whether of the air, the sea, or the land. Nimrod's distinction
in this respect was so great as to become proverbial. The expression,
"before the Lord," intimates, not merely that the Lord was cognizant of
his proceedings, for he knoweth all things, but that Nimrod himself made
no secret his designs, pursued them with a bold front and a high hand,
and at the same time was aware of the name and will of Yahweh. This
defiant air gives a new character to his hunting, which seems to have
extended even to man, as the term is sometimes so applied ([Sa1
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#012) ([Sa1
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#011)), [Jer
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#016)). His name, which literally
means "we shall rebel," is in keeping with the practice of an arbitrary
and violent control over men's persons and property.

[Gen 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010)

The beginning or first seat and the extent of his kingdom among men are
then described. It consists of four towns - Babel and Erek and Akkad and
Kalneh, in the land of Shinar. The number four is characteristic of
Nimrod's kingdom. It is the mark of the four quarters of the earth, of
universality in point of extent, and therefore of ambition. The site of
Babel (Babylon) has been discovered in certain ruins near Hillah,
chiefly on the opposite or eastern bank of the Euphrates, where there is
a square mound called Babil by the natives. Erek has been traced also on
the east bank of the Euphrates, about one hundred miles southeast of
Babil, or half way between the city and the confluence of the rivers. It
is the Orchoe of the Greeks, and the ruins now bear the name of Urka, or
Warka. This name appears as Huruk on the cuneiform inscriptions of the
place. Akkad, in the Septuagint. Archad, Col. Taylor finds in Akkerkoof,
north of Babel, and about nine miles west of the Tigris, where it
approaches the Euphrates. Here there is a hill or mound of ruins called
Tel Nimrud. Rawlinson finds the name Akkad frequent in the inscriptions,
and mentions Kingi Akkad as part of the kingdom of Urukh, but without
identifying the site. Kalneh, Kalno, [Isa
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#009); Kanneh, [Eze
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#023), is regarded by Jerome, and the
Targum of Jonathan, as the same with Ktesiphon on the Tigris, in the
district of Chalonitis. Its ruins are near Takti Kesra. Rawlinson
identifies it with Niffer, but without assigning satisfactory grounds.
The sites of these towns fix that of Shinar, which is evidently the
lower part of Mesopotamia, or, more precisely, the country west of the
Tigris, and south of Is, or Hit, on the Euphrates, and Samara on the
Tigris. It is otherwise called Babylonia and Chaldaea.

[Gen 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#011), [Gen
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#012)

Out of that land came he forth to Asshur. - This may be otherwise
rendered, "out of that land came forth Asshur." The probabilities in
favor of the former translations are the following: First. The discourse
relates to Nimrod. Second. The words admit of it. Third. The word Asshur
has occurred hitherto only as the name of a country. Fourth. Asshur, the
person, was considerably older than Nimrod, and had probably given name
to Asshur before Nimrod's projects began. Fifth. Asshur would have been
as great a man as Nimrod, if he had founded Nineveh and its contiguous
towns; which does not appear from the text. Sixth. "The beginning of his
kingdom" implies the addition to it contained in these verses. Seventh.
And the phrases "in the land of Shinar, out of that land," and the need
of some definite locality for the second four cities, are in favor of
the former rendering.

Asshur was a country intersected by the Tigris. It included the part of
Mesopotamia north of Shinar, and the region between the Tigris and Mount
Zagros. Its extension westward is undefined by any natural boundary, and
seems to have varied at different times. Nineveh was a well-known city
of antiquity, situated opposite Mosul on the Tigris. The country in
which it was placed is called by Strabo Aturia, a variation seemingly of
Asshur. It's remains are now marked by the names Nebbi-yunus and
Koyunjik. Rehoboth-ir, the city broadway or market, has not been
identified. Kelah is said to be now marked by the ruin called Nimrud.
This lies on the left bank of the Tigris, near its confluence with the
greater Zab, Its name seems to be preserved in the Calachene of Strabo.
It was about twenty miles south of Nineveh. It is possible, however, so
far as we can conjecture from conflicting authorities, that Kelah may be
Kileh Sherghat, about fifty miles south of Mosul, on the right bank of
the Tigris. Resen is placed by the text, between Nineveh and Kelah, and
is therefore probably represented by Selamiyeh, a village about half way
between Koyunjik and Nimrud. If Kelah, however, be Kileh Sherghat, Resen
will coincide with Nimrud. "That is the great city."

This refers most readily to Resen, and will suit very well if it be
Nimrud, which was evidently extensive. It may, however, refer to
Nineveh. This completion of Nimrod's kingdom, we see, contains also four
cities. The Babylonian and Assyrian monarchies were akin in origin, and
allied in their history and in their fall. They were too near each other
to be independent, and their mutual jealousies at length brought about
the ruin of the northern capital. A Kushite, and therefore a Hamite,
founded this first world-monarchy or tyranny. Another Hamite power arose
simultaneously in Egypt. A branch of the Kushites seem to have gone
eastward, and spread over India. But another branch spread through the
South of Arabia, and, crossing into Africa, came into contact, sometimes
into alliance, and sometimes into collision with the Egyptian monarchy.
The eastern empire is noticed particularly, because it intruded into
Shemitic ground, and aimed continually at extending its sway over the
nations descended from Shem.

[Gen 10:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#013)

Mizraim has seven sons, from whom are derived eight nations.

\(26\) the Ludim are probably mentioned in [Isa
66:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#019), in connection with Tarshish and
Put; in [Jer 46:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#009), in connection with
Kush and Put; and in [Eze 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#010); [Eze
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#005), in connection with Put. In all
these instances the name is in the singular, but in our text in the
plural, expressly denoting the nation of which Lud was the progenitor.
The Ludim were distinguished for the use of the bow. They were,
doubtless, an African tribe, related to the Egyptians, and well known to
the prophets, though their country cannot now be pointed out. Josephus
intimates that they were destroyed, as well as other tribes descended
from Mizraim, in the Ethiopic war of the time of Moses; but they still
existed in the times of Ezekiel. Movers finds them in the Lewatah, a
tribe of Berbers. Others place them in Mauretania. Pliny mentions a
river Laud in Tingitana.

\(27\) the Anamim are not elsewhere mentioned.

\(28\) the Lehabim are generally identified with the Lubim [Ch2
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#003); [Ch2
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#008); [Dan
2:43](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#043); [Nah
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#009), who are introduced in connection
with the Kushim. They are probably the Libyans, who lay to the west of
Egypt, and, extending from the Mediterranean indefinitely to the south,
came into contact with the Kushites of Abyssinia.

\(29\) the Naphtuhim Bochart places in Nephthys, near Pelusium on the
Lake Sirbonis. Others find a trace of them in Napata, a town of Meroe.
This agrees with the indications of Josephus and the Targum of Jonathan.

\(30\) the Pathrusim have their place in Pathros, a name of upper Egypt
or the Thebais. It is arranged by Isaiah [Isa
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011) between Egypt and Kush.

\(31\) the Kasluhim are supposed by some to be represented by the
Colchians, whom Herodotus (ii. 104) traces to Egypt. It is possible the
Colchians may have been a colony from them. But their original seat must
have been somewhere on the coast of the Red Sea.

\(32\) Philistim, who came from (31). The Philistines dwelt on the coast
of the Mediterranean, from the border of Egypt to Joppa. They had five
principal cities, - Gaza, Ashdod, Ashkelon, Gath, and Ekron. They gave
the name פלשׁת peleshet, Pelesheth, to the whole of Kenaan, from which
is derived the Greek name Παλαιστὶνη Palaistinee "Palaestina." They are
stated by the text to be a colony or offshoot of the Kasluhim.

\(33\) Kaphtorim. From [Jer 47:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#004), it
appears that Kaphtor was a coastland. From [Amo
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007), we learn that the Philistines
came from this land. Hence, we conclude that the Kaphtorim dwelt on the
coast of the Red Sea, adjacent to the Kasluchim, and left their name,
perhaps, in Koptos and Αἴγυπτος Aiguptos. Cappadocia, Crete, and Cyprus
only slightly resemble the name, and have no other recommendation. The
Kasluhim may have been their southern neighbors, and thus the
Philistines may have occupied a part of Kaphtor, before their settlement
on the coast of the Great Sea, within the borders of Kenaan, where they
would, of course, be another tribe (ἀλλόφυλοι allophuloi). This account
of these descendants of Mizraim agrees best with the hint of Josephus,
that many of them bordered on the Ethiopians; and perished, or perhaps
were forced to migrate, in the Ethiopic or other wars (i. 6, 3). Thus,
it appears that the descendants of Mizraim were settled in Africa, with
the exception of the Philistines, who migrated into the country to which
they gave their name.

[Gen 10:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#015)

From Kenaan are descended eleven nations:

\(34\) Zidon is styled his first-born. The name is retained in the
well-known town on the coast of Phoenicia, which is accordingly of the
highest antiquity among the cities of that region. The Sidonians were
reckoned co-extensive with the Phoenicians, and are mentioned by Homer
(Iliad 23:743; Odyssey 4:618).

\(35\) Heth. This tribe dwelt about Hebron and in the mountains around,
and perhaps still further north in the districts extending toward the
Euphrates [Gen 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#003); [Num
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#029); [Jos
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#004). Esau took wives from the Hittites
[Gen 26:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#034), and some part of the
nation existed even after the captivity [Ezr
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001).

\(36\) the Jebusite has his chief seat in and around Jerusalem, which
was called Jebus, from his chief; and the citadel of which was wrested
from him only in the time of David [Sa2
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#007).

\(37\) the Amorite was one of the most important and extensive tribes of
Kenaan. Five kings of this nation dwelt in the mountains afterward
occupied by Judah [Gen 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#007), [Gen
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#013); [Num
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#029); [Jos
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#005), and two on the east of the
Jordon, in Heshbon and Bashan, north of Moab [Num
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#013); [Deu
4:47](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#047). The eastern Amorites were
conquered under Moses, the western under Joshua. A remnant of them were
made bondsmen by Solomon [Kg1 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#020).
They survived the captivity [Ezr 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001).

\(38\) the Girgashite seems to have lain on the west of the Jordan, and
the name may be preserved in the reading Γεργεσηνῶν Gergesēnōn, of [Mat
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#028). The town of the Gergesenes is
supposed to have been at the southeast of the lake of Gennesaret [Gen
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#021); [Deu
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001); [Jos
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#011).

\(39\) the Hivite was found at Shalem, Gibeon, and also at the foot of
Hermon and Antilibanus [Gen 34:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#002); [Jos
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#007); [Jos
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#003); [Jdg
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#003). The former were also classed
under the Amorites [Gen 48:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#022); [Sa2
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#002). With the exception of four
cities of the Gibeonites, they were conquered by Joshua [Jos
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#017); [Jos
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#003), [Jos
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#019).

\(40\) the Arkite probably dwelt near a town called Arke or Caesarea
Libani, lying some miles north of Tripolis, at the foot of Lebanon. Its
ruins are still extant at Tel Arka.

\(41\) the Sinite is supposed to have dwelt in Sinna, a town mentioned
by Strabo, called Sine by Jerome, and Syn in the fifteenth century
(Strab. xvi. 2, 18; Hieron. Quaest. in Gen., Breitenbach, Travels, p.
47), not far from Arke.

\(42\) the Arvadite dwelt in Arvad, Aradus, now Ruad, a Phoenician town
on an island of the same name.

\(43\) the Zemarite has been traced in the town Σίμυρα Simura, the ruins
of which were found by Shaw at the western foot of Lebanon, under the
name of Sumra.

\(44\) the Hamathite was the inhabitant of Hamath, called Hamath Rabbah
(the great), by the Greeks Epiphaneia, and at present Hamah. It is
situated on the Orontes, and held an important place in the history of
Israel. The land of Hamath was of great extent, including the town of
Riblab [Kg2 25:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#021) and reaching even to
Antioch. The entrance of Hamath חמת בוא bô' chamāt, the northern part of
the valley between Lebanon and Antilibanus, formed the utmost boundary
of Palestine to the north [Num 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#021);
[Jos 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#005); [Kg1
8:65](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#065). Its king was in alliance with
David [Sa2 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#010).

And afterward were the families of the Kenaanites spread abroad. - After
the confusion of tongues were these nations formed; and after the
formation of these Kenaanic tribes occurred the dispersion spoken of in
the text. We do not know what was the original seat of the Kenaanites;
or whether the dispersion here mentioned was violent or not. Its primary
result, however, seems to have been their settlement in the country of
which the boundaries are next described. It is not improbable that this
land was allotted to a portion of the Shemites, and occupied by them
when the Kenaanites entered and established themselves among them [Gen
40:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#015). The Kenaanites probably had the
same grasping tendency which displayed itself in Nimrod, their kinsman;
and therefore seized upon the country with a high hand, and called it
after their name. Their expulsion, on the conquest of the land by the
Israelites, and their commercial activity, led to a still further
dispersion; as colonies were sent out by them to the distant shores of
the Mediterranean, to Asia Minor, Greece, Africa, Spain, and even the
British Isles. But it can scarcely be supposed that reference is here
made to these subsequent events in their history.

[Gen 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#019)

The border of Kenaan, as here described, extends along the coast from
Zidon in the direction of (as thou goest unto) Gerar, which lay between
Kadesh and Shur [Gen 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001), and has its
name preserved in the Wady el-Jerur, which is nearly in a line
connecting Ain el-Weibeh and Suez. It turns at Azzah (Gaza), and passes
to the cities of the plain, of which the later history is so memorable.
Its terminating point is Lesha, which is generally supposed to be
Callirrhoe, to the northeast of the Dead Sea, so called from the hot
springs which form a stream flowing into the lake. It is possible,
however, that Lesha is only another variation of Laish and Leshem, a
city belonging to the Sidonians, and situated near the sources of the
Jordan. Thus, we have the western, southern, and eastern border briefly
given in this verse. It is manifest, however, that they did not confine
themselves to these limits, but "afterward spread abroad" into the
adjacent regions. The Hittite went to the northeast; the Amorite crossed
the Jordan, and occupied a great part of Peraea; the Hivite, the Arkite,
the Sinite, the Arvadite, the Zemarite, and the Hamathite stretched far
north of the boundary.

[Gen 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#020)

The list of the Hamites is summed up [Gen
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#020) in the usual form. It appears
that Ham occupied Africa and a certain portion of Asia along the eastern
coast of the Mediterranean, in the south of Arabia, about the lower
valley of the Frat and Diljah, and perhaps along the south of Asia. In
extent of territory, Japheth ultimately far exceeded, as he occupied
most of Asia and almost all of Europe and the New World. Ham is next to
him, as he inherited Africa and a portion of Asia. Some of his
descendants have also been forcibly transplanted to the New Hemisphere.
But in point of political contact with Shem, Japheth, in early times,
sinks comparatively into the shade, and Ham assumes the prominent place.
Babylon, Kush, Egypt, and Kenaan are the powers which come into contact
with Shem, in that central line of human history which is traced in the
Bible. Hence, it is that in the table of nations special attention is
directed to Kush, Nimrod, Mizraim, and to the tribes and borders of
Kenaan.

[Genesis 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 10:21</span></span>

\- XXXIII. Shem

21\. אבר 'eber, "'Eber, yonder side; verb: pass, cross."

22\. עילם 'eylām, "'Elam." עוּל ‛ûl, "suckle." עלם ‛ālam, "hide; be
mature." ארפכשׁד 'arpakshad, "Arpakshad." כשׂד ארף 'arp keśed, "boundary
of Kesed, or (von-Bohlen) Arjapakshata, beside Aria." ארם 'ǎrām, "Aram,
high; verb: be high."

23\. עוּץ ‛ûts, "'Uts; verb: counsel; be firm, solid." חוּל chûl, "Chul;
verb: rub, twist, writhe, be strong, await." גתר geter, "Gether,
bridge?" משׁ meshek, "Mash; related: feel, touch."

24\. שׁלח shelach, "Shelach, missile, shoot."

25\. פלג peleg, "Peleg; noun: brook, canal; verb: divide." יקטן yāqṭān,
"Joctan, small."

26\. אלמודד 'almôdād, "Almodad." למד lāmad, "learn." מדד mādad,
"measure." שׁלף shelep, "Sheleph; verb: draw out or off." חערמות
chatsarmāvet, "Chatsarmaveth, court of death." ירח yerach, "Jerach,
moon, month."

27\. הדורם hadôrām, Hadoram, "majesty, beauty;" verb: "swell, honor."
אוּזל 'ûzāl, Uzal; verb: "go out or away." דקלה dı̂qlâh Diclah, "palm."

28\. עובל ‛ôbāl, 'Obal, "bare, bald." אבימאל 'ǎbı̂ymā'ēl, Abimael,
"father of Mael" (circumcision).

29\. אופיר 'ôpı̂r, Ophir; verb: "break, veil." יובב yôbāb, Jobab; verb:
"cry, call."

30\. משׁא mēshā', Mesha, שׁאה shā'âh = שׁוא shô', "roar, crash." ספר
sepār Sephar, "counting. writing."

From Japheth, who penetrated into the remotest regions, the writer
proceeds to Ham, who came into close contact with Shem. From Ham, he
passes to Shem, in whom the line of history is to be continued.

[Gen 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021)

Shem is here distinguished by two characteristics - the former referring
to a subsequent, the latter to an antecedent event. He is "the father of
all the sons of Heber." It is evident from this that the sons of Heber
cast luster on the family of Shem, and therefore on the whole human
race. It is unnecessary to anticipate the narrative, except so far as to
note that the sons of Heber include most of the Arabians, a portion of
those who mingled with the race and inhabited the land of Aram, and,
most probably, the original element of the population in the land of
Kenaan. This characteristic of Shem shows that the table in which it is
found was composed after the Hebrews had become conspicuous among the
descendants of Shem.

Shem is next distinguished as the "older brother of Japheth"; that is,
older than Ham. This interpretation of the words is most agreeable to
the Hebrew idiom, and is the only one which affords an important sense.
That Shem was the second son appears from the facts that Ham was the
youngest [Gen 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#024), that Shem was born
in the five hundred and third year of Noah [Gen
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#010), and, therefore, Japheth must
have been the one born when Noah was in his five hundredth year [Gen
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#032). The reason for inserting this
statement is to prevent the order in which the brothers are introduced
in the pedigree from being taken as that of their age, instead of that
of the historical relationship subsisting among the nations descended
from them.

[Gen 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#022)

Twenty-six of the primitive nations are descended from Shem, of which
five are immediate.

\(45\) Elam was settled in a part of the modern Persia, to which he gave
name. This name seems to be preserved in Elymais, a province of that
country bordering on the Dijlah, and now included in Khusistan. It was
early governed by its own kings [Gen
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001), and continued to occupy a
distinct place among the nations in the time of the later prophets [Isa
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#006); [Jer
49:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#034); [Eze
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#024). Its capital was Shushan or Susa
[Dan 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002), now Shuster.

\(46\) Asshur seems to have originally occupied a district of
Mesopotamia, which was bounded on the east by the Tigris [Gen
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#014). The inviting plains and slopes
on the east of the Tigris would soon occasion a migration of part of the
nation across that river. It is possible there may have been an ancient
Asshur occupying the same region even before the flood [Gen
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#014).

\(47\) Arpakshad is traced in Ἀῤῥαπαχῖτις Arrapachitis, Arrhapachitis, a
region in the north of Assyria. V. Bohlen and Benfey identify it with
Ariapakshata, denoting a country beside Aria. Gesenius renders it border
or stronghold of the Kasdim; but the components of the word are
uncertain. The nations descended from Arpakshad are noted at the close
on account of their late origin, as well as their import for the
subsequent narrative.

\(48\) Lud is usually identified with the Lydians, Λυδοὶ Ludoi, who by
migration at length reached and gave their name to a part of the west
coast of Asia Minor.

\(49\) Aram gave name to the upper parts of Mesopotamia and the parts of
Syria north of Palestine. Hence, we read of Aram Naharaim (of the two
rivers), Aram Dammesek (of Damascus), Aram Maakah on the southwest
border of Damascus, about the sources of the Jordan, Aram Beth Rechob in
the same neighborhood, and Aram Zoba to the north of Damascus. The name
is perhaps varied in the Ἄριμοι Arimoi of Homer (Iliad 2:783) and Strabo
(xiii. 4, 6). From Aram are descended four later nations.

[Gen 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#023)

\(50\) Uz (Ἀνσῖτις Ausitis, Septuagint.) the chief of a people having
their seat in the north of Arabia Deserta, between Palestine and the
Euphrates. From this Uz it is possible that the sons of Nahor and of
Seir [Gen 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#021); [Gen
36:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#028) obtained their name. Job dwelt
in this land.

\(51\) Hul is supposed to have his settlement about the sources of the
Jordan in Huleh. Others trace this nation in the Hylatae (Pliny 5:19)
near Emesa.

\(52\) Gether is of uncertain position, probably in Arabia.

\(53\) Mash may have left a trace of his name in Mons Masius, Karajah
Dagh, south of Diarbekir, and perhaps also in the Mysians and Moesians,
who may have wandered westward from under this mountain.

[Gen 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#024)

Arpakshad begat (54) Shelah. We know nothing of the nation of which he
was the founder. He begat

\(55\) Heber. He is the progenitor of the Hebrews, the race to which
Abraham belonged. He is marked out very prominently for reasons partly
unknown to us at this distance of time, but partly no doubt because he
was the ancestor of the chosen race who immediately preceded the
confusion of tongues, and to whom belonged that generic Hebrew tongue,
which afterward branched into several dialects, of which the Hebrew, now
strictly so called, was one. It is probable that most of the diversified
modes of speech retained the substance of the primeval speech of
mankind. And it is not improbable, for various reasons, that this Hebrew
tongue, taken in its largest sense, deviated less from the original
standard than any other. The Shemites, and especially the Hebrews,
departed less from the knowledge of the true God than the other families
of man, and, therefore, may be presumed to have suffered less from the
concussion given to the living speech of the race.

The knowledge previously accumulated of the true God, and of his will
and way, would have been lost, if the terms and other modes of
expressing divine things had been entirely obliterated. It is consonant
with reason, then, to suppose that some one language was so little
shaken from its primary structure as to preserve this knowledge. We know
as a fact, that, while other nations retained some faint traces of the
primeval history, the Hebrews have handed down certain and tangible
information concerning former things in a consecutive order from the
very first. This is a proof positive that they had the distinct outline
and material substance of the primeval tongue in which these things were
originally expressed. In keeping with this line of reasoning, while
distinct from it, is the fact that the names of persons and things are
given and explained in the Hebrew tongue, and most of them in that
branch of it in which the Old Testament is composed. We do not enter
further into the special nature of the Hebrew family of languages, or
the relationship in which they are found to stand with the other forms
of human speech than to intimate that such investigations tend to
confirm the conclusions here enunciated.

[Gen 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#025)

This nation was very extensive, and accordingly branched out into
several, of which the immediate ones are Peleg and Joctan.

\(56\) Peleg is remarkable on account of the origin assigned to his
name. "In his days was the land divided." Here two questions occur. What
is the meaning of the earth being divided, and what is the time denoted
by "his days?" The verb "divide" (פלג pālag) occurs only three times
elsewhere in the Hebrew scriptures [Ch1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#019); [Job
38:25](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#025); [Psa
55:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#010). The connection in which this
rare word is used in the Psalm, "divide their tongues," seems to
determine its reference in the present passage to the confusion of
tongues and consequent dispersion of mankind recorded in the following
chapter. This affords a probable answer to our first question. The land
was in his days divided among the representative heads of the various
nations. But to what point of time are we directed by the phrase "in his
days?" Was the land divided at his birth, or some subsequent period of
his life? The latter is possible, as Jacob and Gideon received new
names, and Joshua an altered name, in later life.

The phrase "in his days" seems to look the same way. And the short
interval from the deluge to his birth appears scarcely to suffice for
such an increase of the human family as to allow of a separation into
nations. Yet, on the other hand, it is hard to find any event in later
life which connected this individual more than any other with the
dispersion of man. It is customary to give the name at birth. The phrase
"in his days" may, without any straining, refer to this period. And if
we suppose, at a time when there were only a few families on the earth,
an average increase of ten children in each in four generations, we
shall have a thousand, or twelve hundred full-grown persons, and,
therefore, may have five hundred families at the birth of Peleg. We
cannot suppose more than fifty-five nations distinguished from one
another at the dispersion, as Heber is the fifty-fifth name, and all the
others are descended from him.

And if three families were sufficient to propagate the race after the
flood, nine or ten were enough to constitute a primeval tribe or nation.
We see some reason, therefore, to take the birth of Peleg as the
occasion on which he received his name, and no stringent reason for
fixing upon any later date. At all events the question seems to be of no
chronological importance, as in any case only four generations preceded
Peleg, and these might have been of comparatively longer or shorter
duration without materially affecting the number of mankind at the time
of his birth. Peleg is also remarkable as the head of that nation out of
which, at an after period, the special people of God sprang. Of the
Palgites, as a whole, we hear little or nothing further in history.

\(57\) Joctan, if little or insignificant as an individual or a nation,
is the progenitor of a large group of tribes, finding their place among
the wandering races included afterward under the name Arabic. Cachtan,
as the Arabs designate him in their traditions, may have given name to
Cachtan, a town and province mentioned by Niebuhr.

[Gen 10:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#026)

The thirteen tribes of the Joctanites or primitive Arabs are enumerated
here in [Gen 10:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#026).

\(58\) Almodad is usually referred to Yemen. The first syllable may be
the Arabic article. Mudad is the name of one celebrated in Arab story as
the stepfather of Ishmael and chief of the Jurhum tribe of Joctanites.
The Ἀλλουμαιῶται Alloumaiōtai of Ptolemy belonged to the interior of
Arabia Felix.

\(59\) Sheleph is traced in the Σαλαπηνοὶ Salapeenoi of Ptolemy (vi. 7),
belonging to the interior.

\(60\) Hazarmaveth gives name to a district on the Indian Ocean,
abounding in spices, now called Hadramaut. This tribe is the Chatramitae
of Greek writers.

\(61\) Jerah occupied a district where are the coast and mountain of the
moon, near Hadramaut.

\(62\) Hadoram is preserved in the tribe called Ἀδραμῖται Adamitai
Atramitae, placed by Pliny (vi. 28) between the Homerites and the
Sachalites on the south coast of Arabia.

\(63\) Uzal perhaps gave the ancient name of Azal to Sana, the capital
of Yemen, a place still celebrated for the manufacture of beautiful
stuffs.

\(64\) Diclah settled possibly in the palm-bearing region of the Minaei
in Hejaz.

\(65\) Obal is otherwise unknown.

\(66\) Abimael is equally obscure. Bochart supposes there is a trace of
the name in Μάλι Mali, a place in Arabia Aromatifera.

\(67\) Sheba is the progenitor of the Sabaei in Arabia Felix, celebrated
for spices, gold, and precious stones, and noted for the prosperity
arising from traffic in these commodities. A queen of Sheba visited
Solomon. The dominant family among the Sabaeans was that of Himjar, from
whom the Himjarites (Homeritae) of a later period descended.

\(68\) Ophir gave name to a country celebrated for gold, precious
stones, and almug wood, which seems to have lain on the south side of
Arabia, where these products may be found. What kind of tree the almug
is has not been clearly ascertained. Some suppose it to be the sandal
wood which grows in Persia and India; others, a species of pine. If this
wood was not native, it may have been imported from more distant
countries to Ophir, which was evidently a great emporium. Others,
however, have supposed Ophir to be in India, or Eastern Africa. The
chief argument for a more distant locality arises from the supposed
three years' voyage to it from Ezion-geber, and the products obtained in
the country so reached. But the three years' voyage [Kg1
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#022); [Ch2
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#021) seems to be in reality to
Tarshish, a very different region.

\(69\) Havilah here is the founder of a Joctanite tribe of Arabs, and
therefore his territory must be sought somewhere in the extensive
country which was occupied by these wandering tribes. A trace of the
name is probably preserved in Khawlan, a district lying in the northwest
of Yemen, between Sana and Mecca, though the tribe may have originally
settled or extended further north.

\(70\) Jobab has been compared with the Ἰωβαρῖται Iōbaritai of Ptolemy
(vi. 7). Bochart finds the name in the Arabic: yobab, a desert.

[Gen 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#029)

The situation of Mesha is uncertain. But it is obviously the western
boundary of the settlement, and may have been in the neighborhood of
Mecca and Medina. Sephar is perhaps the Arabic Zaphari, called by the
natives Isfor, a town on the south coast near Mirbat. It seems, however,
to be, in the present passage, the "mount of the east" itself, a
thuriferous range of hills, adjacent, it may be, to the seaport
so-called. Gesenius and others fix upon Mesene, an island at the head of
the Persian Gulf, as the Mesha of the text. But this island may have had
no existence at the time of the Joctanite settlement. These boundaries
include the greater part of the west and south coast of the peninsula,
and are therefore sufficient to embrace the provinces of Hejaz (in
part), Yemen, and Hadramaut, and afford space for the settlements of the
thirteen sons of Joctan. The limits thus marked out determine that all
these settlers, Ophir among the rest, were at first to be found in
Arabia, how far soever they may have wandered from it afterward.

[Gen 10:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#031)

[Gen 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#031) contains the usual closing
formula for the pedigree of the Shemite tribes; and [Gen
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#032) contains the corresponding form
for the whole table of nations.

From a review of these lands it is evident that Shem occupied a much
smaller extent of territory than either of his brothers. The mountains
beyond the Tigris, the Persian Gulf, the Red Sea, the Levant, the
Archipelago, and the Black Sea, bound the countries that were in part
peopled by Shem. Arabia, Syria, and Assyria contained the great bulk of
the Shemites, intermingled with some of the Hamites. The Kushites,
Kenaanites, and Philistines trench upon their ground. The rest of the
Hamites peopled Africa, and such countries as were supplied from it. The
Japhethites spread over all the rest of the world.

In this table there are 70 names, exclusive of Nimrod, of heads of
families, tribes, or nations descended from the 3 sons of Noah - 14 from
Japheth, 30 from Ham, and 26 from Shem. Among the heads of tribes
descended from Japheth are 7 grandsons. Among those from Ham are 23
grandsons and 3 great-grandsons. Among those of Shem are 5 grandsons,
one great-grandson, 2 of the fourth generation, and 13 of the fifth.
Whence, it appears that the subdivisions are traced further in Ham and
much further in Shem than in Japheth, and that they are pursued only in
those lines which are of importance for the coming events in the history
of Shem.

It is to be observed, also, that, though the different races are
distinguished by the diversity of tongues, yet the different languages
are much less numerous than the tribes. The eleven tribes of Kenaanites,
and the thirteen tribes of Joctanites, making allowance for some tribal
peculiarities, most probably spoke at first only two dialects of one
family of languages, which we have designated the Hebrew, itself a
branch of, if not identical with, what is commonly called the Shemitic.
Hence, some Hamites spoke the language of Shem. A similar community of
language may have occurred in some other instances of diversity of
descent.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 11](gen011)

</div>
