<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen045)  [Next](gen047) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 46](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#001)

\- Jacob Goes Down to Egypt

9\. פלוּא pallû', Pallu, "distinguished." חצרן chetsrôn, Chetsron, of
the "court," or "village." כרמי karmı̂y, Karmi, "vine-dresser."

10\. ימוּאל yemû'êl, Jemuel, "day of El." ימין yâmı̂yn, Jamin, "right
hand." אהד 'ôhad, Ohad, "joining together." יכין yâkı̂yn, Jakin, "he
shall establish." צחר tsôchar, Tsochar, "whiteness."

11\. גרשׁון gêreshôn, Gereshon, "expelling." קהת qehâth, Qehath,
"assembly." מררי merârı̂y, Merari, "flowing, bitter."

12\. חמוּל châmûl, Chamul, "pitied, treated with mercy."

13\. תולע tôlâ‛, Tola', "worm, scarlet." פוּה pû'âh, Puvvah, "mouth?"
יוב yôb, Job, "enemy?" שׂמרן śı̂mrôn, Shimron, "watch."

14\. סרד sered, Sered, "fear." אלון 'êlôn, Elon, "oak." יחלאל yachle'êl,
Jachleel, "El shall sicken or inspire with hope."

16\. צפיון tsı̂phyôn, Tsiphjon, "watcher." חגי chaggı̂y, Chaggi,
"festive." שׁוּני shûnı̂y, Shuni, "quiet." אצבון 'etsbôn, Etsbon,
"toiling?" ערי ‛êrı̂y, 'Eri, "watcher." ארודי 'ǎrôdı̂y, Arodi, rover?
אראלי 'ar'êlı̂y, Areli, "lion of El?"

17\. ימנה yı̂mnâh, Jimnah, "prosperity." ישׁוה yı̂shvâh, Jishvah, ישׁוי
yı̂shvı̂y, Jishvi, "even, level." בריעה berı̂y‛âh, Beri'ah, "in evil." שׂרח
śerach, Serach, "overflow." חבר cheber, Cheber, "fellowship." מלכיאל
malkı̂y'êl Malkiel, "king of EL"

21\. בלע bela‛, Bela', "devouring." בכר beker, Beker, "a young camel."
אשׁבל 'ashbêl Ashbel, "short?" גרא gêrâ', Gerah, "a grain." &lt;נעמן
na‛ămân, Na'aman, "pleasant." אחי 'êchı̂y Echi, "brotherly?" ראשׁ rô'sh,
Rosh, "head." מפים mûppı̂ym, Muppim, חפים chûppı̂ym, Chuppim, "covering."
ארד 'ard, Ard, "fugitive, rover."

23\. צשׁים chûshı̂ym, Chushim, "haste."

24\. יחצאל yachtse'êl, Jachtseel, "El will divide." גוּני gûnı̂y, Guni,
"dyed." יצר yêtser, Jetser, "form." שׂלם śı̂llêm, Shillem, "retribution."

The second dream of Joseph is now to receive its fulfillment. His father
is to bow down before him. His mother is dead. It is probable that also
Leah is deceased. The figure, by which the dream shadows forth the
reality, is fulfilled, when the spirit of it receives its
accomplishment.

[Gen 46:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#001)

Jacob arriving at Beer-sheba is encouraged by a revelation from God.
Beer-sheba may be regarded as the fourth scene of Abraham's abode in the
land of promise. "Offered sacrifices." He had gathered from the words of
the Lord to Abraham [Gen 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013), and
the way in which the dreams of Joseph were realized in the events of
Providence, that his family were to descend into Egypt. He felt
therefore, that in taking this step he was obeying the will of Heaven.
Hence, he approaches God in sacrifices at an old abode of Abraham and
Isaac, before he crosses the border to pass into Egypt. On this solemn
occasion God appears to him in the visions of the night. He designates
himself EL the Mighty, and the God of his father. The former name cheers
him with the thought of an all-sufficient Protector. The latter
identifies the speaker with the God of his father, and therefore, with
the God of eternity, of creation, and of covenant. "Fear not to go down
into Mizraim." This implies both that it was the will of God that he
should go down to Egypt, and that he would be protected there. "A great
nation."

Jacob had now a numerous family, of whom no longer one was selected, but
all were included in the chosen seed. He had received the special
blessing and injunction to be fruitful and multiply [Gen
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#003); [Gen
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#011). The chosen family is to be the
beginning of the chosen nation. "I will go down with thee." The "I" is
here emphatic, as it is also in the assurance that he will bring him up
in the fullness of time from Egypt. If Israel in the process of growth
from a family to a nation had remained among the Kenaanites, he would
have been amalgamated with the nation by intermarriage, and conformed to
its vices. By his removal to Egypt he is kept apart from the
demoralizing influence of a nation, whose iniquity became so great as to
demand a judicial extirpation [Gen
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016). He is also kept from sinking
into an Egyptian by the fact that a shepherd, as he was, is an
abomination to Egypt; by his location in the comparatively high land of
Goshen, which is a border land, not naturally, but only politically,
belonging to Egypt; and by the reduction of his race to a body of serfs,
with whom that nation would not condescend to intermingle. "Joseph shall
put his hand upon thine eyes." His long-lost son shall be present to
perform the last offices to him when deceased.

[Gen 46:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#005)

The descent into Egypt is now described. "His daughters, and his sons'
daughters." In the following list only one daughter of Jacob is
mentioned, Dinah, and only one son's daughter, Serah. It is possible,
but not probable, that there were more daughters than these at the time
in his family. But even if there were no others, the plural is adopted
in order to correspond with the general form of classification, from
which the one daughter and the one granddaughter are merely accidental
deviations. The same principle applies to the sons of Dan [Gen
46:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#023), and to other instances in
Scripture [Ch1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#008), [Ch1
2:42](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#042).

Verse 8-27

The list given here of the family of Jacob as it came down into Egypt is
not to be identified with a list of their descendants two hundred and
fifty years after, contained in Num. 26, or with another list
constructed after the captivity, and referring to certain of their
descendants in and after the times of the monarchy. Nor is this the
place to mark out or investigate the grounds of the diversities from the
present which these later lists exhibit. Our proper business here is to
examine into the nature and import of this ancient and original list of
the family of Jacob. It purports to be a list of the names of the sons
of Israel, "who went into Mizraim." This phrase implies that the sons of
Israel actually went down into Egypt; and this is accordingly
historically true of all his immediate sons, Joseph having gone thither
about twenty-two years before the others. And the word "sons" is to be
understood here in its strict sense, as we find it in the immediate
context [Gen 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#007) distinguished from
sons' sons and other descendants.

"Jacob and his sons." From this expression we perceive the progenitor is
to be included with the sons among those who descended to Egypt. This
also is historically exact. For the sake of clearness it is proper here
to state the approximate ages of these heads of Israel at the time of
the descent. Jacob himself was 130 years of age [Gen
47:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#009). Joseph was in his thirtieth year
when he stood before Pharaoh to interpret his dreams and receive his
commission as governor-general of Egypt, [Gen
41:46](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#046). At the end of the second year
of the famine nine full years were added to his life. He was therefore,
we may suppose, 39 years old when Jacob arrived in Egypt, and born when
his father was 91. As we conceive that he was born in the fifteenth year
of Jacob's sojourn in Padan-aram, and Reuben in the eighth, we infer
that Reuben was at the time of the descent into Egypt seven years older
than Joseph, or 46, Simon 45, Levi 44, Judah 43, Dan about 43, Naphtali
about 42, Gad about 42, Asher about 41, Issakar about 41, Zebulun about
40, Dinah about 39, Benjamin about 26. "Jacob's first-born Reuben." This
refers to the order of nature, without implying that the rights of
first-birth were to be secured to Reuben [Ch1
5:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#001).

[Gen 46:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#009)

The sons of Leah and their descendants are here enumerated. Reuben has
four sons, who appear without variation in the other two lists [Num
26:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#005); [Ch1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#003). Of the six sons of Simon, Ohad
appears in the other lists, and Nemuel and Zerah appear as colloquial
variations of Jemuel and Zohar. Such diversities in oral language are
usual to this day in the East and elsewhere. "Son of a Kenaanitess."
This implies that intermarriage with the Kenaanites was the exception to
the rule in the family of Jacob. Wives might have been obtained from
Hebrew, Aramaic, or at all events Shemite tribes who were living in
their vicinity. The three sons of Levi are common to all the lists, with
the slight variation of Gershom for Gershon. The sons of Judah are also
unvaried. We are here reminded that Er and Onon died in the land of
Kenaan [Gen 46:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#012), and of course did
not come down into Egypt. The extraordinary circumstances of Judah's
family are recorded in Gen. 38: In order that Hezron and Hamul may have
been born at the arrival of Jacob's household in Egypt, Judah's and
Perez's first sons must have been born in the fourteenth year of their
respective fathers. For the discussion of this matter see the remarks on
that chapter. The four sons of Issakar occur in the other lists, with
the variation of Jashub for Job. The three sons of Zebulun recur in the
book of Numbers; but in the list of Chronicles no mention is made of his
posterity. Dinah does not appear in the other lists. The descendants of
Leah are in all thirty-two; six sons, one daughter, twenty-three
grandsons, and two great grandsons. "All the souls, his sons and his
daughters, were thirty and three." Here "all the souls" include Jacob
himself, and "his sons and his daughters" are to be understood as a
specification of what is included besides himself.

[Gen 46:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#016)

Next are enumerated the sons of Zilpah, Leah's handmaid. The seven sons
of Gad recur in Num. 26, with the variants Zephon, Ozni, and Arod, for
Ziphion, Ezbon, and Arodi; but they do not occur in Chronicles. Of
Asher's five children, Jishuah is omitted in Numbers, but appears in
Chronicles. This seems to arise from circumstances that the list in
Numbers was drawn up at the time of the facts recorded, and that in
Chronicles is extracted partly from Genesis. The other names are really
the same in all the lists. The descendants of Zilpah are sixteen - two
sons, eleven grandsons, one granddaughter, and two great-grandsons.

[Gen 46:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#019)

The sons of Rachel. It is remarkable that she alone is called the wife
of Jacob, because she was the wife of his choice. Yet the children of
the beloved, we perceive, are not placed before those of the less loved
[Deu 21:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#015). Joseph's two sons are
the same in all lists. Of the ten sons of Benjamin only five appear in
Numbers [Num 26:38-41](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#038), Bela and Ashbel
being the same, and Ahiram, Shupham, and Hupham, being variants of Ehi,
Muppim, and Huppim. In two hundred and fifty years the other five have
become extinct. Naaman and Ard seem to have died early, as two sons of
Bela, named after them, take their places as heads of families or clans.
In Chronicles [Ch1 7:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#006) we have two
lists of his descendants which do not seem to be primary, as they do not
agree with either of the former lists, or with one another, though some
of the names recur. The descendants of Rachel are fourteen - two sons
and twelve grandsons.

[Gen 46:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#023)

The sons of Bilhah, Rachel's handmaid, come last. Hushim, the son of
Dan, appears in Numbers [Num 26:42](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#042) as
Shuham, and perhaps in Chronicles [Ch1
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#012) in an obscure connection. The
four sons of Naphtali occur in all the lists, Shallum being the variant
in Chronicles [Ch1 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#013) for Shillem.
The descendants of Bilhah are seven - two sons and five grandsons.

[Gen 46:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#026)

All the souls that went with Jacob into Egypt, "that came out of his
loins," were eleven sons, one daughter, fifty grandchildren, and four
great-grandsons; in all, sixty-six. Jacob, Joseph and his two sons, are
four; and thus, all the souls belonging to the family of Jacob which
went into Egypt were seventy. This account, with its somewhat intricate
details, is expressed with remarkable brevity and simplicity.

The Septuagint gives seventy-five as the sum-total, which is made out by
inserting Makir the son, and Gilead the grandson of Menasseh, Shuthelah
and Tahan, sons, and Edom or Eran, a grandson of Ephraim Num. 26. This
version has also the incorrect statement that the sons of Joseph born to
him in Egypt were nine; whereas by its own showing they were seven, and
Jacob and Joseph are to be added to make up the nine. Some suppose that
Stephen's statement - ἀποστείλας δὲ Ιωσὴφ μετεκαλέσατο τὸν πατέρα αὑτοῦ
Ιακὼβ καὶ πᾶσαν τὴν συγγένειαν ἐν ψυχαῖς ἐβδομήκοντα πέντε aposteilas de
Iōsēph ton patera autou Iakōb kai tēn sungeneian en psuchais
hebdomēkonta pente - is founded on this version. If Stephen here quoted
the Septuagint as a well-known version, he was accountable only for the
correctness of his quotation, and not for the error which had crept into
his authority. This was immaterial to his present purpose, and it was
not the manner of the sacred speakers to turn aside from their grand
task to the pedantry of criticism. But it is much more likely that the
text of the Septuagint has here been conformed in a bungling way to the
number given by Stephen. For it is to be observed that his number
refers, according to the text, to Jacob and all his kindred, "exclusive
of Joseph and his sons." They could not therefore, amount to
seventy-five, but only to sixty-seven, if we count merely Jacob and his
proper descendants. It is probable, therefore, that in the idea of
Stephen the "kindred" of Jacob included the eight or nine surviving
wives that accompanied the children of Israel. Judah's wife was dead,
and it is probable that Reuben's was also deceased before he committed
incest with Bilhah. If there were two or three more widowers the number
of surviving wives would be eight or nine.

The number of the children of Israel is very particularly noted. But the
Scripture lays no stress upon the number itself, and makes no particular
application of it. It stands forth, therefore, on the record merely as a
historical fact. It is remarkable that it is the product of seven, the
number of holiness; and ten, the number of completeness. It is still
more remarkable that it is the number of the names of those who are the
heads of the primitive nations. This is in accordance with the fact that
the church is the counterpart of the world, not only in diversity of
character and destiny, but also in the adaptation of the former to work
out the restitution of all things to God in the latter. The covenant
with Abraham is a special means by which the seed may come, who is to
give legal and vital effect to the old and general covenant with Noah
the representative of the nations. The church of God in the world is to
be the instrument by which the kingdom of the world is to become the
kingdom of Christ. "When the Most High bestowed the inheritance on the
nations, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the
peoples according to the number of the sons of Israel" [Deu
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008). This curious sentence may have
an immediate reference to the providential distribution of the human
family over the habitable parts of the earth, according to the number of
his church, and of his dispensation of grace; but at all events it
conveys the great and obvious principle that all things whatsoever in
the affairs of men are antecedently adapted with the most perfect
exactitude to the benign reign of grace already realized in the children
of God, and yet to be extended to all the sons and daughters of Adam.

[Gen 46:28-34](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#028)

The settlement in Goshen is now narrated. "Judah he sent before him." We
have already seen why the three older sons of Jacob were disqualified
for taking the lead in important matters relating to the family. "To
lead the way before him into Goshen" - to get the requisite directions
from Joseph, and then conduct the immigrants to their destined
resting-place. "And went up." Egypt was the valley of the Nile, and
therefore, a low country. Goshen was comparatively high, and therefore,
at some distance from the Nile and the sea. "And he appeared unto him."
A phrase usually applied to the appearance of God to men, and intended
to intimate the unexpectedness of the sight, which now came before the
eyes of Jacob. "I will go up." In a courtly sense, to approach the
residence of the sovereign is to go up. Joseph intends to make the
"occupation" of his kindred a prominent part of his communication to
Pharaoh, in order to secure their settlement in Goshen. This he
considers desirable, on two grounds: first, because Goshen was best
suited for pasture; and secondly, because the chosen family would thus
be comparatively isolated from Egyptian society.

The two nations were in some important respects mutually repulsive. The
idolatrous and superstitious customs of the Egyptians were abhorrent to
a worshipper of the true God; and "every shepherd was the abomination of
Egypt." The expression here employed is very strong, and rises even to a
religious aversion. Herodotus makes the cowherds the third of the seven
classes into which the Egyptians were divided (Herodotus ii. 164).
Others include them in the lowest class of the community. This, however,
is not sufficient to account for the national antipathy. About seventeen
or eighteen centuries before the Christian era it is probable that the
Hyksos, or shepherd kings, were masters of the southern part of the
country, while a native dynasty still prevailed in lower Egypt. The
religion of these shepherd intruders was different from that of the
Egyptians which they treated with disrespect. They were addicted to the
barbarities which are usually incident to a foreign rule. It is not
surprising, therefore, that the shepherd became the abomination of
Egypt.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 47](gen047)

</div>
