<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen031)  [Next](gen033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#001)

\- Jacob Wrestles in Prayer

3\. מחנים machănāyı̂m, Machanaim, "two camps."

22\. יבק yaboq, Jabboq; related: בקק bāqaq "gush or gurgle out" or אבק
'ābaq in niphal, "wrestle." Now Wady Zurka.

29\. ישׂראל yı̂śrā'ēl, Jisrael, "prince of God."

31\. פניאל penı̂y'ēl = פנוּאל penû'ēl, Peniel, Penuel, "face of God."

After twenty years spent in Aram, Jacob now returns to Kenann. As his
departure was marked by a great moment in his spiritual life, so he is
now approaching to a crisis in his life of no less significance

[Gen 32:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#001)

Jacob has a vision of the heavenly host. This passage, recording Laban's
farewell and departure, closes the connection of Jacob with Haran and
all its toils of servitude, and is hence, annexed to the previous
chapter in the English version. In the distribution of the original
text, it is regarded as the counterpart of the two following verses, in
which Jacob's onward progress is mentioned, and so placed with them at
the beginning of a new chapter. "The angels of God met him." Twenty
years ago Jacob saw the mystical ladder connecting heaven and earth, and
the angels of God thereupon ascending and descending from the one to the
other. Now, in circumstances of danger, he sees the angels of God on
earth, encamped beside or around his own camp [Psa
34:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#008). He recognizes them as God's
camp, and names the place Mahanaim, from the double encampment. This
vision is not dwelt upon, as it is the mere sequel of the former scene
at Bethel. Mahanaim has been identified with Mahneh, about eight miles
from the cairn of Laban and Jacob.

[Gen 32:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#004)

Jacob now sends a message to Esau apprising him of his arrival. Unto the
land of Seir. Arabia Petraea, with which Esau became connected by his
marriage with a daughter of Ishmael. He was now married 56 years to his
first two wives, and 20 to his last, and therefore, had a separate and
extensive establishment of children and grandchildren. Jacob endeavors
to make amends for the past by an humble and respectful approach to his
older brother, in which he styles himself, "thy servant" and Esau, "my
lord." He informs him of his wealth, to intimate that he did not expect
anything from him. "Four hundred men with him." This was a formidable
force. Esau had begun to live by the sword [Gen
27:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#040), and had surrounded himself with
a numerous body of followers. Associated by marriage with the Hittites
and the Ishmaelites, he had rapidly risen to the rank of a powerful
chieftain. It is vain to conjecture with what intent Esau advanced at
the head of so large a retinue. It is probable that he was accustomed to
a strong escort, that he wished to make an imposing appearance before
his brother, and that his mind was in that wavering state, when the
slightest incident might soothe him into good-will, or arouse him to
vengeance. Jacob, remembering his own former dealings with him, has good
cause for alarm. He betakes himself to the means of deliverance. He
disposes of his horde into two camps, that if one were attacked and
captured, the other might meanwhile escape. He never neglects to take
all the precautions in his power.

[Gen 32:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#010)

Next, he betakes himself to prayer. He appeals to the God of Abraham and
Isaac, to Yahweh the God of promise and performance. "I am less than;"
unworthy of all the mercy and truth of God. "With my staff." Jacob seems
to have left his home without escort and without means. It was evidently
intended that he should return in a short time; but unforeseen
circumstances lengthened the period. "Me, the mother with the children."
Me is used here in that pregnant sense which is familiar in Scripture,
to include his whole clan; as Ishmael, Israel, Edom, often stand for
their respective races. He then pleads the express promise of God [Gen
28:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#013); [Gen
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#003).

[Gen 32:14-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#014)

Jacob sends forward a present to Esau. "He lodged there that night."
Mahanaim may have been about twenty-five miles from the Jabbok. At some
point in the interval he awaited the return of his messengers. Abiding
during the night in the camp, not far from the ford of the Jabbok, he
selects and sends forward to Esau his valuable present of five hundred
and fifty head of cattle. "That which was come into his hand," into his
possession. The cattle are selected according to the proportions of male
and female which were adopted from experience among the ancients (Varro,
de re rust. II. 3). "Every drove by itself," with a space between, that
Esau might have time to estimate the great value of the gift. The
repetition of the announcement of the gift, and of Jacob himself being
at hand, was calculated to appease Esau, and persuade him that Jacob was
approaching him in all brotherly confidence and affection. "Appease
him." Jacob designs this gift to be the means of propitiating his
brother before he appears in his presence. "Lift up my face," accept me.
"Lodged that night in the camp;" after sending this present over the
Jabbok. This seems the same night referred to in [Gen
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#014).

[Gen 32:23-32](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#023)

Jacob wrestles with a man. "Passed over the ford of Jabbok." The Jabbok
rose near Rabbath Ammon, and flowed into the Jordan, separating North
Gilead from South, or the kingdom of Og from that of Sihon. "Jacob was
left alone," on the north side, after all had passed over. "A man
wrestled with him." When God has a new thing of a spiritual nature to
bring into the experience of man, he begins with the senses. He takes
man on the ground on which he finds him, and leads him through the
senses to the higher things of reason, conscience, and communion with
God.

Jacob seems to have gone through the principles or foundations of faith
in God and repentance toward him, which gave a character to the history
of his grandfather and father, and to have entered upon the stage of
spontaneous action. He had that inward feeling of spiritual power which
prompted the apostle to say, "I can do all things." Hence, we find him
dealing with Esau for the birthright, plotting with his mother for the
blessing, erecting a pillar and vowing a vow at Bethel, overcoming Laban
with his own weapons, and even now taking the most prudent measures for
securing a welcome from Esau on his return. He relied indeed on God, as
was demonstrated in many of his words and deeds; but the prominent
feature of his character was a strong and firm reliance on himself. But
this practical self-reliance, though naturally springing up in the new
man and highly commendable in itself, was not yet in Jacob duly
subordinated to that absolute reliance which ought to be placed in the
Author of our being and our salvation. Hence, he had been betrayed into
intrusive, dubious, and even sinister courses, which in the retributive
providence of God had brought, and were yet to bring him, into many
troubles and perplexities. The hazard of his present situation arose
chiefly from his former unjustifiable practices toward his brother. He
is now to learn the lesson of unreserved reliance on God.

"A man" appeared to him in his loneliness; one having the bodily form
and substance of a man. Wrestled with him - encountered him in the very
point in which he was strong. He had been a taker by the heel from his
very birth, and his subsequent life had been a constant and successful
struggle with adversaries. And when he, the stranger, saw that he
prevailed not over him. Jacob, true to his character, struggles while
life remains, with this new combatant. touched the socket of his thigh,
so that it was wrenched out of joint. The thigh is the pillar of a man's
strength, and its joint with the hip the seat of physical force for the
wrestler. Let the thigh bone be thrown out of joint, and the man is
utterly disabled. Jacob now finds that this mysterious wrestler has
wrested from him, by one touch, all his might, and he can no longer
stand alone. Without any support whatever from himself, he hangs upon
the conqueror, and in that condition learns by experience the practice
of sole reliance on one mightier than himself. This is the turning-point
in this strange drama. Henceforth Jacob now feels himself strong, not in
himself, but in the Lord, and in the power of his might. What follows is
merely the explication and the consequence of this bodily conflict.

And he, the Mighty Stranger, said, Let me go, for the dawn ariseth. The
time for other avocations is come: let me go. He does not shake off the
clinging grasp of the now disabled Jacob, but only calls upon him to
relax his grasp. "And he, Jacob, said, I will not let thee go except
thou bless me". Despairing now of his own strength, he is Jacob still:
he declares his determination to cling on until his conqueror bless him.
He now knows he is in the hand of a higher power, who can disable and
again enable, who can curse and also bless. He knows himself also to be
now utterly helpless without the healing, quickening, protecting power
of his victor, and, though he die in the effort, he will not let him go
without receiving this blessing. Jacob's sense of his total debility and
utter defeat is now the secret of his power with his friendly
vanquisher. He can overthrow all the prowess of the self-reliant, but he
cannot resist the earnest entreaty of the helpless.

[Gen 32:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#028)

"What is thy name?" He reminds him of his former self, Jacob, the
supplanter, the self-reliant, self-seeking. But now he is disabled,
dependent on another, and seeking a blessing from another, and for all
others as well as himself. No more Jacob shall thy name be called, but
Israel - a prince of God, in God, with God. In a personal conflict,
depending on thyself, thou wert no match for God. But in prayer,
depending on another, thou hast prevailed with God and with men. The new
name is indicative of the new nature which has now come to its
perfection of development in Jacob. Unlike Abraham, who received his new
name once for all, and was never afterward called by the former one,
Jacob will hence, be called now by the one and now by the other, as the
occasion may serve. For he was called from the womb [Gen
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023), and both names have a spiritual
significance for two different aspects of the child of God, according to
the apostle's paradox, "Work out your own salvation with fear and
trembling, for it is God that worketh in you both to will and to do of
his good pleasure" [Phi 2:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012). "Tell
now thy name."

Disclose to me thy nature. This mysterious Being intimates by his reply
that Jacob was to learn his nature, so far as he yet required to know
it, from the event that had just occurred; and he was well acquainted
with his name. And he blessed him there. He had the power of disabling
the self-sufficient creature, of upholding that creature when unable to
stand, of answering prayer, of conferring a new name, with a new phase
of spiritual life, and of blessing with a physical renovation, and with
spiritual capacity for being a blessing to mankind. After all this,
Jacob could not any longer doubt who he was. There are, then, three acts
in this dramatic scene: first, Jacob wrestling with the Omnipresent in
the form of a man, in which he is signally defeated; second, Jacob
importunately supplicating Yahweh, in which he prevails as a prince of
God; third, Jacob receiving the blessing of a new name, a new
development of spiritual life, and a new capacity for bodily action.

[Gen 32:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#031)

Peniel - the face of God. The reason of this name is assigned in the
sentence, "I have seen God face to face." He is at first called a man.
Hosea terms him the angel ([Hos 12:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#004)
(3, 4). And here Jacob names him God. Hence, some men, deeply penetrated
with the ineffable grandeur of the divine nature, are disposed to
resolve the first act at least into an impression on the imagination. We
do not pretend to define with undue nicety the mode of this wrestling.
And we are far from saying that every sentence of Scripture is to be
understood in a literal sense. But until some cogent reason be assigned,
we do not feel at liberty to depart from the literal sense in this
instance. The whole theory of a revelation from God to man is founded
upon the principle that God can adapt himself to the apprehension of the
being whom he has made in his own image. This principle we accept, and
we dare not limit its application "further than the demonstrative laws
of reason and conscience demand." If God walk in the garden with Adam,
expostulate with Cain, give a specification of the ark to Noah, partake
of the hospitality of Abraham, take Lot by the hand to deliver him from
Sodom, we cannot affirm that he may not, for a worthy end, enter into a
bodily conflict with Jacob. These various manifestations of God to man
differ only in degree. If we admit anyone, we are bound by parity of
reason to accept all the others.

We have also already noted the divine method of dealing with man. He
proceeds from the known to the unknown, from the simple to the complex,
from the material to the spiritual, from the sensible to the
super-sensible. So must he do, until he have to deal with a world of
philosophers. And even then, and only then, will his method of teaching
and dealing with people be clearly and fully understood. The more we
advance in the philosophy of spiritual things, the more delight will we
feel in discerning the marvelous analogy and intimate nearness of the
outward to the inward, and the material to the spiritual world. We have
only to bear in mind that in man there is a spirit as well as a body;
and in this outward wrestling of man with man we have a token of the
inward wrestling of spirit with spirit, and therefore, an experimental
instance of that great conflict of the Infinite Being with the finite
self, which grace has introduced into our fallen world, recorded here
for the spiritual edification of the church on earth.

"My life is preserved." The feeling of conscience is, that no sinner can
see the infinitely holy God and live. "And he halted upon his thigh."
The wrenching of the tendons and muscles was mercifully healed, so as to
leave a permanent monument, in Jacob's halting gait, that God had
overcome his self-will.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 33](gen033)

</div>
