<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen027)  [Next](gen029.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#001.md)

\- Jacob's Journey to Haran

3\. קהל qâhāl, "congregation."

9\. מחלת māchălat, Machalath, "sickness, or a harp."

19\. לוּז lûz, Luz, "almond."

The blessing of his sons was the last passage in the active life of
Isaac, after which he retires from the scene. Jacob now becomes the
leading figure in the sacred history. His spiritual character has yet
come out to view. But even now we can discern the general distinction in
the lives of the three patriarchs. Abraham's is a life of authority and
decision; Isaac's, of submission and acquiescence; and Jacob's, of trial
and struggle.

[Gen 28:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#001.md)

Isaac has now become alive to the real destiny of Jacob. He therefore
calls for him to bless him, and give him a command. The command is to
take a wife, not from Kenaan, but from the kindred of his parents. The
blessing comes from "God Almighty" ([Gen
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001).md). It is that belonging to the
chosen seed, "the blessing of Abraham." It embraces a numerous
offspring, the land of promise, and all else that is included in the
blessing of Abraham. "A congregation of peoples." This is the word
"congregation" (קהל qâhāl) which is afterward applied to the assembled
people of God, and to which the Greek ἐκκλησία ekklēsia, "ecclesia,"
corresponds. Jacob complies with his mother's advice and his father's
command, and, at the same time, reaps the bitter fruit of his fraud
against his brother in the hardship and treachery of an exile of twenty
years. The aged Isaac is not without his share in the unpleasant
consequences of endeavoring to go against the will of God.

[Gen 28:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#006.md)

Esau is induced, by the charge of his parents to Jacob, the compliance
of the latter with their wishes, and by their obvious dislike to the
daughters of Kenaan, to take Mahalath, a daughter of Ishmael, in
addition to his former wives. "Went unto Ishmael;" that is, to the
family or tribe of Ishmael, as Ishmael himself was now thirteen years
dead. Esau's hunting and roving career had brought him into contact with
this family, and we shall presently find him settled in a neighboring
territory.

[Gen 28:10-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#010.md)

Jacob's dream and vow. Setting out on the way to Haran, he was overtaken
by night, and slept in the field. He was far from any dwelling, or he
did not wish to enter the house of a stranger. He dreams. A ladder or
stair is seen reaching from earth to heaven, on which angels ascend and
descend. This is a medium of communication between heaven and earth, by
which messengers pass to and fro on errands of mercy. Heaven and earth
have been separated by sin. But this ladder has re-established the
contact. It is therefore a beautiful emblem of what mediates and
reconciles [Joh 1:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#051.md). It here serves
to bring Jacob into communication with God, and teaches him the emphatic
lesson that he is accepted through a mediator. "The Lord stood above
it," and Jacob, the object of his mercy, beneath. First. He reveals
himself to the sleeper as "the Lord" [Gen
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004.md), "the God of Abraham thy father,
and of Isaac." It is remarkable that Abraham is styled his father, that
is, his actual grandfather, and covenant father. Second. He renews the
promise of the land, of the seed, and of the blessing in that seed for
the whole race of man. Westward, eastward, northward, and southward are
they to break forth. This expression points to the world-wide
universality of the kingdom of the seed of Abraham, when it shall become
the fifth monarchy, that shall subdue all that went before, and endure
forever. This transcends the destiny of the natural seed of Abraham.
Third. He then promises to Jacob personally to be with him, protect him,
and bring him back in safety. This is the third announcement of the seed
that blesses to the third in the line of descent [Gen
12:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#002.md); [Gen
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018.md); [Gen
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#004.md).

[Gen 28:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#016.md)

Jacob awakes, and exclaims, "Surely the Lord is in this place, and I
knew it not." He knew his omnipresence; but he did not expect a special
manifestation of the Lord in this place, far from the sanctuaries of his
father. He is filled with solemn awe, when he finds himself in the house
of God and at the gate of heaven. The pillar is the monument of the
event. The pouring of oil upon it is an act of consecration to God who
has there appeared to him [Num 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#001.md). He
calls the name of the place Bethel, "the house of God." This is not the
first time it received the name. Abraham also worshipped God here, and
met with the name already existing (see on [Gen
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#008.md); [Gen
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#003.md); [Gen
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#030)..md)

[Gen 28:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#020.md)

Jacob's vow. A vow is a solemn engagement to perform a certain duty, the
obligation of which is felt at the time to be especially binding. It
partakes, therefore, of the nature of a promise or a covenant. It
involves in its obligation, however, only one party, and is the
spontaneous act of that party. Here, then, Jacob appears to take a step
in advance of his predecessors. Hitherto, God had taken the initiative
in every promise, and the everlasting covenant rests solely on his
eternal purpose. Abraham had responded to the call of God, believed in
the Lord, walked before him, entered into communion with him, made
intercession with him, and given up his only son to him at his demand.
In all this there is an acceptance on the part of the creature of the
supremacy of the merciful Creator. But now the spirit of adoption
prompts Jacob to a spontaneous movement toward God. This is no ordinary
vow, referring to some special or occasional resolve.

It is the grand and solemn expression of the soul's free, full, and
perpetual acceptance of the Lord to be its own God. This is the most
frank and open utterance of newborn spiritual liberty from the heart of
man that has yet appeared in the divine record. "If God will be with
me." This is not the condition on which Jacob will accept God in a
mercenary spirit. It is merely the echo and the thankful acknowledgment
of the divine assurance, "I am with thee," which was given immediately
before. It is the response of the son to the assurance of the father:
"Wilt thou indeed be with me? Thou shalt be my God." "This stone shall
be God's house," a monument of the presence of God among his people, and
a symbol of the indwelling of his Spirit in their hearts. As it comes in
here it signalizes the grateful and loving welcome and entertainment
which God receives from his saints. "A tenth will I surely give unto
thee." The honored guest is treated as one of the family. Ten is the
whole: a tenth is a share of the whole. The Lord of all receives one
share as an acknowledgment of his sovereign right to all. Here it is
represented as the full share given to the king who condescends to dwell
with his subjects. Thus, Jacob opens his heart, his home, and his
treasure to God. These are the simple elements of a theocracy, a
national establishment of the true religion. The spirit of power, and of
love, and of a sound mind, has begun to reign in Jacob. As the Father is
prominently manifested in regenerate Abraham, and the Son in Isaac, so
also the Spirit in Jacob.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 29](gen029.md)

</div>
