<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen049)  [Next](exo000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 50](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#001)

\- The Burial of Jacob

10\. אטד 'āṭâd Atad, "the buck-thorn."

11\. מצרים אבל 'ābêl-mı̂tsrayı̂m, Abel-Mitsraim, "mourning of Mizraim," or
meadow of Mizraim.

This chapter records the burial of Jacob and the death of Joseph, and so
completes the history of the chosen family, and the third bible for the
instruction of man.

[Gen 50:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#001)

After the natural outburst of sorrow for his deceased parent, Joseph
gave orders to embalm the body, according to the custom of Egypt. "His
servants, the physicians." As the grand vizier of Egypt, he has
physicians in his retinue. The classes and functions of the physicians
in Egypt may be learned from Herodotus (ii. 81-86). There were special
physicians for each disease; and the embalmers formed a class by
themselves. "Forty days" were employed in the process of embalming;
"seventy days," including the forty, were devoted to mourning for the
dead. Herodotus mentions this number as the period of embalming.
Diodorus (i. 91) assigns upwards of thirty days to the process. It is
probable that the actual process was continued for forty days, and that
the body lay in natron for the remaining thirty days of mourning. See
Hengstenberg's B. B. Mos. u. Aeg., and Rawlinson's Herodotus.

[Gen 50:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#004)

Joseph, by means of Pharaoh's courtiers, not in person, because he was a
mourner, applies for leave to bury his father in the land of Kenaan,
according to his oath. This leave is freely and fully allowed.

[Gen 50:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#007)

The funeral procession is now described. "All the servants of Pharaoh."
The highest honor is conferred on Jacob for Joseph's sake. "The elders
of Pharaoh, and all the elders of the land of Mizraim." The court and
state officials are here separately specified. "All the house." Not only
the heads, but all the sons and servants that are able to go. Chariots
and horsemen accompany them as a guard on the way. "The threshing-floor
of Atari, or of the buck-thorn." This is said to be beyond Jordan.
Deterred, probably, by some difficulty in the direct route, they seem to
have gone round by the east side of the Salt Sea. "A mourning of seven
days." This is a last sad farewell to the departed patriarch.
Abel-Mizraim. This name, like many in the East, has a double meaning.
The word Abel no doubt at first meant mourning, though the name would be
used by many, ignorant of its origin, in the sense of a meadow. "His
sons carried him." The main body of the procession seems to have halted
beyond the Jordan, and awaited the return of the immediate relatives,
who conveyed the body to its last resting-place. The whole company then
returned together to Egypt.

[Gen 50:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#015)

His brethren supplicate Joseph for forgiveness. "They sent unto Joseph,"
commissioned one of their number to speak to him. now that our common
father has given us this command. "And Joseph wept" at the distress and
doubt of his brothers. He no doubt summons them before him, when they
fall down before him entreating his forgiveness. Joseph removes their
fears. "Am I in God's stead?" that I should take the law into my own
hands, and take revenge. God has already judged them, and moreover
turned their sinful deed into a blessing. He assures them of his
brotherly kindness toward them.

[Gen 50:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#022)

The biography of Joseph is now completed. "The children of the third
generation" - the grandsons of grandsons in the line of Ephraim. We have
here an explicit proof that an interval of about twenty years between
the births of the father and that of his first-born was not unusual
during the lifetime of Joseph. "And Joseph took an oath." He thus
expressed his unwavering confidence in the return of the sons of Israel
to the land of promise. "God will surely visit." He was embalmed and put
in a coffin, and so kept by his descendants, as was not unusual in
Egypt. And on the return of the sons of Israel from Egypt they kept
their oath to Joseph [Exo 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#019), and
buried his bones in Shekem [Jos 24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032).

The sacred writer here takes leave of the chosen family, and closes the
bible of the sons of Israel. It is truly a wonderful book. It lifts the
veil of mystery that hangs over the present condition of the human race.
It records the origin and fall of man, and thus explains the
co-existence of moral evil and a moral sense, and the hereditary memory
of God and judgment in the soul of man. It records the cause and mode of
the confusion of tongues, and thus explains the concomitance of the
unity of the race and the specific diversity of mode or form in human
speech. It records the call of Abraham, and thus accounts for the
preservation of the knowledge of God and his mercy in one section of the
human race, and the corruption or loss of it in all the rest. We need
scarcely remark that the six days' creation accounts for the present
state of nature. It thus solves the fundamental questions of physics,
ethics, philology, and theology for the race of Adam. It notes the
primitive relation of man to God, and marks the three great stages of
human development that came in with Adam, Noah, and Abraham. It points
out the three forms of sin that usher in these stages - the fall of
Adam, the intermarriage of the sons of God with the daughters of men,
and the building of the tower of Babel. It gradually unfolds the purpose
and method of grace to the returning penitent through a Deliverer who is
successively announced as the seed of the woman, of Shem, of Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, and Judah. This is the second Adam, who, when the covenant
of works was about to fall to the ground through the failure of the
first Adam, undertook to uphold it by fulfilling all its conditions on
behalf of those who are the objects of the divine grace.

Hence, the Lord establishes his covenant successively with Adam, Noah,
and Abraham; with Adam after the fall tacitly, with Noah expressly, and
with both generally as the representatives of the race descending from
them; with Abraham especially and instrumentally as the channel through
which the blessings of salvation might be at length extended to all the
families of the earth. So much of this plan of mercy is revealed from
time to time to the human race as comports with the progress they have
made in the education of the intellectual, moral, and active faculties.
This only authentic epitome of primeval history is worthy of the
constant study of intelligent and responsible man.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Introduction](exo000)

</div>
