<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen036)  [Next](gen038.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 37](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#001.md)

\- Joseph Was Sold into Egypt

17\. דתין dotayı̂n Dothain, "two wells?" (Gesenius)

25\. נכאת neko't "tragacanth" or goat's-thorn gum, yielded by the
"astragalus gummifer", a native of Mount Lebanon. צרי tsērı̂y
"opobalsamum," the resin of the balsam tree, growing in Gilead, and
having healing qualities. לט loṭ, λῆδον lēdon, "ledum, ladanum," in the
Septuagint στακτή staktē. The former is a gum produced from the cistus
rose. The latter is a gum resembling liquid myrrh.

36\. פוטיפר pôṭı̂yphar Potiphar, "belonging to the sun."

The sketch of the race of Edom, given in the preceding piece, we have
seen, reaches down to the time of Moses. Accordingly, the history of
Jacob's seed, which is brought before us in the present document,
reverts to a point of time not only before the close of that piece, but
before the final record of what precedes it. The thread of the narrative
is here taken up from the return of Jacob to Hebron, which was seventeen
years before the death of Isaac.

[Gen 37:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#001.md)

Joseph is the favorite of his father, but not of his brethren. "In the
land of his father's sojournings." This contrasts Jacob with Esau, who
removed to Mount Seir. This notice precedes the phrase, "These are the
generations." The corresponding sentence in the case of Isaac is placed
at the end of the preceding section of the narrative [Gen
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#011.md). "The son of seventeen years;"
in his seventeenth year [Gen 37:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#032.md).
"The sons of Bilhah." The sons of the handmaids were nearer his own age,
and perhaps more tolerant of the favorite than the sons of Leah the free
wife. Benjamin at this time was about four years of age. "An evil report
of them." The unsophisticated child of home is prompt in the disapproval
of evil, and frank in the avowal of his feelings. What the evil was we
are not informed; but Jacob's full-grown sons were now far from the
paternal eye, and prone, as it seems, to give way to temptation. Many
scandals come out to view in the chosen family. "Loved Joseph." He was
the son of his best-loved wife, and of his old age; as Benjamin had not
yet come into much notice. "A Coat of many colors." This was a coat
reaching to the hands and feet, worn by persons not much occupied with
manual labor, according to the general opinion. It was, we conceive,
variegated either by the loom or the needle, and is therefore, well
rendered χιτὼν ποικίλος chitōn poikilos, a motley coat. "Could not bid
peace to him." The partiality of his father, exhibited in so weak a
manner, provokes the anger of his brothers, who cannot bid him good-day,
or greet him in the ordinary terms of good-will.

[Gen 37:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#005.md)

Joseph's dreams excite the jealousy of his brothers. His frankness in
reciting his dream to his brothers marks a spirit devoid of guile, and
only dimly conscious of the import of his nightly visions. The first
dream represents by a figure the humble submission of all his brothers
to him, as they rightly interpret it. "For his dreams and for his
words." The meaning of this dream was offensive enough, and his telling
of it rendered it even more disagreeable. A second dream is given to
express the certainty of the event [Gen
41:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#032.md). The former serves to interpret
the latter. There the sheaves are connected with the brothers who bound
them, and thereby indicate the parties. The eleven stars are not so
connected with them. But here Joseph is introduced directly without a
figure, and the number eleven, taken along with the eleven sheaves of
the former dream, makes the application to the brothers plain. The sun
and moon clearly point out the father and mother. The mother is to be
taken, we conceive, in the abstract, without nicely inquiring whether it
means the departed Rachel, or the probably still living Leah. Not even
the latter seems to have lived to see the fulfillment of this prophetic
dream [Gen 49:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#031.md). The second dream
only aggravated the hatred of his brothers; but his father, while
rebuking him for his speeches, yet marked the saying. The rebuke seems
to imply that the dream, or the telling of it, appears to his father to
indicate the lurking of a self-sufficient or ambitious spirit within the
breast of the youthful Joseph. The twofold intimation, however, came
from a higher source.

[Gen 37:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#012.md)

Joseph is sent to Dothan. Shekem belonged to Jacob; part of it by
purchase, and the rest by conquest. Joseph is sent to inquire of their
welfare (שׁלום shālom "peace," [Gen
37:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#004).md). With obedient promptness the
youth goes to Shekem, where he learns that they had removed to Dothan, a
town about twelve miles due north of Shekem.

[Gen 37:18-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#018.md)

His brothers cast him into a pit. "This master of dreams;" an eastern
phrase for a dreamer. "Let us slay him." They had a foreboding that his
dreams might prove true, and that he would become their arbitrary
master. This thought at all events would abate somewhat of the barbarity
of their designs. It is implied in the closing sentence of their
proposal. Reuben dissuades them from the act of murder, and advises
merely to cast him into the pit, to which they consent. He had a more
tender heart, and perhaps a more tender conscience than the rest, and
intended to send Joseph back safe to his father. He doubtless took care
to choose a pit that was without water.

[Gen 37:25-30](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#025.md)

Reuben rips his clothes when he finds Joseph gone. "To eat bread." This
shows the cold and heartless cruelty of their deed. "A caravan" - a
company of travelling merchants. "Ishmaelites." Ishmael left his
father's house when about fourteen or fifteen years of age. His mother
took him a wife probably when he was eighteen, or twenty at the
furthest. He had arrived at the latter age about one hundred and
sixty-two years before the date of the present occurrence. He had twelve
sons [Gen 25:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#013.md), and if we allow
only four other generations and a fivefold increase, there will be about
fifteen thousand in the fifth generation. "Came from Gilead;" celebrated
for its balm [Jer 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#022.md); [Jer
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#011.md). The caravan road from Damascus
to Egypt touches upon the land of Gilead, goes through Beth-shean, and
passes by Dothan. "Spicery." This gum is called tragacanth, or
goats-thorn gum, because it was supposed to be obtained from this plant.
"Balm," or balsam; an aromatic substance obtained from a plant of the
genus Amyris, a native of Gilead. "Myrrh" is the name of a gum exuding
from the balsamodendron myrrha, growing in Arabia Felix. "Lot," however,
is supposed to be the resinous juice of the cistus or rock rose, a plant
growing in Crete and Syria. Judah, relenting, and revolting perhaps from
the crime of fratricide, proposes to sell Joseph to the merchants.

Midianites and Medanites [Gen 37:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#036.md)
are mere variations apparently of the same name. They seem to have been
the actual purchasers, though the caravan takes its name from the
Ishmaelites, who formed by far the larger portion of it. Midian and
Medan were both sons of Abraham, and during one hundred and twenty-five
years must have increased to a small clan. Thus, Joseph is sold to the
descendants of Abraham. "Twenty silver pieces;" probably shekels. This
is the rate at which Moses estimates a male from five to twenty years
old [Lev 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#005.md). A man-servant was
valued by him at thirty shekels [Exo
21:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#032.md). Reuben finding Joseph gone,
rends his clothes, in token of anguish of mind for the loss of his
brother and the grief of his father.

[Gen 37:31-36](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#031.md)

The brothers contrive to conceal their crime; and Joseph is sold into
Egypt. "Torn, torn in pieces is Joseph." The sight of the bloody coat
convinces Jacob at once that Joseph has been devoured by a wild beast.
"All his daughters." Only one daughter of Jacob is mentioned by name.
These are probably his daughters-in-law. "To the grave." Sheol is the
place to which the soul departs at death. It is so called from its ever
craving, or being empty. "Minister." This word originally means eunuch,
and then, generally, any officer about the court or person of the
sovereign. "Captain of the guards." The guards are the executioners of
the sentences passed by the sovereign on culprits, which were often
arbitrary, summary, and extremely severe. It is manifest, from this dark
chapter, that the power of sin has not been extinguished in the family
of Jacob. The name of God does not appear, and his hand is at present
only dimly seen among the wicked designs, deeds, and devices of these
unnatural brothers. Nevertheless, his counsel of mercy standeth sure,
and fixed is his purpose to bring salvation to the whole race of man, by
means of his special covenant with Abraham.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 38](gen038.md)

</div>
