<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen043)  [Next](gen045.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#001.md)

\- The Ten Brothers Were Tested

Joseph has had the satisfaction of seeing his brother Benjamin safe and
well. He has heard his brothers acknowledging their guilt concerning
himself. He resolves to put their attachment to Benjamin, and the
genuineness of their change of disposition, to a test that will at the
same time expose Benjamin to no hazard.

[Gen 44:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#001.md)

And my cup. - Besides returning each man's money as before, a silver cup
of Joseph's is put in Benjamin's bag, after which, when daylight comes,
they are dismissed. They are scarcely out of the town when Joseph's
steward is ordered to overtake them, and charge them with stealing the
cup. "And whereby indeed he divineth." Divining by cups, we learn from
this, was a common custom in Egypt (Herodotus ii. 83). It is here
mentioned to enhance the value of the cup. Whether Joseph really
practised any sort of divination cannot be determined from this passage.

[Gen 44:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#006.md)

The cup is found in Benjamin's bag. "Spake unto them these words." The
words of Joseph, supplying of course the mention of the cup which is
expressed in the text only by the pronoun this. "We brought back to
thee." Silver that we might have retained, and to which you made no
claim when we tendered it, we brought back. How or why should we
therefore, steal silver? "Now also according to your words let it be."
He adopts their terms with a mitigation. He with whom the cup is found
shall become a slave for life, and the rest be acquitted. The steward
searches from the oldest to the youngest. The cup is found where it was
put.

[Gen 44:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#013.md)

"They rent their garments;" the natural token of a sorrow that knows no
remedy. "And Judah went." He had pledged himself for the safety of
Benjamin to his father. And he was yet there; awaiting no doubt the
result which he anticipated. "They fell before him on the earth." It is
no longer a bending of the head or bowing of the body, but the posture
of deepest humiliation. How deeply that early dream penetrated into the
stern reality! "Wot ye not that such a man as I doth certainly divine?"
Joseph keeps up the show of resentment for a little longer, and brings
out from Judah the most pathetic plea of its kind that ever was uttered.
"The God," the great and only God, "hath found out the iniquity of thy
servants;" in our dark and treacherous dealing with our brother.
"Behold, we are servants to my lord." He resigns himself and all to
perpetual bondage, as the doom of a just God upon their still-remembered
crime. "He shall be my servant; and ye, go up in peace to your father."
Now is the test applied with the nicest adjustment. Now is the moment of
agony and suspense to Joseph. Will my brothers prove true? says he
within himself. Will Judah prove adequate to the occasion? say we. His
pleading with his father augured well.

Verse 18-34

"And Judah came near unto him." He is going to surrender himself as a
slave for life, that Benjamin may go home with his brothers, who are
permitted to depart. "Let thy servant now speak a word in the ears of my
lord." There is nothing here but respectful calmness of demeanor. "And
let not thine anger burn against thy servant." He intuitively feels that
the grand vizier is a man of like feelings with himself. He will
surmount the distinction of rank, and stand with him on the ground of a
common humanity. "For so art thou as Pharaoh." Thou hast power to grant
or withhold my request. This forms, the exordium of the speech. Then
follows the plea. This consists in a simple statement of the facts,
which Judah expects to have its native effect upon a rightly-constituted
heart. We will not touch this statement, except to explain two or three
expressions. A young lad - a comparative youth. "Let me set mine eyes
upon him" - regard him with favor and kindness. "He shall leave his
father and he shall die." If he were to leave his father, his father
would die. Such is the natural interpretation of these words, as the
paternal affection is generally stronger than the filial. "And now let
thy servant now abide instead of the lad a servant to my lord." Such is
the humble and earnest petition of Judah. He calmly and firmly
sacrifices home, family, and birthright, rather than see an aged father
die of a broken heart.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 45](gen045.md)

</div>
