<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen007)  [Next](gen009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001.md)

[Genesis 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 8:1</span></span>

\- The Land Was Dried

1\. שׁכך shākak "stoop, assuage."

3\. חסר chāsar "want, fail, be abated."

4\. אררט 'ărārāṭ, "Ararat," a land forming part of Armenia. It is
mentioned in [Kg2 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#037.md), and [Isa
37:38](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#038.md), as the retreat of Adrammelek
and Sharezer after the murder of their father; and in [Jer
51:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#027.md) as a kingdom.

8\. קלל qālal, "be light, lightened, lightly esteemed, swift."

10\. חוּל chûl, "twist, turn, dance, writhe, tremble, be strong, wait."
יהל yāchal "remain, wait, hope."

13\. חרב chāreb, "be drained, desolated, amazed."

[Gen 8:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001.md)

The waters commence their retreat. "And God remembered Noah." He is said
to remember him when he takes any step to deliver him from the waters.
The several steps to this end are enumerated.

A wind. - This would promote evaporation, and otherwise aid the retreat
of the waters. "The fountains of the deep and the windows of the skies
were shut." The incessant and violent showers had continued for six
weeks. It is probable the weather remained turbid and moist for some
time longer. In the sixth month, however, the rain probably ceased
altogether. Some time before this, the depressing of the ground had
reached its lowest point, and the upheaving had set in. This is the main
cause of the reflux of the waters. All this is described, as we
perceive, according to appearance. It is probable that the former
configuration of the surface was not exactly restored. At all events it
is not necessary, as the ark may have drifted a considerable space in a
hundred and fifty days. Some of the old ground on which primeval man had
trodden may have become a permanent water bed, and a like amount of new
land may have risen to the light in another place. Hence, it is vain to
seek for a spot retaining the precise conditions of the primitive Eden.
The Euphrates and Tigris may substantially remain, but the Pishon and
Gihon may have considerably changed. The Black Sea, the Caspian, the
lakes Van and Urumiah may cover portions of the Adamic land. At the end
of the hundred and fifty days the prevalence of the waters begins to
turn into a positive retreat.

[Gen 8:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#004.md)

The ark rested. - It is stranded on some hill in Ararat. This country
forms part of Armenia. As the drying wind most probably came from the
east or north, it is likely that the ark was drifted toward Asia Minor,
and caught land on some hill in the reaches of the Euphrates. It cannot
be supposed that it rested on either of the peaks now called Ararat, as
Ararat was a country, not a mountain, and these peaks do not seem
suitable for the purpose. The seventh month began usually with the new
moon nearest the vernal equinox, or the 21st of March. "The tenth
month." The waters ceased to prevail on the first of the ninth month.
The ark, though grounded six weeks before, was still deep in the waters.
The tops of the hills began to appear a month after. The subsiding of
the waters seems to have been very slow.

[Gen 8:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#006.md)

The raven and the dove are sent out to bring tidings of the external
world. "Forty days." Before Noah made any experiment he seems to have
allowed the lapse of forty days to undo the remaining effect of the
forty days' rain. "The window." He seems to have been unable to take any
definite observations through the aperture here called a window. The
raven found carrion in abundance, floated probably on the waters, and
did not need to return. This was such a token of the state of things as
Noah might expect from such a messenger. He next sends the dove, who
returns to him. "Yet other seven days." This intimates that he stayed
seven days also after the raven was sent out. The olive leaf plucked off
was a sign of returning safety to the land. It is said by Theophrastus
(Hist. Plant. 4, 7) and Pliny (H. N. 13, 50) that the olive strikes
leaves even under water. From this event, the olive branch became the
symbol of peace, and the dove the emblem of the Comforter, the messenger
of peace. After seven other days, the dove being despatched, returns no
more. The number seven figures very conspicuously in this narrative.
Seven days before the showers commence the command to enter the ark is
given; and at intervals of seven days the winged messengers are sent
out. These intervals point evidently to the period of seven days,
determined by the six days of creation and the seventh day of rest. The
clean beasts also and the birds are admitted into the ark by seven
pairs. This points to the sacredness associated with the number arising
from the hallowed character of the seventh day. The number forty also,
the product of four, the number of the world or universe, and ten the
number of completeness, begins here to be employed for a complete period
in which a process will have run its course.

[Gen 8:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#013.md)

Noah delays apparently another month, and, on the first day of the new
year, ventures to remove the covering of the ark and look around. The
date of the complete drying of the land is then given. The interval from
the entrance to the exit consists of the following periods:

Rain continued 40 days Waters prevailed 150 days Waters subside 99 days
Noah delays 40 days Sending of the raven and the dove 20 days Another
month 29 days Interval until the 27th of the 2nd month 57 days Sum-total
of days 365 days

Hence, it appears that the interval was a lunar year of three hundred
and fifty-six days nearly, and ten days; that is, as nearly as possible,
a solar year. This passage is important on account of the divisions of
time which it brings out at this early epoch. The week of seven days is
plainly intimated. The lunar month and year are evidently known. It is
remarkable that the ten additional days bring up the lunar year in whole
numbers to the solar. It seems a tacit agreement with the real order of
nature. According to the Hebrew text, the deluge commenced in the 1656th
year of the race of man. According to all texts it occurred in the time
of Noah, the ninth in descent from Adam.

[Genesis 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 8:15</span></span>

\- XXVII. The Ark Was Evacuated

19\. משׁפחה mı̂shpāchah, "kind, clan, family." שׁפחה shı̂pchâh,
"maid-servant; related: spread."

20\. מזבח mı̂zbēach, "altar; related: slay animals, sacrifice."

21\. עלה 'olâh, "whole burnt-offering." That which goes up. "Step;
related: go up."

[Gen 8:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#015.md)

The command to leave the ark is given and obeyed. As Noah did not enter,
so neither does he leave the ark, without divine direction. "The fowl,
the cattle, and the creeper." Here, again, these three classes are
specified under the general head of every living tiring. They are again
to multiply on the earth. "Every living thing." This evidently takes the
place of the cattle mentioned before. "After their families." This word
denotes their tribes. It is usually applied to families or clans.

[Gen 8:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#020.md)

The offering of Noah accepted. The return to the dry land, through the
special mercy of God to Noah and his house, is celebrated by an offering
of thanksgiving and faith. "Builded an altar." This is the first mention
of the altar, or structure for the purpose of sacrifice. The Lord is now
on high, having swept away the garden, and withdrawn his visible
presence at the same time from the earth. The altar is therefore erected
to point toward his dwelling-place on high. "Unto the Lord." The
personal name of God is especially appropriate here, as he has proved
himself a covenant keeper and a deliverer to Noah. "Of all clean cattle,
and every clean fowl." The mention of clean birds renders it probable
that these only were taken into the ark by seven pairs [Gen
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#003.md). Every fit animal is included in
this sacrifice, as it is expressive of thanksgiving for a complete
deliverance. We have also here the first mention of the burnt-offering
עלה 'olâh; the whole victim, except the skin, being burned on the altar.
Sacrifice is an act in which the transgressor slays an animal and offers
it in whole, or in part as representative of the whole, to God. In this
act he acknowledges his guilt, the claim of the offended law upon his
life, and the mercy of the Lord in accepting a substitute to satisfy
this claim for the returning penitent. He at the same time actually
accepts the mercy of the Most High, and comes forward to plead it in the
appointed way of reconciliation. The burnt-offering is the most perfect
symbol of this substitution, and most befitting the present occasion,
when life has been granted to the inmates of the ark amidst the
universal death.

[Gen 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021.md)

The effect of this plea is here described. The Lord smelled the sweet
savor. He accepted the typical substitute, and, on account of the
sacrifice, the offerers, the surviving ancestors of the post-diluvian
race. Thus, the re-entrance of the remnant of mankind upon the joys and
tasks of life is inaugurated by an articulate confession of sin, a
well-understood foreshadowing of the coming victim for human guilt, and
a gracious acceptance of this act of faith. "The Lord said in his
heart." It is the inward resolve of his will. The purpose of mercy is
then expressed in a definite form, suited to the present circumstances
of the delivered family. "I will not again curse the soil any more on
account of man." This seems at first sight to imply a mitigation of the
hardship and toil which man was to experience in cultivating the ground
[Gen 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#017.md). At all events, this very
toil is turned into a blessing to him who returns from his sin and
guilt, to accept the mercy, and live to the glory of his Maker and
Saviour. But the main reference of the passage is doubtless to the curse
of a deluge such as what was now past. This will not be renewed.
"Because the imagination of his heart is evil from his youth." This is
the reason for the past judgment, the curse upon the soil: not for the
present promise of a respite for the future. Accordingly, it is to be
taken in close connection with the cursing of the soil, of which it
assigns the judicial cause. It is explanatory of the preceding phrase,
on account of man. The reason for the promise of escape from the fear of
a deluge for the future is the sacrifice of Noah, the priest and
representative of the race, with which the Lord is well pleased. The
closing sentence of this verse is a reiteration in a more explicit form
of the same promise. "Neither will I again smite all living as I have
done." There will be no repetition of the deluge that had just overswept
the land and destroyed the inhabitants.

[Gen 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#022.md)

Henceforth all the days of the earth. - After these negative assurances
come the positive blessings to be permanently enjoyed while the present
constitution of the earth continues. These are summed up in the
following terms:

HEAT Sowing, beginning in October Reaping, ending in June COLD Early
fruit, in July Fruit harvest, ending in September

The cold properly occupies the interval between sowing and reaping, or
the months of January and February. From July to September is the period
of heat. In Palestine, the seedtime began in October or November, when
the wheat was sown. Barley was not generally sown until January. The
grain harvest began early in May, and continued in June. The early
fruits, such as grapes and figs, made their appearance in July and
August; the full ingathering, in September and October. But the passage
before us is not limited to the seasons of any particular country.
Besides the seasons, it guarantees the continuance of the agreeable
vicissitudes of day and night. It is probable that even these could not
be distinguished during part of the deluge of waters. At all events,
they did not present any sensible change when darkness reigned over the
primeval abyss.

The term of this continuance is here defined. It is to last as long as
the order of things introduced by the six days' creation endures. This
order is not to be sempiternal. When the race of man has been filled up,
it is here hinted that the present system of nature on the earth may be
expected to give place to another and a higher order of things.

Here it is proper to observe the mode of Scripture in the promise of
blessing. In the infancy of mankind, when the eye gazed on the present,
and did not penetrate into the future, the Lord promised the immediate
and the sensible blessings of life, because these alone are as yet
intelligible to the childlike race, and they are, at the same time, the
immediate earnest of endless blessings. As the mind developes, and the
observable universe becomes more fully comprehended, these present and
sensible sources of creature happiness correspondingly expand, and
higher and more ethereal blessings begin to dawn upon the mind. When the
prospect of death opens to the believer a new and hitherto unknown world
of reality, then the temporal and corporeal give way to the eternal and
spiritual. And as with the individual, so is it with the race. The
present boon is the earnest in hand, fully satisfying the existing
aspirations of the infantile desire. But it is soon found that the
present is always the bud of the future; and as the volume of promise is
unrolled, piece by piece, before the eye of the growing race, while the
present and the sensible lose nothing of their intrinsic value, the
opening glories of intellectual and spiritual enjoyment add an
indescribable zest to the blessedness of a perpetuated life. Let not us,
then, who flow in the full tide of the latter day, despise the rudiment
of blessing in the first form in which it was conferred on Noah and his
descendants; but rather remember that is not the whole content of the
divine good-will, but only the present shape of an ever-expanding
felicity, which is limited neither by time nor sense.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 9](gen009.md)

</div>
