<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen035)  [Next](gen037) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 36](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#001)

\- Section XII - Jacob

\- The History of Esau

2\. &lt;אהלבמה 'ohŏlı̂ybâmâh, Oholibamah, "tent of the high place." ענה
‛ǎnâh, 'Anah, "answering." צבעון tsı̂b‛ôn, Tsib'on, "dyer, colored."

4\. אליפז 'ělı̂yphaz, Eliphaz, "God of strength." רעוּאל re‛û'êl Re'uel,
"friend of God."

5\. יעוּשׁ ye‛ûsh, Je'ush, "haste." יעלם ya‛lâm, Ja'lam, "hiding." קרח
qôrach Qorach, "ice."

11\. תימן têymân, Teman, "right-hand man." אומר 'ômār, Omar, "eloquent."
צפו tsephô, Tsepho, "watch." געתם ga‛tâm Ga'tam, "touch." קנז qenaz
Qenaz, "hunting."

12\. תמנע tı̂mnâ( Timna', "restraint." עמלק ‛ǎmâlêq, 'Amaleq, "licking
up, laboring."

13\. נחת nachath, Nachath, "going down, rest." זרח zerach, Zerach,
"rising" (of light). שׁמח shammâh, Shammah, "wasting." מזה mı̂zzâh,
Mizzah, "fear, sprinkling."

20\. ליטן lôṭân, Lotan, "covering, veiled." שׁובל shôbâl, Shobal,
"flowing, a shoot."

21\. דשׁון dı̂yshôn, Dishon, "a kind of gazelle, fat." אצר 'etser, Etser,
"store." דישׁן dı̂yshân, Dishan, "threshing."

22\. חרי chôrı̂y, Chori, "troglodyte." הימם hēmām, Hemam, "noise,
commotion."

23\. עלון ‛alvân, 'Alvan, "lofty." מנחת mânachath, Manachath, "rest."
עיבל ‛êybâl, 'Ebal, "stripped of leaves." שׁפו shephô, Shepho, "bare."
אונם 'ônâm, Onam, "strong."

24\. איה 'ayâh, Ajjah, "cry, hawk." ימם yêm "hot springs." Not mules
(פידים peyādı̂ym) nor giants (אימים 'êymı̂ym).

26\. חמדן chemdân, Chemdan, "pleasant." אשׁבן 'eshbân, Eshban,
"thought?" יתרן yı̂thrân, Jithran, "gain." כרן kerân, Keran, "harp?"

27\. בלהן bı̂lhân, Bilhan, "timid." זעון za‛ăvân, Za'avan, "troubled?"
עקן ‛âqân, 'Aqan, "twistinq."

28\. ארן 'ǎrân, Aran, "wild-goat?"

32\. בלע bela‛, Bela' "devouring." בעור be‛ôr, Be'or, "torch." דנהבה
dı̂nhâbâh, Dinhabah.

33\. יובב yôbâb, Jobab, "shout." בצרה bātsrâh Botsrah, "fold, fort."

34\. חשׁם chûshâm, Chusham, "haste."

35\. הדד hădad, Hadad, "breaking, shout." בדד bedad Bedad, "separation."
עוית ‛ǎvı̂yth, 'Avith, "twisting."

36\. שׂמלה śamlâh, Samlah, "garment." משׂרקה maśrêqâh, Masreqah,
"vineyard."

37\. שׁאוּל shâ'ûl, Shaul, "asked."

38\. חנן בעל ba‛al-chānān, Ba'al-chanan, "lord of grace." עכבור ‛akbôr,
'Akbor, "mouse."

39\. הדר hădar, Hadar, "honor." פעו pâ‛û, Pa'u, "bleeting." מחיטאל
mehêyṭab'êl, Mehetab'el, "God benefiting." מטרד maṭrêd, Matred, "push."
זהב מי mēy-zâhāb, Me-zahab, "water of gold."

40\. יתת yethêth, Jetheth, "a nail?"

41\. אלה 'êlâh, Elah, "terebinth." פינון pı̂ynôn, Pinon, "dark?"

42\. מבצר mı̂btsâr, Mibtsar, "fortress."

43\. מגדיאל magdı̂y'êl, Magdiel, "prince of God." עירם ‛ı̂yrâm 'Iram,
"civic or naked."

The two documents that now remain run parallel to one another in point
of time. They relate to the two sons of Isaac; and, as usual, the record
of the one, who, though first born, falls into the ranks of paganism, is
first given briefly, and thus dismissed, in order to make way for the
more elaborate history of the chosen seed. The latter document does not
terminate with the book of Genesis. We do not again meet with the
phrase, "and these are the generations," until we come to the third
chapter of Numbers, and even then it is only applied in a subordinate
sense to the family of Aaron and Moses, and the priesthood connected
with them. Hence, the latter document may be regarded as extending
through the remaining books of the Pentateuch. The former may therefore,
be of like extent in regard to time. The last of the eight kings, of
whom it is not said that he died, seems to have been the contemporary of
Moses, who made application to him for leave to pass through his land.
If this be so, it follows that the remainder of Genesis comes
immediately from the hand of Moses; a result which is in accordance with
other indications that have presented themselves in the previous part of
this book. This interesting monument of antiquity, from its extreme
brevity, leaves many questions which it suggests to our minds
unanswered, and in the absence of all other information, we must rest
contented with the meagre notices of the race of Edom which it has
furnished. And where we cannot ascertain the actual connection of the
events and individuals mentioned, we must be satisfied with any possible
relation in which they may be placed. The notice, notwithstanding its
brevity, we shall find to be arranged with admirable precision.

[Gen 36:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#001)

This passage is introductory, and records the settlement of Esau with
his family in Mount Seir. "Esau, who is Edom." This is a fact of which
we were informed in the previous history [Gen
25:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#025), [Gen
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#030). It is mentioned here because
the latter name gave origin to the national designation; namely, the
Edomites or Idumaeans. The occurrence of this explanatory or definitive
clause here and in other parts of this chapter throws light on the
manner in which this work was composed. Such parenthetical explanations
are sometimes ascribed to the reviser or redactor of the original text.
And to this there is no theoretic objection, provided the reviser be
allowed to be of equal authority with the original author, and the
explanatory addition be necessary for the reader of a later period, and
could not have been furnished by the original author. Otherwise, such a
mode of accounting for these simple clauses is unnecessary, and
therefore, unwarrantable. The present case the writer has already
explained, and the latest reader requires the clause no more than the
earliest, as he is aware from the previous notices that Esau is Edom. We
are thus led to regard these explanatory clauses as marks of an early or
artless simplicity of style, and not as any clear or certain traces of
revision.

[Gen 36:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#002)

Esau took his wives. - From the word "his" we conclude that this
sentence does not refer to his marrying these wives, but to his taking
them with him when he removed from Kenaan. Hence, the sentence, after
being interrupted by the intervening particulars, is resumed and
completed in the sixth verse. The date of this event is therefore, some
time after Jacob's flight to Padan-aram, and before his return. The
daughter of Ishmael he only married after Jacob's departure, and by her
he had one son who was born in Kenaan. We may therefore, suppose that,
about eighteen years after Jacob's flight, Isaac had assigned to Esau a
sufficient stock of cattle and goods for a separate establishment, the
extent of Esau's portion and of that which Isaac had reserved for Jacob
had become so great as to demand pasture grounds widely removed from one
another, and Esau's former habits and his last matrimonial alliances had
drawn him toward Mount Seir. He married his first wives when he was
forty years of age [Gen 26:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#034), and as
Jacob was seventy-seven when he left his home, at eighteen years after
that date, Esau had been fifty-five years married to his first two
wives, and somewhat less than eighteen to Ishmael's daughter.

Of the daughters of Kenaan. - This refers to the two following wives
mentioned in this verse, and distinguishes them from the third,
mentioned in the following verse, who is of the family of Ishmael.
"Adah, daughter of Elon the Hittite." On comparing the account of his
two wives whom he married at forty with the present, the first, namely,
Judith, daughter of Beeri the Hittite, no longer appears either by her
own name, that of her father, or that of her tribe. Hence, we presume
that in the course of the past forty-seven years she has died without
male issue. This presumption is favored by the circumstance that the
daughter of Elon the Hittite is now advanced into the first place. If it
seems undesirable to anyone to make any presumption of this kind, we
have only to say that in the absence of the connecting links in a
historical statement like this, we must make some supposition to show
the possibility of the events related. The presumption we have made
seems easier and therefore, more likely than that the names of the
individual, the father and the tribe, should be all different, and the
order of the two wives reversed, and yet that the same person should be
intended; and hence, we have adopted it as a possible arrangement,
leaving to others the preference of any other possibility that may be
suggested. For after all it should be remembered that testimony only
could determine what were the actual circumstances. She who was formerly
called Basemath appears here with the name of Adah. At a time when
proper names were still significant, the application of more than one
name to the same individual was not unusual.

Oholibamah, daughter of Anah, daughter of Zibon the Hivite. - This may
have been the fourth wife of Esau in the order of time, though she is
here classed with the daughter of Elon, because she was of the daughters
of Kenaan. "Daughter of Zibon" means his granddaughter, by the mother's
side. "The Hivite" [Gen 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#017). Zibon
is thus distinguished from the Horite of the same name [Gen
36:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#020). The Hivite race we have already
met with at Shekem [Gen 34:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#002). They
also held four cities a short way north of Jerusalem, of which Gihon was
the chief [Jos 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#003), [Jos
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#007),[Jos
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#017). It was easy, therefore, for Anah
the Horite to marry the daughter of Zibon the Hivite. "Basemath,"
previously called Mahalath.

[Gen 36:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#004)

Five sons were born to Esau in Kenaan, of whom Adah and Basemath bare
each one. As Oholibamah bare him three sons before leaving Kenaan, she
must have been married to him four or five years before that event,
perhaps on the death of his first wife, and in consequence of his
connection with the south.

[Gen 36:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#006)

The sentence that was left incomplete in [Gen
36:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#002) is now resumed and completed. His
departure from Kenaan is ascribed to the abounding wealth of himself and
his brother. What remained in the hands of Isaac was virtually Jacob's,
though he had not yet entered into formal possession of it. Mount Seir
is the range of hills extending from the Elanitic Gulf to the Salt Sea;
the northern part of which is called Jebal Γεβαλήνη Gebalénē and the
southern part esh-Sherah, and parallel to which on the west lies Wady
Arabah. In this range is situated the celebrated rock city, Sela or
Petra, adjacent to Mount Hor.

[Gen 36:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#009)

After the removal to Mount Seir the race of Esau is traced further. It
is remarkable that the phrase, "And these are the generations of Esau,"
is now repeated. This is sufficient to show us that it does not
necessarily indicate diversity of authorship, or is a very distinct
piece of composition. Here it merely distinguishes the history of Esau's
descent in Mount Seir from that in Kenaan. "Father of Edom." Edom here
denotes the nation sprung from him. Eliphaz has five sons by his wife,
and by a concubine a sixth, named Amalek, most probably the father of
the Amalekites [Gen 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#007). "Timna" was
probably a very young sister of Lotan [Gen
36:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#022), perhaps not older than her
niece Oholibamah [Gen 36:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#025). Eliphaz
was at least forty-one years younger than Esau. Yet it is curious that
the father takes the niece to wife, and the son the aunt. "Teman" is the
father of the Temanites, among whom we find Eliphaz the Temanite
mentioned in Job [Job 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#011). The name
Kenaz may indicate some affinity of Edom with the Kenizzites [Gen
25:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#019), though these were an older
tribe. The other tribes are not of any note in history. Zepho is Zephi
in Chronicles, by the change of a feeble letter. Such variations are not
unusual in Hebrew speech, and so make their appearance in writing. Thus,
in Genesis itself we have met with Mehujael and Mehijael, Peniel and
Penuel [Gen 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#018); [Gen
32:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#030). The sons of Esau by
Oholibamah are younger than the other two, and hence, these sons are not
enumerated along with those of the latter.

[Gen 36:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#015)

The first dukes of Edom. The Alluph or duke is the head of the tribe
among the Edomites, like the Nasi or prince among the Israelites. The
ten grandsons of Esau by Adah and Basemath take rank with his three sons
by Oholibamah. This favors the presumption that she was his fourth and
latest wife. "Duke Corah." This appears to be inserted by a slip of the
pen, though it occurs in the Septuagint and Onkelos. It is missing,
however, in the Samaritan Pentateuch. It would make twelve dukes,
whereas it appears from the closing verses of the chapter that there
were only eleven. It is possible, however, that there may have been a
Corah descended from Eliphaz who attained to a dukedom; and that Amalek
separated himself from the rest of the Edomites and asserted his
independence. In the absence of explanatory testimony we must leave this
point undecided as we find it.

[Gen 36:20-30](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#020)

This notice of the Horites is in matter more distinct from what
precedes, than the second is from the first paragraph in the chapter.
"Seir the Horite." The Horite [Gen
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#006), was the cave-dweller, and
probably got his name from the cave hewn out of the solid rock in which
he was accustomed to dwell. Sela was a city of such excavated dwellings.
If Seir here mentioned be the original Seir, then he is the remote
father of the seven Horite dukes who belonged to the time of Esau. If he
be their immediate parent, then he is named after that earlier Seir who
gave name to the mountain range. "Who dwelt in the land." The sons of
Seir dwelt in this land before the coming of the Edomites. Here follow
the descendants of the then living dukes of the Horim. Hori, Lotan's
son, bears the name of the nation. "Hemam," in Chronicles Homam, by a
change of letter. "Timna," the concubine of Eliphaz [Gen
36:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#012). "Alvan" and "Shepho", in
Chronicles Aljan and Shephi, by a reverse change of the same letters
(see [Gen 36:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#011)).

"Zibon." This we suppose to be different from Zibon the Hivite [Gen
36:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#002), [Gen
36:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#014). "Anah" is of course different
from his uncle Anah the brother of Zibon the Horite. "The hot springs in
the wilderness." There were various hot springs in the vicinity, as
Kallirrhoe in Wady Zurka Main, those in Wady Hemad between Kerak and the
Salt Sea, and those in Wady el-Ahsy. "Sons of Anah." The plural, sons,
here is used according to the general formula, though only one son is
mentioned. Oholibamah, being the daughter of Anah, and wife of Esau,
while Eliphaz is married to her aunt Timna, is not likely to be the
granddaughter by the mother's side of her uncle Zibon. This is in favor
of Zibon the Hivite and Zibon the Horite being different individuals
[Gen 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#002). "Anah" is here the brother
of Zibon. The nephew Anah [Gen 36:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#024),
bears the name of his uncle [Gen
36:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#020). "Dishon" is an example of the
same community of name [Gen 36:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#021). All
Dishon's and Ezer's sons have names ending in "-an." "Acan" יעקן ya‛ăqân
(Jaacan) in [Ch1 1:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#041) is a graphic
error for ועקן va‛ăqân (and Acan). Uz; see [Gen
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#023); [Gen
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#021). In [Gen
36:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#029), the dukes are formally
enumerated. "According to their dukes;" the seven officials of
pre-eminent authority among the Horites. The official is here
distinguished from the personal. This is a distinction familiar to
Scripture.

[Gen 36:31-39](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#031)

The series of eight kings here enumerated are plainly elective, as not
one succeeds his father. The king co-exists with the dukes, who are
again enumerated at the close of the list, and are mentioned in the song
of Moses [Exo 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#015). These dukes are
no doubt the electors of the common sovereign, who is designed to give
unity and strength to the nation. It is natural to suppose that no
sovereign was elected until after the death of Esau, and, therefore, if
he lived as long as Jacob, after the children of Israel had been
seventeen years in Egypt. As we calculate that they were two hundred and
ten years in that country, and forty years afterward in the wilderness,
this would allow two hundred and thirty-three (250-17) years for seven
reigns, and a part of the eighth, during which Moses and his host
marched along the borders of Edom. Allowing some interval before the
first election, we have an average of thirty-three years for each reign.
"Before a king reigned over the children of Israel." This simply means
before there was a monarchy established in Israel. It does not imply
that monarchy began in Israel immediately after these kings; as Lot's
beholding the vale of Jordan to be well-watered before the Lord
destroyed Sodom and Amorah, does not imply that the cities were
destroyed immediately after Lot beheld this sight [Gen
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010).

Nor does it imply that monarchy in Israel had begun in the time of the
writer; as Isaac's saying, "That my soul may bless thee before I die"
[Gen 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#004) does not imply that he was
dead at the time of his saying so. It merely implies that Israel was
expected to have kings [Gen 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#011), as
Isaac was expected to die. Of the several sovereigns here mentioned we
have no other historical notice. "Beor" is also the name of Balaam's
father [Num 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#005). This indicates
affinity of language between their respective tribes. The site of
"Dinhabah," the capital of Bela, though the name is applied to many
towns, has not been ascertained. "Bozrah" is el-Busaireh, about
twenty-one miles nearly south of the Salt Sea. "The land of the
Temanite" has its name from Teman, son of Eliphaz. His town was,
according to Jerome, five miles from Petra. "Hadad" is a name of
frequent recurrence among the Aramaeans. "Who smote Midian in the field
of Moab." This records an event not otherwise known, and indicates
external conquest on the part of the Idumaean state. "Avith" or Ajuth
([Ch1 1:46](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#046), probably a graphic error)
is not otherwise known.

"Masrecah" is likewise unknown. "Rehoboth by the river." If the river be
the Phrat (Onkelos), Rehoboth may be er-Rahabah, not far from the mouth
of the Khabur. Otherwise it may be er-Ruhaibeh on a wady joining the
Sihor or el-Arish [Gen 26:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#022), or the
Robotha of Eusebius and Jerome, the site of which is not known. "Hadar"
is probably a colloquial variation of Hadad [Gen
36:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#035) which is found in Chronicles.
Pau or Pai is unknown. Matred is the father of his wife. Mezahab her
mother's father. The death of all these sovereigns is recorded except
the last, who is therefore, supposed to have been contemporary with
Moses.

[Gen 36:40-43](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#040)

The hereditary dukes who were contemporaneous with this sovereign, and
formed no doubt his council, are now enumerated. Timna, once the name of
a female, now appears as a male, unless we allow a duchess in her own
right to have occurred among them. The same applies to Oholibamah. Alva
or Aljah is near akin to Alvan or Allan [Gen
36:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#023). Jetheth, Elah, Pinon, Mibzar,
Magdiel, Iram, are new names. Four of the old names reappear. One is
only slightly different. The number of dukes is eleven. It is probable
that Amalek separated from the family confederacy; and the number of
tribes may have been originally twelve. The seven Horite dukedoms
probably merged into the Idumaean eleven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 37](gen037)

</div>
