<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen008)  [Next](gen010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#001)

[Genesis 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 9:1</span></span>

\- The Blessing of Noah

2\. מורא môrā', "fear, reverence, awful deed." חת chat, "dread, breaking
of the courage."

Noah is saved from the deluge. His life is twice given to him by God. He
had found grace in the sight of the Lord, and now he and his family have
been graciously accepted when they approached the Lord with
burnt-offerings. In him, therefore, the race of man is to be begun anew.
Accordingly, as at the beginning, the Lord proceeds to bless him. First.
The grant of increase is the same as at first, but expressed in ampler
terms. Second. Dominion over the other animals is renewed. But some
reluctance on their part to yield obedience is intimated. "The fear and
dread of you." These terms give token of a master whose power is
dreaded, rather than of a superior whose friendly protection is sought.
"Into your hand are they given." They are placed entirely at the
disposal of man.

[Gen 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#003)

The grant of sustenance is no longer confined to the vegetable, but
extended to the animal kinds, with two solemn restrictions. This
explains how fully the animals are handed over to the will of man. They
were slain for sacrifice from the earliest times. Whether they were used
for food before this time we are not informed. But now "every creeper
that is alive" is granted for food. "Every creeper" is everything that
moves with the body prone to the earth, and therefore in a creeping
posture. This seems to describe the inferior animals in
contradistinction to man, who walks erect. The phrase "that is alive"
seems to exclude animals that have died a natural death from being used
as food.

[Gen 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004)

The first restriction on the grant of animal food is thus expressed:
"Flesh with its life, its blood, shall ye not eat." The animal must be
slain before any part of it is used for food. And as it lives so long as
the blood flows in its veins, the life-blood must be drawn before its
flesh may be eaten. The design of this restriction is to prevent the
horrid cruelty of mutilating or cooking an animal while yet alive and
capable of suffering pain. The draining of the blood from the body is an
obvious occasion of death, and therefore the prohibition to eat the
flesh with the blood of life is a needful restraint from savage cruelty.
It is also intended, perhaps, to teach that the life of the animal,
which is in the blood, belongs not to man, but to God himself, who gave
it. He makes account of it for atonement in sacrifice; otherwise it is
to be poured on the ground and covered with dust [Lev
17:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011).

[Gen 9:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#005)

The second restriction guards human life. The shedding of human blood is
sternly prohibited. "Your blood of your lives." The blood which belongs
to your lives, which constitutes the very life of your corporeal nature.
"Will I require." I, the Lord, will find the murderer out, and exact the
penalty of his crime. The very beast that causes the death of man shall
be slain. The suicide and the homicide are alike accountable to God for
the shedding of man's blood. The penalty of murder is here proclaimed -
death for death. It is an instance of the law of retaliation. This is an
axiom of moral equity. He that deprives another of any property is bound
to make it good or to suffer the like loss.

The first law promulgated in Scripture was that between Creator and
creature. If the creature refuse to the Creator the obedience due, he
forfeits all the Creator has given him, and, therefore, his life. Hence,
when Cain murdered his brother, he only displayed a new development of
that sin which was in him, and, being already condemned to the extreme
penalty under the first transgression, had only a minor punishment
annexed to his personal crime. And so it continued to be in the
antediluvian world. No civil law is on record for the restriction of
crime. Cain, indeed, feared the natural vengeance which his conscience
told him his sin deserved. But it was not competent in equity for the
private individual to undertake the enforcement of the penalties of
natural law. So long as the law was between Creator and creature, God
himself was not only the sole legislator, but the sole administrator of
law.

The second law is that between creature and creature, which is here
introduced on the occasion of giving permission to partake of animal
food, as the first was published on that of granting the use of
vegetable diet. In the former case, God is the administrator of the law,
as he is the immediate and sovereign party in the legal compact. In the
latter case, man is, by the express appointment of the Lord of all,
constituted the executive agent. "By man shall his blood be shed." Here,
then, is the formal institution of civil government. Here the civil
sword is committed to the charge of man. The judgment of death by the
executioner is solemnly delegated to man in vindication of human life.
This trust is conveyed in the most general terms. "By man." The divine
legislator does not name the sovereign, define his powers, or determine
the law of succession. All these practical conditions of a stable
government are left open questions.

The emphasis is laid solely on "man." On man is impressively laid the
obligation of instituting a civil constitution suited to his present
fallen condition. On the nation as a body it is an incumbent duty to
select the sovereign, to form the civil compact between prince and
people, to settle the prerogative of the sovereign and the rights of the
subjects, to fix the order of succession, to constitute the legislative,
judicial, and administrative bodies, and to render due submission to the
constituted authorities. And all these arrangements are to be made
according to the principles of Scripture and the light of nature.

The reason why retribution is exacted in the case of man is here also
given. "For in the image of God has he made man." This points on the one
hand to the function of the magistrate, and on the other to the claims
of the violated law; and in both respects illustrates the meaning of
being created in the image of God. Man resembles God in this, that he is
a moral being, judging of right and wrong, endowed with reason and will,
and capable of holding and exercising rights. Hence, he is in the first
place competent to rule, and on his creation authorized to exercise a
mild and moral sway over the inferior creatures. His capacity to govern
even among his fellow-men is now recognized. The function of
self-government in civil things is now conferred upon man. When duly
called to the office, he is declared to be at liberty to discharge the
part of a ruler among his fellow-men, and is entitled on the ground of
this divine arrangement to claim the obedience of those who are under
his sway. He must rule in the Lord, and they must obey in the Lord.

However, in the next place, man is capable of, and has been actually
endowed with, rights of property in himself, his children, his
industrial products, his purchases, his receipts in the way of gift, and
his claims by covenant or promise. He can also recognize such rights in
another. When, therefore, he is deprived of anything belonging to him,
he is sensible of being wronged, and feels that the wrongdoer is bound
to make reparation by giving back what he has taken away, or an
equivalent in its place. This is the law of requital, which is the
universal principle of justice between the wrongdoer and the
wrong-sufferer. Hence, the blood of him who sheds blood is to be shed.
And, in setting up a system of human government, the most natural and
obvious case is given, according to the manner of Scripture, as a sample
of the law by which punishment is to be inflicted on the transgressor in
proportion to his crime. The case in point accordingly arises
necessarily out of the permission to use animal food, which requires to
be guarded on the one hand by a provision against cruelty to animals,
and, on the other, by an enactment forbidding the taking away of human
life, on the pain of death, by order of the civil magistrate. This case,
then, turns out to be the most heinous crime which man can commit
against his fellow-man, and strikingly exemplifies the great common
principle of retributive justice.

The brute is not a moral being, and has, therefore, no proper rights in
itself. Its blood may therefore be shed with impunity. Nevertheless,
man, because he is a moral being, owes a certain negative duty to the
brute animal, because it is capable of pain. He is not to inflict
gratuitous or unnecessary suffering on a being susceptible of such
torture. Hence, the propriety of the blood being shed before the flesh
is used for food. Life, and therefore the sense of pain, is extinguished
when the blood is withdrawn from the veins.

[Genesis 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 9:8</span></span>

\- XXIX. The Covenant with Noah

13\. קשׁת qeshet, "bow; related: be bent."

14\. ענן ‛ānan, "cover, cast over; noun: cloud."

The covenant made with Noah [Gen 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#018)
is now formally confirmed. The purpose conceived in the heart [Gen
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021) now receives significant
expression. Not only a new blessing is bestowed, but also a new covenant
is formed with Noah. For he that has offered an acceptable sacrifice is
not only at peace with God, but renewed in mind after the image of God.
He is therefore a fit subject for entering into a covenant.

[Gen 9:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#008)

Unto Noah and to his sons. - God addresses the sons of Noah as the
progenitors of the future race. "I establish." He not merely makes כרת
kārat, but ratifies, his covenant with them. "My covenant." The covenant
which was before mentioned to Noah in the directions concerning the
making of the ark, and which was really, though tacitly, formed with
Adam in the garden.

[Gen 9:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#009)

The party with whom God now enters into covenant is here fully
described. "You and your seed after you, and every breathing living
thing;" the latter merely "on account of the former." The animals are
specially mentioned because they partake in the special benefit of
preservation from a flood, which is guaranteed in this covenant. There
is a remarkable expression employed here - "From all that come out of
the ark, to every beast of the land." It seems to imply that the beast
of the land, or the wild beast, was not among those that came out of the
ark, and, therefore, not among those that went in. This coincides with
the view we have given of the inmates of the ark.

[Gen 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#011)

The benefits conferred by this form of God's covenant are here
specified. First, all flesh shall no more be cut off by a flood;
secondly, the land shall no more be destroyed by this means. The Lord
has been true to his promise in saving Noah and his family from the
flood of waters. He now perpetuates his promise by assuring him that the
land would not again be overwhelmed with water. This is the new and
present blessing of the covenant. Its former blessings are not
abrogated, but only confirmed and augmented by the present. Other and
higher benefits will flow out of this to those who rightly receive it,
even throughout the ages of eternity. The present benefit is shared by
the whole race descended from Noah.

[Gen 9:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#012)

The token of the covenant is now pointed out. "For perpetual ages." This
stability of sea and land is to last during the remainder of the human
period. What is to happen when the race of man is completed, is not the
question at present. "My bow." As God's covenant is the well-known and
still remembered compact formed with man when the command was issued in
the Garden of Eden, so God's bow is the primeval arch, coexistent with
the rays of light and the drops of rain. It is caused by the rays of the
sun reflected from the falling raindrops at a particular angle to the
eye of the spectator. A beautiful arch of reflected and refracted light
is in this way formed for every eye. The rainbow is thus an index that
the sky is not wholly overcast, since the sun is shining through the
shower, and thereby demonstrating its partial extent. There could not,
therefore, be a more beautiful or fitting token that there shall be no
more a flood to sweep away all flesh and destroy the land.

It comes with its mild radiance only when the cloud condenses into a
shower. It consists of heavenly light, variegated in hue, and mellowed
in lustre, filling the beholder with an involuntary pleasure. It forms a
perfect arch, extends as far as the shower extends, connects heaven and
earth, and spans the horizon. In these respects it is a beautiful emblem
of mercy rejoicing against judgment, of light from heaven irradiating
and beatifying the soul, of grace always sufficient for the need of the
reunion of earth and heaven, and of the universality of the offer of
salvation. "Have I given." The rainbow existed as long as the present
laws of light and air. But it is now mentioned for the first time,
because it now becomes the fitting sign of security from another
universal deluge, which is the special blessing of the covenant in its
present form. "In the cloud." When a shower-cloud is spread over the
sky, the bow appears, if the sun, the cloud, and the spectator are in
the proper relation to one another. 16. "And I will look upon it to
remember." The Scripture is most unhesitating and frank in ascribing to
God all the attributes and exercises of personal freedom. While man
looks on the bow to recall the promise of God, God himself looks on it
to remember and perform this promise. Here freedom and immutability of
purpose meet.

The covenant here ostensibly refers to the one point of the absence, for
all time to come, of any danger to the human race from a deluge. But it
presupposes and supplements the covenant with man subsisting from the
very beginning. It is clearly of grace; for the Lord in the very terms
affirms the fact that the imagination of man's heart is evil from his
youth, while at the same time the original transgression belonged to the
whole race. The condition by which any man becomes interested in it is
not expressed, but easily understood from the nature of a covenant, a
promise, and a sign, all of which require of us consenting faith in the
party who covenants, promises, and gives the sign. The meritorious
condition of the covenant of grace is dimly shadowed forth in the
burnt-offerings which Noah presented on coming out of the ark. One
thing, however, was surely and clearly revealed to the early saints;
namely, the mercy of God. Assured of this, they were prepared humbly to
believe that all would rebound to the glory of his holiness, justice,
and truth, as well as of his mercy, grace, and love, though they might
not yet fully understand how this would be accomplished.

[Gen 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#017)

God seems here to direct Noah's attention to a rainbow actually existing
at the time in the sky, and presenting to the patriarch the assurance of
the promise, with all the impressiveness of reality.

[Genesis 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 9:18</span></span>

\- XXX. The Prophecy of Noah

18\. כנען kena‛an, "Kena'an, bowed down."

19\. נפץ nāpats, "break, scatter, spread." פוּץ pûts, "break, scatter,
flow."

20\. כרם kerem, "orchard, vineyard."

21\. יין yayı̂n, "wine; related: ferment."

After the blessing on the new heads of the human race has been
pronounced, and the covenant with them renewed, we are prepared for a
new development of human action. This appears, however, in the form of
an event which is itself a meet preliminary to the subsequent stage of
affairs. The prophecy of Noah, delivered in the shape of a solemn
paternal doom, pronounced upon his three sons, sketches in a few
striking traits the future history of the separate families of mankind.

[Gen 9:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#018)

These two verses form a connecting link between the preceding and the
following passage. After the recital of the covenant, comes naturally
the statement, that by the three sons of Noah, duly enumerated, was the
whole land overspread. This forms a fit conclusion to the previous
paragraph. But the penman of these sentences had evidently the following
paragraph in view. For he mentions that Ham was the father of Kenaan;
which is plainly the preface to the following narrative.

[Gen 9:20-27](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#020)

Then comes the prediction [Gen
9:20-27](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#020), which has a special interest,
as the first prophetic utterance of man recorded in the Old Testament.
The occasion of it is first stated. Noah becomes "a man of the soil." If
he was before a mechanic, it is evident he must now attend to the
cultivation of the soil, that he may draw from it the means of
subsistence. "He planted a vineyard." God was the first planter [Gen
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#008); and since that time we hear
nothing of the cultivation of trees until Noah becomes a planter. The
cultivation of the vine and the manufacture of wine might have been in
practice before this time, as the mention of them is merely incidental
to the present narrative. But it seems likely from what follows, that,
though grapes may have been in use, wine had not been extracted from
them. "And was drunken." We are not in a position to estimate the amount
of Noah's guilt in this case, as we do not know how far he was
acquainted with the properties of wine.

But we should take warning by the consequences, and beware of the abuse
of any of God's gifts. "Ham the father of Kenaan." It is natural to
suppose, as some have done, that Kennan had something to do with the
guilt of this act. But there is no clear indication of this in the text,
and Kenann's relationship to Ham may be again mentioned simply in
anticipation of the subsequent prophecy. Ham is punished in his youngest
son, who was perhaps a favorite. The intention of this act is eminently
pure and befitting dutiful sons. "The garment." The loose mantle or
shawl which was used for wrapping round the body when going to sleep.
The actions of the sons in this unpleasant occurrence, especially that
of Ham, give occasion to the following prophetic sentence: "His youngest
son." This seems plainly the meaning of the phrase הקטן בנו benô
haqāṭān, "his son, the little." He must be regarded here as contrasted
with the other two, and therefore distinguished as the youngest.

The manner of Scripture here is worthy of particular remark. First, the
prediction takes its rise from a characteristic incident. The conduct of
the brothers was of comparatively slight importance in itself, but in
the disposition which it betrayed it was highly significant. Secondly,
the prediction refers in terms to the near future and to the outward
condition of the parties concerned. Thirdly, it foreshadows under these
familiar phrases the distant future, and the inward, as well as the
outward, state of the family of man. Fourthly, it lays out the destiny
of the whole race from its very starting-point. These simple laws will
be found to characterize the main body of the predictions of Scripture.

[Gen 9:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#025)

The prophecy consists of two parts - a malediction and a benediction.
"Cursed be Kenaan." A curse [Gen 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#014),
[Gen 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#017); [Gen
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#011) is any privation, inferiority, or
other ill, expressed in the form of a doom, and bearing, not always upon
the object directly expressed, but upon the party who is in the
transgression. Thus, the soil is cursed on account of Adam the
transgressor [Gen 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#017). It is apparent
that in the present ease the prime mover was Ham, who is therefore
punished in the prospect of a curse resting on his posterity, and
especially on a particular line of it. Let us not imagine, however, that
the ways of the Lord are not equal in this matter; for Kenaan and his
descendants no doubt abundantly deserved this special visitation. And as
the other descendants of Ham are not otherwise mentioned in the
prophecy, we may presume that they shared in the curse pronounced upon
Kenaan. At all events, they are not expressly included in the blessing
pronounced on the other two divisions of the human family, It is proper
to observe, also, that this prediction does not affirm an absolute
perpetuity in the doom of Ham or Kenaan. It only delineates their
relative condition until the whole race is again brought within the
scope of prophecy.

A servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren. - The curse here
consists in servitude, which is in itself an inferiority, and, among the
children of self-will, tends more and more to all the horrid ills of
slavery. Slavery originated in war and conquest. The mere warrior put
the captives to death, the cannibal devoured them, the economist fed
them for their labor. Accordingly, slavery soon made its appearance in
all countries which were trodden by the conqueror. A system of slavery,
imposed without consent and for no crime, is a dire evil. Besides the
direct injustice of robbing a fellow-man of his personal liberty, it
dissolves wedlock, breaks the family tie, and disregards the conscience.
It trades, therefore, in the souls as well as the bodies of mankind. It
is a historical fact that the degradation of slavery has fallen
especially upon the race of Ham. A portion of the Kenaanites became
bondsmen among the Israelites, who were of the race of Shem. The early
Babylonians, the Phoenicians, the Carthaginians, and Egyptians, who all
belonged to the race of Ham, were subjugated by the Assyrians, who were
Shemites, the Persians, the Macedonians, and the Romans, who were all
Japhethites. And in modern times it is well known that most of the
nations of Europe traded in African slaves. "A servant of servants"
means a slave of the most abject kind. "Unto his brethren." If the doom
of slavery be referred to the race of Ham, then his brethren are the
descendants of Japheth and Shem, who have held many of the Hamites in
bondage. If we limit the sentence to Kenaan, then his brethren may
include the other descendants of Ham. It is said that the servile tribe
is also the most tyrannical; and it is the fact that the Africans have
lent themselves to the forcible seizing and selling into slavery in
distant lands of their own kinsmen and fellow-countrymen.

[Gen 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#026), [Gen
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#027)

And he said. - The prediction concerning the other two brothers is a
distinct utterance of Noah. "Blessed be Yahweh, the God of Shem." The
characteristic boon of Shem is that Yahweh, the one true, living, known
God, is his God. The knowledge and worship of the Creator is preserved
in the family of Shem, when it is lost or fatally obscured among the
other descendants of Noah. The prophet is so conscious of the
unspeakable blessing of knowing and loving the true God, that he breaks
out into thanksgiving in the very act of announcing the transcendent
privilege of Shem. There is a dark side, however, to this prophetic
thought, as it implies that the two other families of mankind, at least
for part of the period under the prophet's view, were estranged from the
true and living God. History corroborates both aspects of this prophetic
sentence for the space of two thousand four hundred years. During the
most part of this long period the Holy Yahweh Omnipotent was unknown to
the great mass of the Japhethites, Hamites, and even Shemites. And it
was only by the special election and consecration of an individual
Shemite to be the head of a special people, and the father of the
faithful, that he did not cease to be the God of even a remnant of Shem.

Then follows the refrain, "And Kenaan shall be servant unto them." The
phrase "unto them" proves that Shem here comprehends the race descended
from him, and consisting of many individuals. Scripture sees the race in
the father, traces up its unity to him, discerns in him the leading
traits of character that often mark his remotest posterity, and
identifies with him in destiny all those of his race who continue to
take after him. Thus, Adam denotes the whole race, Shem, Ham, and
Japheth, its three great branches. Attention to this law of the unity,
continuity, and identity of a race, will aid us much in understanding
the dealings of Providence with the several branches of the human
family. We learn also from the same phrase that this solemn sentence is
no mere ebullition of the personal feelings of Noah. He is not speaking
of Shem and Kenaan merely, but of the future races that are to spring
from them. This appears still more plainly from the fact that Japheth,
as well as Ham, is described as long estranged from the true God. And
now that we are on spiritual ground, it ought to be observed that
Kenaan's curse is not exclusion, either present or prospective, from the
mercy of God. That is an evil he brings on himself by a voluntary
departure from the living God. The curse merely affects the body - the
personal liberty. It is a mere degradation from some of the natural
rights of our common humanity; and does not of itself cut him off from
any offer of mercy, or benefit of repentant faith.

God shall enlarge Japheth. - God is here spoken of by his generic name.
This intimates, or at least coincides, with the fact that Japheth did
not continue that nearness of approach to him which is implied in the
use of the personal name. There is in the original a play upon the word
"Japheth", which itself signifies enlargement. This enlargement is the
most striking point in the history of Japheth, who is the progenitor of
the inhabitants of Europe, Asia, and America, except the region between
the Persian Gulf, the Red Sea, the Mediterranean, the Euxine, the
Caspian, and the mountains beyond the Tigris, which was the main seat of
the Shemites. This expansive power refers not only to the territory and
the multitude of the Japhethites, but also to their intellectual and
active faculties. The metaphysics of the Hindus, the philosophy of the
Greeks, the military prowess of the Romans, and the modern science and
civilization of the world, are due to the race of Japheth. And though
the moral and the spiritual were first developed among the Shemites, yet
the Japhethites have proved themselves capable of rising to the heights
of these lofty themes, and have elaborated that noble form of human
speech, which was adopted, in the providence of God, as best suited to
convey to mankind that further development of Old Testament truth which
is furnished in the New.

And he shall dwell in the tents of Shem. - We regard Japheth as the
subject of this sentence; because, if God were its subject, the meaning
would be substantially the same as the blessing of Shem, already given,
and because this would intermingle the blessing of Shem with that of
Japheth, without any important addition to our information. Whereas,
when Japheth is the subject of the sentence, we learn that he shall
dwell in the tents of Shem - an altogether new proposition. This form of
expression does not indicate a direct invasion and conquest of the land
of Shem, which would not be in keeping with the blessing pronounced on
him in the previous sentence: it rather implies that this dwelling
together would be a benefit to Japheth, and no injury to Shem.
Accordingly, we find that when the Persians conquered the Babylonian
empire, they restored the Jews to their native land; when Alexander the
Great conquered the Persians, he gave protection to the Jews; and when
the Romans subdued the Greek monarchy, they befriended the chosen
nation, and allowed them a large measure of self-government. In their
time came the Messiah, and instituted that new form of the church of the
Old Testament which not only retained the best part of the ancient
people of God, but extended itself over the whole of Europe, the chief
seat of Japheth; went with him wherever he went; and is at this day,
through the blessing of God on his political and moral influence,
penetrating into the moral darkness of Ham, as well as the remainder of
Shem and Japheth himself. Thus, in the highest of all senses, Japheth is
dwelling in the tents of Shem.

Again comes the refrain, "And Keenan shall be servant unto them." A
portion of Japheth still holds a portion of Ham in bondage. But this
very bondage has been the means of bringing some of the sons of Ham to
dwell in the tents of Shem; and the day is not far distant when Japheth
will relinquish altogether the compulsory hold upon his brother, and
consecrate his entire moral influence over him to the revival in his
race of the knowledge and love of God our Father, and our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Thus, it appears that the destiny of these three great branches of the
Noachic family, during the time of their separation on the high question
of their relation to God, is traced out with great fidelity in this
remarkable prediction. Ham is aptly represented by Kenaan, the slave,
who is seized, enslaved, and sold even by his kinsmen to one another,
and to the descendants of Shem and Japheth. Shem includes within his
posterity the select family who know God as the Lord, the God of
promise, of mercy, of salvation. Japheth is enlarged by God, and at
length becomes acquainted with him whom he once ignorantly worshipped.
The historian recognizes these as salient points in the experience of
the three races, so long as they continue apart. The time is approaching
when this strange intermediate development will come to a happy issue,
in the reunion of all the members of the human family, according to
clearer and further-reaching prophecies yet to be delivered.

[Gen 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#028), [Gen
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#029)

The history of Noah is now closed, in the customary form of the fifth
chapter. This marks a connection between the third and fourth documents,
and points to one hand as the composer, or at least compiler, of both.
The document now closed could not have had the last paragraph appended
to it until after the death of Noah. But, with the exception of these
two verses, it might have been composed hundreds of years before. This
strongly favors the notion of a constant continuator, or, at all events,
continuation of the sacred history. Every new prophet and inspired
writer whom God raised up added the necessary portion and made the
necessary insertions in the sacred record. And hence, the Word of God
had a progressive growth and adaptation to the successive ages of the
church.

The present document stands between the old world and the new world.
Hence, it has a double character, being the close of the antediluvian
history, and the introduction to that of the postdiluvian race. It
records a great event, pregnant with warning to all future generations
of men. And it notes the delegation, by God to man, of authority to
punish the murderer by death, and therefore to enforce all the minor
sanctions of law for breaches of the civil compact. It therefore points
out the institution of civil government as coming from God, and clearly
exhibits the accountability of all governments to God for all the powers
they hold, and for the mode in which they are exercised. This also is a
great historical lesson for all ages.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 10](gen010)

</div>
