<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen019)  [Next](gen021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001)

\- Abraham in Gerar

2\. אבימלך .2 'ǎbı̂ymelek, Abimelekh, "father of the king."

7\. נביא nābı̂y' "prophet," he who speaks by God, of God, and to God, who
declares to people not merely things future, but also things past and
present, that are not obvious to the sense or the reason; related:
"flow, go forth."

13\. התעוּ hı̂t‛û is plural in punctuation, agreeing grammatically with
אלהים 'ĕlohı̂ym. ו(w), however, may be regarded as the third radical, and
the verb may thus really be singular.

16\. נכהת nokachat an unusual form, either for נכחת nokaḥat the second
person singular feminine perfect or נכחה nokeḥâh the third person
singular feminine perfect, from a verb signifying in hiphil, "make
straight, right."

17\. אמה 'āmâh "hand-maid," free or bond. שׁפחה shı̂pchâh "bond-maid"
[Sa1 25:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#041).

The concealment of his relation to Sarah calls to our mind a similar act
of Abraham recorded not many pages back. We are to remember, however,
that an interval of twenty-four years has elapsed since that event. From
the present passage we learn that this was an old agreement between him
and his wife, while they were wandering among strangers. It appears that
Abraham was not yet conscious of anything wrong or even imprudent in
this piece of policy. He therefore practises it without any hesitation.
On this occasion he appears for the first time as a prophet. He is the
first of this order introduced to our notice in the Old Testament,
though Henok had prophesied at an earlier period [Jde
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014), and Noah's benediction was, at
the same time, a prediction.

[Gen 20:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001)

Abimelek takes Sarah. Abraham had been dwelling near Hebron. But the
total separation between him and Lot, and the awful overthrow of Sodom
and Amorah in the vicinity, may have loosened his tie to Hebron, and
rendered it for the present not an agreeable place of residence. He
therefore travels southward and takes up his abode at Gerar (see note on
[Gen 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#019)). Sarah, though now
eighty-nine years of age, was as youthful in look as a person of forty
would now be. She had, moreover, had no family, was remarkable for her
good looks, and was at present, no doubt, renewed in health and vigor
[Gen 12:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#011).

[Gen 20:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#003)

The Supreme Being here appears as God אלהים 'ĕlohı̂ym, and therefore in
his eternal power and independence, as he was antecedent to the creation
of man. He communicates with Abimelek in a dream. This prince addresses
him as אדני 'ǎdonāy, "Lord." We have already seen that the knowledge of
the true God had not yet disappeared from the Gentile world, who were
under the Noachic covenant. "Thou wilt die." Thou art dying or at the
point of death if thou persist. A deadly plague was already in the body
of Abimelek, on account of Sarah. "Wilt thou slay a righteous nation
also?" Abimelek associates his nation with himself, and expects that the
fatal stroke will not be confined to his own person. He pleads his
integrity in the matter, which the Lord acknowledges. Gentiles sometimes
act according to the dictates of conscience, which still lives in them,
though it be obscured by sin. Abimelek was innocent in regard to the
"great sin" of seizing another man's wife, of which God acquitted him.
He was wrong in appropriating a woman to himself by mere stretch of
power, and in adding wife to wife. But these were common customs of the
time, for which his conscience did not upbraid him in his pleading with
God. "And the God." The presence of the definite article seems to
intimate a contrast of the true God with the false gods to which the
Gentiles were fast turning. Abimelek was at least in the doubtful ground
on the borders of polytheism.

[Gen 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007)

Abraham is here designated by the Lord a prophet. This constituted at
once the gravity of Abimelek's offence [Psa
105:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#015), and the ground of his hope of
pardon. It is at the same time a step in advance of all the previous
spiritual attainments of Abraham. A prophet is God's spokesman, who
utters with authority certain of the things of God [Exo
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001); [Exo
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#015). This implies two things: first,
the things of God are known only to him, and therefore must be
communicated by him; secondly, the prophet must be enabled of God to
announce in correct terms the things made known to him. These things
refer not only to the future, but in general to all such matters as fall
within the purpose and procedure of God. They may even include things
otherwise known or knowable by man, so far as these are necessary to the
exposition of the divine will. Now Abraham has heretofore received many
communications from God. But this did not constitute him a prophet. It
is the divinely-authorized utterance of new truth which raises him to
this rank. And Abraham's first exercise in prophecy is not in speaking
to men of God, but to God for men. "He shall pray for thee." The
prophetic and the priestly offices go together in the father of the
faithful. These dignities belong to him, not from any absolute merit,
for this he has not, but from his call to be the holder of the promise,
and the father of that seed to whom the promises were made.

[Gen 20:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#008)

Abimelek retraces his steps, and rectifies his conduct. He makes known
his dream to his assembled court, who are filled with astonishment and
apprehension. He then calls Abraham, and in bold and manly style
remonstrates with him for leading him into error and sin. Abraham is
apparently silent from confusion and self-condemnation. Abimelek, after
a pause, demands of him his reason for so doing. Abraham now replies
with great simplicity and candor. He had said within himself, "The fear
of God is not in this place." This is another indication that polytheism
was setting in. He concluded that his life would be in danger on account
of his wife, and resorted to his wonted expedient for safety. He had
learned to trust in the Lord in all things; but he did not think this
inconsistent with using all lawful means for personal security, and he
was not yet fully alive to the unlawfulness of his usual pretence. He
pleads also in extenuation that she is in reality his sister (see [Gen
12:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#019)). "Caused me to wander." The
verb here is not necessarily plural. But if it be, it is only an
instance of the literal, meaning of אלהים 'ĕlohı̂ym, the Eternal
Supernatural Powers, coming into view. "Thy kindness." The old compact
of Abraham with Sarah tended to palliate his conduct in the eyes of
Abimelek, as he would see that it had no special reference to himself.

[Gen 20:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#014)

Abimelek seems to have accepted his apology, as he probably felt that
there was truth in the character Abraham gave of his people, and was
precluded from resenting it by the salutary impression of his dream;
while at the same time Abraham's mode of avoiding danger appeared
warrantable according to his own and the common code of morals. He
therefore hastens to make honorable amends for his conduct. He makes
Abraham a valuable present, restores his wife, and makes him free to
dwell in any part of his dominions. He then accosts Sarah in respectful
terms, informing her that he had presented her brother with one thousand
silver pieces, probably shekels, on her account. He does not offer this
directly to herself, that it may be distinctly understood that her honor
was unstained. This may refer either to Abraham or to the sum of money.
The latter is more natural, as the sentence then affords a reason for
addressing Sarah, and mentioning this particular gift. "A covering of
the eyes" does not mean a veil, the proper word for which is צעיף
tsā‛ı̂yp, but is a figurative phrase for a recompense or pacificatory
offering, in consideration of which an offence is overlooked. "Unto all
that are with thee." All her family were concerned in this public
vindication of her character. "And all this that thou mayest be
righted." The original of this is most naturally taken as a part of
Abimelek's speech, and then it is to be translated as above. All this
has been done or given that the injury to Sarah may be redressed. If the
original be regarded as a part of the narrative, it must be rendered,
"And all this (was done) that she might be righted." The sense is the
same in substance. In the former case the verb is in the second person,
in the latter in the third.

[Gen 20:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#017)

These verses record the fact of Abraham's intercession for Abimelek, and
explain in what sense he was on the point of dying ([Gen
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#003)). "They bare" means that they
were again rendered capable of procreating children, and in the natural
course of things did so. The verb is in the masculine form, because both
males and females were involved in this judicial malady. The name Yahweh
is employed at the end of the chapter, because the relation of the
Creator and Preserver to Sarah is there prominent.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 21](gen021)

</div>
