<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen025)  [Next](gen027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#001)

[Genesis 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 26:1</span></span>

\- The Events of Isaac's Life

5\. משׁמרת mı̂shmeret, "charge, ordinance." מציה mı̂tsvâh, "command,"
special order. חק choq, "decree, statute," engraven on stone or metal.
תירה tôrâh, "law," doctrine, system of moral truth.

10\. עשׂק ‛êśeq, 'Eseq, "strife."

21\. שׂטנה śı̂ṭnâh, Sitnah, "opposition."

22\. רחבית rechobôt, Rechoboth, "room."

26\. אחזת 'ǎchuzat, Achuzzath, "possession."

33\. שׁבעה shı̂b‛âh, Shib'ah, "seven; oath."

34\. יהוּדית yehûdı̂yt, Jehudith, "praised." בארי be'ērı̂y, Beeri, "of a
well." בשׂמת bāśemat, Basemath, "sweet smell." אילן 'êylon, Elon, "oak."

This chapter presents the leading events in the quiet life of Isaac. It
is probable that Abraham was now dead. In that case, Esau and Jacob
would be at least fifteen years of age when the following event
occurred.

[Gen 26:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#001)

Renewal of the promise to Isaac. "A famine in the land." We left Isaac,
after the death of Abraham, at Beer-lahai-roi [Gen
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#011). The preceding events have only
brought us up to the same point of time. This well was in the land of
the south [Gen 24:62](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#062). The present
famine is distinguished from what occurred in the time of Abraham [Gen
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#010). The interval between them is at
least a hundred years. The author of this, the ninth document, is, we
find, acquainted with the seventh document; and the famine to which he
refers is among the earliest events recorded in it. There is no reason
to doubt, then, that he has the whole history of Abraham before his
mind. "Unto Abimelek unto Gerar." The Abimelek with whom Abraham had
contact about eighty years before may have been the father of the
present sovereign. Both Abimelek and Phikol seem to have been official
names. Gerar [Gen 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#019) was apparently
on the brook of Mizraim [Num 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#005), the
Wady el-Arish, or the Wady el-Khubarah, a northern affluent of the
former, or in the interval between them. It is on the way to Egypt, and
is the southern city of the Philistines, who probably came from Egypt
[Gen 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#014). Isaac was drawing toward
Egypt, when he came to Gerar.

[Gen 26:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#002)

Isaac is now the heir, and therefore the holder, of the promise. Hence,
the Lord enters into communication with him. First, the present
difficulty is met. "Go not down into Mizraim," the land of corn, even
when other lands were barren. "Dwell in the land of which I shall tell
thee." This reminds us of the message to Abraham [Gen
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001). The land here spoken of refers
to "all these lands" mentioned in the following verses. "Sojourn in this
land:" turn aside for the present, and take up thy temporary abode here.
Next, the promise to Abraham is renewed with some variety of expression.
"I will be with thee" [Gen 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#022), a
notable and comprehensive promise, afterward embodied in the name
Immanuel, "God with us. Unto thee and unto thy seed." This was fulfilled
to his seed in due time. All these lands, now parcelled out among
several tribes. "And blessed in thy seed" [Gen
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003); [Gen
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018).

This is the great, universal promise to the whole human race through the
seed of Abraham, twice explicitly announced to that patriarch. "All the
nations." In constancy of purpose the Lord contemplates, even in the
special covenant with Abraham, the gathering in of the nations under the
covenant with Noah and with Adam [Gen
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#009); [Hos
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#007). "Because Abraham hearkened to my
voice," in all the great moments of his life, especially in the last act
of proceeding on the divine command to offer Isaac himself. Abraham, by
the faith which flows from the new birth, was united with the Lord, his
shield and exceeding great reward [Gen
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001), with God Almighty, who quickened
and strengthened him to walk before him and be perfect [Gen
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001). The Lord his righteousness
worketh in him, and his merit is reflected and reproduced in him [Gen
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016), [Gen
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018). Hence, the Lord reminds Isaac
of the oath which he had heard at least fifty years before confirming
the promise, and of the declaration then made that this oath of
confirmation was sworn because Abraham had obeyed the voice of God. How
deeply these words would penetrate into the soul of Isaac, the intended
victim of that solemn day! But Abraham's obedience was displayed in all
the acts of his new life. He kept the charge of God, the special
commission he had given him; his commandments, his express or occasional
orders; his statutes, his stated prescriptions, graven on stone; his
laws, the great doctrines of moral obligation. This is that unreserved
obedience which flows from a living faith, and withstands the
temptations of the flesh.

[Gen 26:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#006)

Rebekah preserved from dishonor in Gerar. Gerar was probably a
commercial town trading with Egypt, and therefore Isaac's needs during
the famine are here supplied. "The men of the place" were struck with
the appearance of Rebekah, "because she was fair." Isaac, in answer to
their inquiries, pretends that she is his sister, feeling that his life
was in peril, if she was known to be his wife. Rebekah was at this time
not less than thirty-five years married, and had two sons upwards of
fifteen years old. She was still however in the prime of life, and her
sons were probably engaged in pastoral and other field pursuits. From
the compact between Abraham and Sarah [Gen
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#013), and from this case of Isaac
about eighty years after, it appears that this was a ready pretence with
married people among strangers in those times of social insecurity.

[Gen 26:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#008)

Abimelek observes Isaac sporting with Rebekah as only husband and wife
should, constrains him to confess that she is his wife, charges him with
the impropriety of his conduct, and commands his people to refrain from
harming either of them on pain of death. We see how insecure a female's
honor was in those days, if she was in a strange land, and had not a
band of men to keep back the hand of violence. We perceive also that God
mercifully protects his chosen ones from the perils which they bring
upon themselves by the vain self-reliance and wicked policy of the old
corrupt nature. This remnant of the old man we find in the believers of
old, as in those of the present time, though it be different and far
less excusable in its recent manifestations.

[Gen 26:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#012)

The growing prosperity of Isaac. "And Isaac sowed in that land." This
does not imply a fixed property in the soil, but only an annual tenancy.
"A hundred-fold." The rates of increase vary from thirty to a hundred.
Sixty-fold is very good, and was not unusual in Palestine. A
hundred-fold was rare, and only in spots of extraordinary fertility.
Babylonia, however, yielded two hundred and even three hundred-fold,
according to Herodotus (I. 193). Thus, the Lord began to "bless him."
The amazing growth of the stranger's wealth in flocks and herds and
servants awakens the envy of the inhabitants. The digging of the well
was an enterprise of great interest in rural affairs. It conferred a
sort of ownership on the digger, especially in a country where water was
precious. And in a primeval state of society the well was the scene of
youthful maidens drawing water for domestic use, and of young men and
sometimes maidens watering the bleating flocks and lowing herds, and
therefore the gathering center of settled life. Hence, the envious
Philistines were afraid that from a sojourner he would go on to be a
settler, and acquire rights of property. They accordingly took the most
effectual means of making his abiding place uncomfortable, when they
stopped up the wells. At length the sovereign advised a separation, if
he did not enjoin the departure of Isaac.

[Gen 26:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#017)

Isaac retires, and sets about the digging of wells. He retreats from
Gerar and its suburbs, and takes up his abode in the valley, or wady of
Gerar. These wadys are the hollows in which brooks flow, and therefore
the well-watered and fertile parts of the country. He digs again the old
wells, and calls them by the old names. He commences the digging of new
ones. For the first the herdmen of Gerar strive, claiming the water as
their property. Isaac yields. He digs another; they strive, and he again
yields. He now removes apparently into a distinct region, and digs a
third well, for which there is no contest. This he calls Rehoboth,
"room" - a name which appears to be preserved in Wady er-Ruhaibeh, near
which is Wady esh-Shutein, corresponding to Sitnah. "For now the Lord
hath made room for us." Isaac's homely realizing faith in a present and
presiding Lord here comes out.

[Gen 26:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#023)

Isaac now proceeds to Beer-sheba. "Went up." It was an ascent from Wady
er-Ruhaibeh to Beer-sheba; which was near the watershed between the
Mediterranean and the Salt Sea. "In that night" - the night after his
arrival, in a dream or vision. "I am the God of Abraham thy father."
Isaac is again and again reminded of the relation in which his father
stood to God. That relation still subsists; for Abraham still lives with
God, and is far nearer to him than he could be on earth. "The God of
Abraham" is another name for Yahweh. "Fear not," as he had said to
Abraham after his victory over the four kings [Gen
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001). Then follow the reasons for
courage: I, with thee, blessing thee, multiplying thy seed; a
reassurance of three parts of the promise involving all the rest. Then
comes the instructive reason for this assurance - "for the sake of
Abraham my servant." "An altar" - the first on record erected by Isaac.
"Called on the name of the Lord" - engaged in the solemn and public
invocation of Yahweh [Gen 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#026); [Gen
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#008). "His tent there." It was
hallowed ground to his father [Gen
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#033), and now to himself. "Digged a
well," and thereby took possession of the soil at least for a time. We
hear of this well again in the next passage.

[Gen 26:26-33](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#026)

The treaty with Abimelek. This is an interview similar to what Abraham
had with the king of Gerar; and its object is a renewal of the former
league between the parties. Besides Phikol, the commander-in-chief, he
is now accompanied by Ahuzzath, his privy counsellor. Isaac upbraids him
with his unkindness in sending him away, and his inconsistency in again
seeking a conference with him. "We clearly saw." His prosperity was such
as to be a manifest token of the Lord's favor. Hence, they desired the
security of a treaty with him by an oath of execration on the
transgressor. "Do us no hurt." The covenant is one-sided, as expressed
by Abimelek. "As we have not touched thee." This implies the other side
of the covenant. "Thou art now blessed of Yahweh." This explains the
one-sidedness of the covenant. Isaac needed no guarantee from them, as
the Lord was with him. Abimelek is familiar with the use of the name
Yahweh. Isaac hospitably entertains and lodges the royal party, and on
the morrow, after having sworn to the treaty, parts with them in peace.
On the same day Isaac's servants report concerning the well they had
digged [Gen 26:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#025) that they had found
water. This well he calls Sheba, "an oath," and hence the town is called
Beer-sheba, "the well of the oath." Now the writer was aware that this
place had received the same name on a former occasion [Gen
21:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#031). But a second well has now been
dug in like circumstances in the same locality. This gives occasion for
a new application of the name in the memories of the people. This is
another illustration of the principle explained at [Gen
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#030). Two wells still exist at this
place to attest the correctness of the record.

[Gen 25:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#034)

Esau at forty years of age forms matrimonial connections with the
Hittites. Heth was the second son of Kenaan, and had settled in the
hills about Hebron. Esau had got acquainted with this tribe in his
hunting expeditions. From their names we learn that they spoke the same
language with himself. They belonged to a family far gone in
transgression and apostasy from God. The two wives chosen from such a
stock were a source of great grief to the parents of Esau. The choice
manifested his tolerance at least of the carnal, and his indifference to
the spiritual.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 27](gen027)

</div>
