<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen005)  [Next](gen007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#001.md)

\- The Growth of Sin

3\. דון dı̂yn "be down, strive, subdue, judge." בשׁגם bāshagām "inasmuch,
as also." The rendering "in their error" requires the pointing בשׁגם
beshāgām, and the plural form of the following pronoun. It is also
unknown to the Septuagint.

4\. נפילים nepı̂lı̂ym "assailants, fellers, men of violence, tyrants."

Having traced the line of descent from Adam through Sheth, the seed of
God, to Noah, the author proceeds to describe the general spread and
growth of moral evil in the race of man, and the determination of the
Lord to wipe it away from the face of the earth.

[Gen 6:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#001.md)

There are two stages of evil set forth in [Gen
6:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#001.md) - the one contained in the
present four verses, and the other in the following. The former refers
to the apostasy of the descendants of Sheth, and the cause and
consequences of it. When man began to multiply, the separate families of
Cain and Sheth would come into contact. The daughters of the stirring
Cainites, distinguished by the graces of nature, the embellishments of
art, and the charms of music and song, even though destitute of the
loftier qualities of likemindedness with God, would attract attention
and prompt to unholy alliances. The phrase "sons of God," means an order
of intelligent beings who "retain the purity of moral character"
originally communicated, or subsequently restored, by their Creator.
They are called the sons of God, because they have his spirit or
disposition. The sons of God mentioned in [Job
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#007.md), are an order of rational beings
existing before the creation of man, and joining in the symphony of the
universe, when the earth and all things were called into being. Then all
were holy, for all are styled the sons of God. Such, however, are not
meant in the present passage. For they were not created as a race, have
no distinction of sex, and therefore no sexual desire; they "neither
marry nor are given in marriage" [Mat
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#030.md). It is contrary to the law of
nature for different species even on earth to cohabit in a carnal way;
much more for those in the body, and those who have not a body of flesh.
Moreover, we are here in the region of humanity, and not in the sphere
of superhuman spirits; and the historian has not given the slightest
intimation of the existence of spiritual beings different from man.

The sons of God, therefore, are those who are on the Lord's side, who
approach him with duly significant offerings, who call upon him by his
proper name, and who walk with God in their daily conversation. The
figurative use of the word "son" to denote a variety of relations
incidental, and moral as well as natural, was not unfamiliar to the
early speaker. Thus, Noah is called "the son of five hundred years" [Gen
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#032.md). Abraham calls Eliezer בן־בותי
ben-bēytı̂y, "son of my house" [Gen
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#003.md). The dying Rachel names her son
Ben-oni, "son of my sorrow," while his father called him Benjamin, "son
of thy right hand" [Gen 35:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#018.md). An
obvious parallel to the moral application is presented in the phrases
"the seed of the woman" and "the seed of the serpent." The word
"generations" תולדות tôledot, [Gen
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#001).md) exhibits a similar freedom and
elasticity of meaning, being applied to the whole doings of a rational
being, and even to the physical changes of the material world [Gen
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004.md). The occasion for the present
designation is furnished in the remark of Eve on the birth of Sheth. God
hath given me another seed instead of Habel. Her son Sheth she therefore
regarded as the son of God. Accordingly, about the birth of his son
Enosh, was begun the custom calling upon the name of the Lord, no doubt
in the family circle of Adam, with whom Sheth continued to dwell. And
Enok, the seventh from Adam in the same line, exhibited the first
striking example of a true believer walking with God in all the
intercourse of life. These descendants of Sheth, among whom were also
Lamek who spoke of the Lord, and Noah who walked with God, are therefore
by a natural transition called the sons of God, the godlike in a moral
sense, being born of the Spirit, and walking not after the flesh, but
after the Spirit [Psa 82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006.md); [Hos
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#001.md).

Some take "the daughters of man" to be the daughters of the Cainites
only. But it is sufficient to understand by this phrase, the daughters
of man in general, without any distinction of a moral or spiritual kind,
and therefore including both Cainite and Shethite females. "And they
took them wives of all whom they chose." The evil here described is that
of promiscuous intermarriage, without regard to spiritual character. The
godly took them wives of all; that is, of the ungodly as well as the
godly families, without any discrimination. "Whom they chose," not for
the godliness of their lives, but for the goodliness of their looks.
Ungodly mothers will not train up children in the way they should go;
and husbands who have taken the wrong step of marrying ungodly wives
cannot prove to be very exemplary or authoritative fathers. Up to this
time they may have been consistent as the sons of God in their outward
conduct. But a laxity of choice proves a corresponding laxity of
principle. The first inlet of sin prepares the way for the flood-gates
of iniquity. It is easy to see that now the degeneracy of the whole race
will go on at a rapid pace.

[Gen 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003.md)

My Spirit - , in contradistinction to the spirit of disobedience which,
by the fall, obtained entrance into the soul of man. "Shall not strive
with man forever." To strive דון dı̂yn is to keep down, rule, judge, or
strive with a man by moral force. From this passage we learn that the
Lord by his Spirit strives with man up to a certain point. In this
little negative sentence streams out the bright light of God's free and
tender mercy to the apostate race of man. He sends his Spirit to
irradiate the darkened mind, to expostulate with the conscience, to
prompt and strengthen holy resolve, and to bring back the heart, the
confidence, the affection to God. He effects the blessed result of
repentance toward God in some, who are thus proved to be born of God.
But it is a solemn thought that with others he will not strive
perpetually. There is a certain point beyond which he will not go, for
sufficient reasons known fully to himself, partly to us. Two of these we
are to notice for our instruction: First, he will not touch the free
agency of his rational creatures. He can put no force on the volitions
of men. An involuntary or compulsory faith, hope, love, obedience, is a
contradiction in terms; and anything that could bear the name can have
no moral validity whatsoever. Secondly, after giving ample warning,
instruction, and invitation, he will, as a just judgment on the
unbelieving and the impenitent, withdraw his Spirit and let them alone.
The antediluvian world was fast approaching to this point of final
perversity and abandonment.

Inasmuch as he is also flesh - , in contradistinction to spirit, the
breath of life which the Almighty breathed Into his nostrils. These two
parts of man's complex being were originally in true and happy
adjustment, the corporeal being the fit organ and complement of the
spiritual as it is in him. But now by the fall the flesh has gained the
upper hand, and the spirit is in the bondage of corruption. The fact
that he is flesh also as well as spirit, has therefore come out into sad
prominence. The doctrine of the carnal mind in the Epistle to the Romans
Rom. 8 is merely the outgrowth of the thought expressed in this passage.

His days shall be an hundred and twenty years. - "His days" are the days
of man, not the individual, but the race, with whom the Lord still
strives. Hence, they refer to the duration, not of the life of an
individual, but of the existence of the race. From this we learn that
the narrative here reverts to a point of time before the birth of Shem,
Ham, and Japheth, recorded in the close of the preceding passage as
there were only a hundred years from their birth to the deluge. This is
according to the now well-known method of Scripture, when it has two
lines of events to carry on. The former narrative refers to the godly
portion of mankind; this to the ungodly remnant.

Not forever will the Lord strive with man; but his longsuffering will
still continue for one hundred and twenty years. Meanwhile he does not
leave himself or his clemency without a witness. He sent Noah with the
message of warning, who preached by his voice, by his walking with God,
and also by his long labor and perseverance in the building of the ark.
The doomed race, however, filled up the measure of their iniquity, and
when the set number of years was accomplished, the overwhelming flood
came.

[Gen 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#004.md)

Two classes of men, with strong hand and strong will, are here
described. "The giants," the well-known men of great stature, physical
force, and violent will, who were enabled by these qualities to claim
and secure the supremacy over their fellow-men. "Had been in the land in
those days." In the days when those intermarriages were beginning to
take place, the warriors were asserting the claim of might. Violence and
rapine were becoming rampant in the land. "And after that." The progeny
of the mixed marriages were the second and subsequent class of leading
men. "The sons of God" are here contradistinguished from the "nephilim,
or giants," who appear therefore to have belonged to the Cainites. The
offspring of these unhallowed unions were the heroes, the gallants, the
mighty men, the men of renown. They were probably more refined in
manners and exalted in thought than their predecessors of pure Cainite
descent. "Men of name," whose names are often in men's mouths, because
they either deserved or required to be named frequently on account of
their influential or representative character. Being distinguished from
the common herd by prominent qualities or memorable exploits, they were
also frequently marked out by a special name or surname, derived from
such trait of character or deed of notoriety. "Of old" (מעולם mē'ôlām).
This has been sometimes explained "of the world," in the sense of αἰών
aiōn; but the meaning is too late for the present passage. The phrase
uniformly means "of old," covering a more or less extensive length of
time. This note of time implies a writer probably after the deluge, who
could speak of antediluvian affairs, as happening of old.

It is remarkable that we have no hint of any kind of government in the
antediluvian world. It is open to us to suppose that the patriarchal
polity would make its appearance, as it is an order based upon natural
relations. But it is possible that God himself, being still present and
manifest, was recognized as the governor. To him offerings were brought,
and he deals with Cain on his first and second transgression. In that
case the lawless violence of the strong and willful is to be regarded as
rebellion, not only against the patriarchal rule, but the divine
supremacy. A notice of civil law and government would not of course
affect the authority of the book. But the absence of such notice is in
favor of its divine origin. It is obvious that higher things than these
have the attention of the sacred writer.

[Gen 6:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#005.md)

In these verse we are to conceive the 120 years of respite to be at an
end. The iniquity of the race is now full, and the determination of the
Lord is therefore announced, with a statement of the grounds on which it
rests, and a glance at the individual to be excepted from the general
destruction.

[Gen 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#005.md)

And God saw. - The course of the primeval world was a great experiment
going on before the eye of God, and of all intelligent observers, and
manifesting the thorough depravity and full-grown degeneracy of the
fallen race, when left to the bent of its perverted inclinations. "Every
imagination" (יצר yētser). Here the object of thought is distinguished
from the thought itself. This is a distinction not generally or
constantly recognized by the mental philosopher, though of essential
importance in the theory of the mind. The thought itself is a real phase
or attitude of mind; the form, idea, species, object of thought may have
matter, real content, or it may not. "Only evil every day." This is an
unlimited condemnation of the state and process of the carnal man. The
reason is obvious. Homage to God, to truth, to right, to love, does not
reign in his heart; and the imaginations or purposes that are not
regulated by this, however excellent and praiseworthy in other respects,
are destitute of the first the essential principle of moral good. This
is now made palpable to the eye of observation by the almost universal
predominance of the ungodly spirit. This accordingly forms the ground of
the divine procedure.

[Gen 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#006.md)

And it repented the Lord - that he had made man. The Scripture is frank
and unreserved; some people would say, imprudent or regardless of
misconstruction, in its statements of truth. Repentance ascribed to the
Lord seems to imply wavering or change of purpose in the Eternal
Self-existent One. But the sublime dictate of the inspired word is, "God
is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should
repent: hath he said and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken and shall
he not make it good?" [Num 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#019.md). In
sooth, every act here recorded - the observation, the resolve, the
exception - seems equally with the repentance to jar with the
unchangeableness of God. To go to the root of the matter, every act of
the divine will, of creative power, or of interference with the order of
nature, seems at variance with inflexibility of purpose. But, in the
first place, man has a finite mind and a limited sphere of observation,
and therefore is not able to conceive or express thoughts or acts
exactly as they are in God, but only as they are in himself. Secondly,
God is a spirit, and therefore has the attributes of personality,
freedom, and holiness; and the passage before us is designed to set
forth these in all the reality of their action, and thereby to
distinguish the freedom of the eternal mind from the fatalism of inert
matter. Hence, thirdly, these statements represent real processes of the
Divine Spirit, analogous at least to those of the human. And, lastly, to
verify this representation, it is not necessary that we should be able
to comprehend or construe to ourselves in all its practical detail that
sublime harmony which subsists between the liberty and the immutability
of God. That change of state which is essential to will, liberty, and
activity, may be, for aught we know, and from what we know must be, in
profound unison with the eternity of the divine purpose.

[Gen 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#007.md)

I will wipe away man from the face of the soil. - The resolve is made to
sweep away the existing race of man. Heretofore, individuals had
departed this life. Adam himself had long since paid the debt of nature.
These solemn testimonies to the universal doom had not made any salutary
or lasting impression on the survivors. But now a general and violent
destruction is to overtake the whole race - a standing monument of the
divine wrath against sin, to all future generations of the only family
saved.

From man to cattle, creeper and fowl of the sky. - These classes of
animated nature being mingled up with man are involved in the same ruin
with him. This is of a piece with the curse laid upon the serpent, which
was the unconscious organ of the tempter. It is an instance of a law
which runs through the whole course of nature, as we observe that it is
the method of the divine government to allow for the time the suffering
inflicted on an inferior animal, or even on a fellow-creature, by
selfish passion. It has an appearance to some minds of harshness and
unfairness. But we must remember that these animated creatures are not
moral, and, therefore, the violent termination of their organic life is
not a punishment; that the pain incidental to this, being apart from
guilt, is in itself a beneficial provision for the conservation of life;
and that it was not intended that the life of animals should be
perpetual. The return of the land to a state of desolation by the
destruction of animal and vegetable life, however, has its lesson for
man, for whom ultimately all of this beauty and fertility were designed,
and from whom it is now withdrawn, along with all the glories it
foreshadows, as part of the punishment of his guilt. The tenant has
become unworthy of the tabernacle, and accordingly he is dispossessed,
and it is taken down and removed.

[Gen 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#008.md)

And Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord. - Noah and his family are
the only exceptions to this sweeping destruction. Hitherto we have met
with distant and indirect intimations of the divine favor, and
significant deeds of regard and acceptance. Now for the first time grace
itself finds a tongue to express its name. Grace has its fountain in the
divine breast. The stream has been flowing forth to Adam, Eve, Habel,
Henok, and others, we hope, unknown to fame. By the time it reaches Noah
it has found a name, by which it is recognized among people to this day.
It is opposed to works as a source of blessing. Whither grace comes
there merit cannot be. Hence, we learn even from the case of Noah that
original sin asserts its presence in the whole race of Adam. This
completes the circle of saving doctrine in regard to God that comes down
from the antediluvian times. He intimates that the seed of the woman, an
individual pre-eminently so called, will bruise the serpent's head. He
clothes our first parents with coats of skin - an earnest and an emblem
of the better, the moral clothing of the soul. He regards Habel and his
offering. He accepts him that in faith does well. He translates Enok,
who walked with him. His Spirit, we learn, has been striving with
antediluvian man. Here are the Spirit of God and the seed of the woman.
Here are clothing, regarding, accepting, translating. Here, then, is
salvation provided and applied, begun, continued, and completed. And
last, though not least, grace comes out to view, the eternal fountain of
the whole. On the part of man, also, we have repenting, believing,
confessing, offering, calling on the name of the Lord, and walking with
God.

The two parts of the document which is now closed are as distinct from
each other as it is from the following one. They combine, in fact, to
form the needful preliminary to the fourth document. The genealogy
brings us to the leading agent in the succeeding narrative; the
description of the corruption of the human race furnishes the occasion
for his agency. The third is therefore the prologue, as the fifth is the
epilogue, to the fourth document, in which the main action lies.

[Genesis 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 6:9</span></span>

\- Section VI - The Deluge

\- XXIII. The Ark

9\. דור dôr "age, time from birth to death," applied either to an
individual or the whole contemporary race, running parallel with some
leading individual. Hence, the "race" or "generation" living during that
time.

14\. תבה tēbâh "chest, ark." It is used only of this vessel of Noah's
construction, and of the little vessel in which Moses was put [Exo
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#003.md), [Exo
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#005.md). The root, according to Furst,
means "to be hollow." אבה 'ēbeh a cognate word, signifies "a reed;"
κιβωτός kibōtos Septuagint. גפר goper α. λ., perhaps "fir, cypress,
resinous wood." קן qēn "nest, room; related: prepare, rear up."

16\. צהר tsohar "shining, light;" not the same as the חלון chalôn [Gen
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#006.md), or the aperture through which
Noah let out the raven.

18\. ברית berı̂yt "covenant; related: cut, eat, choose, decide."

The close of the preceding document introduces the opening topic of this
one. The same rule applies to all that have gone before. The generations
of the skies and the land [Gen 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004.md) are
introduced by the finishing of the skies and the land [Gen
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001.md); the generations of man in the
line of Sheth [Gen 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#001.md), by the birth
of Sheth [Gen 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#025.md); and now the
generations of Noah, by the notice that Noah found grace in the eyes of
the Lord. The narrative here also, as usual, reverts to a point of time
before the stage of affairs described in the close of the preceding
passage. Yet there is nothing here that seems to indicate a new author.
The previous paragraph is historical, and closely connected with the end
of the fourth chapter; and it suitably prepares for the proceedings of
Noah, under the divine direction, on the eye of the deluge. We have now
a recapitulation of the agent and the occasion, and then the divine
commission and its execution.

[Gen 6:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#009.md)

Here are the man and the occasion.

[Gen 6:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#009.md)

The generations of Noah. - In the third document we had the generations
of man; now we are limited to Noah, because he is himself at peace with
God, and is now the head and representative of those who are in the same
blessed relation. The narrative, therefore, for the first time, formally
confines itself to the portion of the human family in communion with
God, Noah is here characterized by two new and important epithets -
"just" and "perfect." It is to be remembered that he had already found
grace in the eyes of the Lord. Adam was created good; but by
disobedience he became guilty, and all his race, Noah among the rest,
became involved in that guilt. To be just is to be right in point of
law, and thereby entitled to all the blessings of the acquitted and
justified. When applied to the guilty, this epithet implies pardon of
sin among other benefits of grace. It also presupposes that spiritual
change by which the soul returns from estrangement to reconciliation
with God. Hence, Noah is not only just, but perfect. This attribute of
character imports not only the turning from darkness to light, from
error to truth, from wrong to right, but the stability of moral
determination which arises from the struggle, the trial, the victory of
good over evil, therein involved. The just is the right in law; the
perfect is the tested in holiness. "In his ages;" among the men of his
age. This phrase indicates the contrast between Noah and the men of his
day. It is probable, moreover, that he was of pure descent, and in that
respect also distinguished from his contemporaries who were the
offspring of promiscuous intermarriage between the godly and the
ungodly. "Noah walked with God," like Henok. This is the native
consequence of his victory over sin, and his acceptance with God. His
sons are mentioned, as they are essentially connected with the following
events.

[Gen 6:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#011.md)

And the land was corrupt. - In contrast with Noah, the rest of the race
were corrupt - entirely depraved by sin. "It was filled with violence" -
with the outward exhibition of inward carnality. "And God saw this." It
was patent to the eye of Heaven. This is the ground of the following
commission.

[Gen 6:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#013.md)

The directions concerning the ark embrace the purpose to destroy the
race of man [Gen 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#013.md), the plan and
specification of the ark [Gen 6:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#014.md),
the announcement of the deluge [Gen
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#017.md), the arrangements for the
preservation of Noah and his family, and certain kinds of animals [Gen
6:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#018.md).

[Gen 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#013.md)

The end of all flesh. - The end may mean either the point to which it
tends, or the extermination of the race. The latter is the simpler. All
flesh is to be understood of the whole race, while yet it does not
preclude the exception of Noah and his family. This teaches us to beware
of applying an inflexible literality to such terms as all, when used in
the sense of ordinary conversation. "Is come before me," is in the
contemplation of my mind as an event soon to be realized. "For the land
is filled with violence." The reason. "I will destroy them." The
resolve. There is retribution here, for the words "corrupt" and
"destroy" are the same in the original.

[Gen 6:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#014.md)

The ark. - Reckoning the cubit at 1.8 feet, we find the length to be
about 540, the breadth 90, and the height 54 feet. The construction of
such a vessel implies great skill in carpentry. The lighting apparatus
is not described so particularly that we can form any conception of it.
It was probably in the roof. The roof may have been flat. "And to a
cubit shalt thou finish it above." The cubit is possibly the height of
the parapet round the lighting and ventilating aperture. The opening
occupied, it may be, a considerable portion of the roof, and was covered
during the rain with an awning מכסה mı̂ksēh, [Gen
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#013.md). If, however, it was in the sides
of the ark, the cubit was merely its height. It was then finished with a
strong railing, which went round the whole ark, and over which the
covering, above mentioned, hung down on every side. The door was in the
side, and the stories were three. In each were of course many "nests" or
chambers, for animals and stores. It may be curious to a mechanical mind
to frame the details of this structure from the general hints here
given; but it could not serve any practical end. Only the animals
necessary to man, or unusual to the region covered by the deluge,
required to be included in the ark. It seems likely that wild animals in
general were not included. It is obvious, therefore, that we cannot
calculate the number of animals preserved in the ark, or compare the
space they would require with its recorded dimensions. We may rest
assured that there was accommodation for all that needed to be there.

[Gen 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#017.md)

The method of destruction is now specified. A water flood shall cover
the land, in which all flesh shall perish. I, "behold," I. This
catastrophe is due to the interposition of the Creator. It does not come
according to the ordinary laws of physics, but according to the higher
law of ethics.

[Gen 6:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#018.md)

The covenant with Noah. Here is the first appearance of a covenant
between God and man on the face of Scripture. A covenant is a solemn
compact, tacit or express, between two parties, in which each is bound
to perform his part. Hence, a covenant implies the moral faculty; and
wherever the moral faculty exists, there must needs be a covenant.
Consequently, between God and man there was of necessity a covenant from
the very beginning, though the name do not appear. At first it was a
covenant of works, in regard to man; but now that works have failed, it
can only be a covenant of grace to the penitent sinner. "My covenant."
The word "my" points to its original establishment with Adam. My
primeval covenant, which I am resolved not to abandon. "Will I
establish." Though Adam has failed, yet will I find means of maintaining
my covenant of life with the seed of the woman. "With thee." Though all
flesh be to perish through breach of my covenant, yet will I uphold it
with thee. "Go into the ark." This is the means of safety. Some may say
in their hearts, this is a clumsy way to save Noah. But if he is to be
saved, there must be some way. And it is not a sign of wisdom to
prescribe the way to the All-wise. Rather let us reflect that the
erection of this ark was a daily warning to a wicked race, a deepening
lesson of reliance on God to Noah and his household, and a most salutary
occupation for the progenitors of the future race of mankind. "And thy
sons, etc." Noah's household share in the covenant.

[Gen 6:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#019.md)

And of all the living. - For the sake of Noah, the animal species also
shall be preserved, "two of each, male and female." They are to come in
pairs for propagation. The fowl, the cattle, the creeping thing or
smaller animals, are to come. From this it appears that the wild animals
are not included among the inmates of the ark. (See [Gen
7:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#002.md), [Gen
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#008)..md) The word "all" is not to be
pressed beyond the specification of the writer. As the deluge was
universal only in respect to the human race, it was not necessary to
include any animals but those that were near man, and within the range
of the overwhelming waters. Fodder and other provisions for a year have
to be laid in.

[Gen 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#022.md)

The obedience of Noah and the accomplishment of his task are here
recorded. The building of so enormous a fabric must have occupied many
years.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 7](gen007.md)

</div>
