<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen023)  [Next](gen025.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#001.md)

\- The Marriage of Isaac

26\. קרד qādad, "bow the head." השׁתחוה shâchâh, "bow the body."

29\. לבן lābān, "Laban, white."

In this circumstantial account of the marriage of Isaac, we have a
beautiful picture of ancient manners in the East, the living original of
which the present customs of that cradle of mankind are a striking copy.

[Gen 24:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#001.md)

Abraham binds the chief servant of his house to seek a wife for his son
Isaac among his kindred. The first movement in this matrimonial
arrangement is on the part of the father, who does not consult his son,
but the chief manager of his household affairs. Abraham is now a hundred
and forty years of age, and Sarah has been three years dead. Isaac seems
to have been of an easy, sedate turn of mind, and was not in
circumstances to choose a partner for life such as his father would
approve. The promise of a numerous offspring by the son of Sarah is
before the mind of the patriarch. All these considerations impel him to
look out for a suitable wife for his son, and the blessing of the Lord
encourages him to proceed. The person whom Abraham intrusted with this
delicate task has a threefold designation. First, he is "his servant" or
minister. Secondly, he is the old man, ancient, or elder of his house.
Here the term "elder" approaches its official signification. In early
times age was taken into account, along with good conduct and aptitude,
as the qualification for services of trust. Thirdly, he "ruled over all
that he had." He was therefore a master as well as a minister. If this
be Eliezer of mascus [Gen 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#002.md), he was
the steward of Abraham before the birth of Ishmael fifty-four Years ago.
"Under my thigh." The thigh was the seat of generative power, and the
region of sacramental consecration, and to put the hand under the thigh
was to acknowledge and pledge obedience to him who requires the oath.

[Gen 24:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#003.md)

The appeal is to God as "Yahweh, God of heaven and God of the earth."
Yahweh is the personal name of God, which is properly used by those who
are in fellowship with him. He is the Author of all being, and therefore
of heaven and earth; and hence the arbiter of the destiny of the
oath-taker, both in spiritual and material things, both in this life and
in what is to come. "Not of the daughters of the Kenaanite," a race
sinking fast into ungodliness and unrighteousness, doomed to
extirpation, to whom the promised seed is to succeed. The kindred of
Abraham were Shemites, Hebrews, and still retained some knowledge of the
true God, and some reverence for him and his will. The experienced elder
of Abraham's house does not wish to bind himself by an oath to what it
may be impossible to fulfill. He makes the supposition of the
unwillingness of the bride whom he may select, and obtains a quittance
from his oath in that ease. The patriarch, however, charges him not to
bring his son back to the land of his fathers, and expresses his
confidence in the God of promise, that he will direct his servant to the
suitable wife for his son. "His angel" [Gen
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#007.md). This is the Lord in the function
of an angel or messenger opening the way for the servant of Abraham. He
does not make any appearance to the servant, though a superintending
Providence is strikingly displayed in the whole affair. The faithful
elder now understands and takes the required oath.

[Gen 24:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#010.md)

He proceeds on his journey. "Took ten camels." These are designed for
conducting the bride and her companions home to his master. "All the
best belonging to his master in his hand." This refers to the presents
for the bride and her friends, and to the accommodations for her comfort
on the journey. "Aram-Naharaim." Aram was an extensive area, embracing
not only the country west of the Frat and north of Palestine, but the
northern part of Mesopotamia, or the country between the Frat and the
Dijlah. The latter region is for the sake of distinction called Aram of
the two rivers. It did not include the southern part of Mesopotamia,
which was called Shinar [Gen 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#002.md), and
probably extended only to the Chaboras, Khabour. The part of it in which
Haran was situated was called Padan-aram [Gen
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#002.md). "The city of Nahor." It is
probable that Nahor accompanied his father, Terah, to Haran [Gen
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031.md). If not, he must have followed
him very soon.

[Gen 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#011.md)

Made the camels kneel, - for repose. "The time when the maidens that
draw water come out." The evening was the cool part of the day. The
simple maidens of primitive days attended personally to domestic
affairs. The experienced steward might therefore naturally expect to see
the high-born damsels of the land at the public well, which had probably
given rise to the neighboring town. The prayer of the aged servant is
conceived in a spirit of earnest, childlike faith. The matter in hand is
of extraordinary importance. A wife is to be found for the heir of
promise. This was a special concern of God, and so the single-hearted
follower of Abraham makes it. He takes upon himself the choice of a
maiden among those that come to draw, to whom he will make the request
of a particular act of kindness to a stranger, and he prays God that the
intended bride may be known by a ready compliance with his request. The
three qualifications, then, in the mind of the venerable domestic for a
bride for his master's son, are a pleasing exterior, a kindly
disposition, and the approval of God.

[Gen 24:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#015.md)

The answer is immediate and direct. "He had not yet done speaking," when
the answer came. A damsel "very fair to look upon," satisfying the taste
of the old man, appears. He thereupon prefers his request, with which
she promptly complies. The old man waits in wonder and silence to see if
the Lord's approval will follow.

[Gen 24:22-28](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#022.md)

Rebekah makes herself known in reply to his inquiries. "A ring of gold."
The single ring was worn in the nose, the side cartilage of which was
pierced for the purpose. This is a custom of the East. "A beka" was half
a shekel, somewhat less than a quarter of an ounce. "Ten of gold in
weight." Ten bekas would be about two ounces and a quarter. If shekels,
however, be understood, the weight will be double. These were merely a
reward for her kindness and courtesy to a stranger. Two questions are
now asked by the stranger - the one relating to her kindred, and the
other to the means and the inclination they had to entertain a stranger,
when inns were not yet in existence. She announces herself to be the
daughter of his master's nephew, and assures him of the requisite
accommodation.

[Gen 24:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#026.md)

Bowed his head and worshipped. - The bowing of the head and of the body
are here combined to indicate the aged servant's deep thankfulness for
the guidance of the Lord. The utterance of the mouth accompanies the
external gesture of reverence. "Her mother's house;" those who were in
the department of the females. We may imagine with what excitement and
alacrity Rebekah would communicate the extraordinary intelligence.

[Gen 24:29-33](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#029.md)

The reception of Abraham's servant. Laban now comes on the scene. He is
ready to run with his sister to find the man, and invite him, as a
matter of course, to his father's house. "When he saw the ring." The
presents to his sister assure him that this is the envoy of some man of
wealth and position. "Thou blessed of the Lord." The name of Yahweh was
evidently not unfamiliar to Laban's ears. He calls this stranger
"blessed of Yahweh," on account of his language, demeanor, and manifest
prosperity. The knowledge and worship of the living God, the God of
truth and mercy, was still retained in the family of Nahor. Being warmly
invited, the man enters the house. "And he ungirded the camels." Laban
is the actor here, and in the following duties of hospitality. "The
men's feet that were with him." It comes out here, incidentally, as it
was reasonable to infer from the number of camels, that Abraham's
steward had a retinue of servants with him. The crowning act of an
Eastern reception is the presenting of food. But the faithful servant
must deliver his message before partaking of the friendly meal.

Verse 34-49

The servant's errand is told. He explains his business in a singularly
artless and pleasing manner. He then leaves the matter in the hands of
the family. "Given unto him all that he hath." His children by Hagar and
Keturah were dismissed with portions during his life, and the main bulk
of his property was conveyed to Isaac.

[Gen 24:50-61](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#050.md)

The servant's return with Rebekah. So plain an interposition of
Providence admits of no refusal on the part of those who revere the
Lord. Bethuel now appears as a concurring party. Laban, as the full
brother of Rebekah, has a voice in the disposal of her hand; but the
father only has the power to ratify the contract. The patriarch's
servant first bows in acknowledgment to the Lord, who had now manifested
his approval of the choice he had made, and then proceeds to distribute
costly gifts to the bride, and to her brother and mother. Now at length
the thankful guest partakes of the fare set before him along with his
entertainers, and after the night's repose requests to be dismissed. "A
few days;" perhaps a week or ten days. The mother and brother naturally
plead for a little time to prepare for parting with Rebekah. They could
not expect the servant, however, to stay months.

"Inquire at her mouth." This is the only free choice in the matter that
seems to be given to Rebekah. Her consent may have been modestly
indicated, before her family ratified the contract. It is plain,
however, that it was thought proper that the parents should receive and
decide upon a proposal of marriage. The extent to which the maiden's
inclinations would be consulted would depend very much on the custom of
the country, and the intelligence and good feeling of the parents. In
later times the custom became very arbitrary. Rebekah's decision shows
that she concurred in the consent of her relatives. "And her nurse." Her
name, we learn afterward [Gen 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#008.md),
was Deborah. The nurse accompanied the bride as her confidential adviser
and faithful attendant, and died in her service; a beautiful trait of
ancient manners. The blessing consists in a boundless offspring, and the
upper hand over their enemies. These are indicative of a thin
population, and a comparatively rude state of society. "And her
damsels." We here learn, again, incidentally, that Rebekah had more
female attendants than her nurse.

[Gen 24:62-67](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#062.md)

Isaac receives his bride. He had been at Beer-lahai-roi, the scene of
the interview of Hagar with the angel of the Lord - a spot calculated to
awaken thoughts of an overruling Providence. "To meditate." This is a
characteristic of Isaac's retiring, contemplative mood. Abraham was the
active, authoritative father; Isaac was the passive, submissive son. To
meditate was to hold converse with his own thoughts, to ponder on the
import of that never-to-be-forgotten scene when he was laid on the altar
by a father's hand, and a ram caught in the thicket became his
substitute, and to pour out his soul unto the God of his salvation. In
this hour of his grave reflection comes his destined bride with her
faithful escort upon his view. Rebekah lights off the camel. Doubtless
the conversation by the way with the elder of Abraham's house had made
her aware of their approach to the residence of her future husband.

She concludes at once that this must be he, and, alighting, asks if it
be. On being informed by the servant that this is his young master, she
puts on the veil, which covers the head, and hangs down gracefully both
behind and before. The aged servant reports the success of his mission,
and presents Rebekah. Isaac brings his cousin's daughter into the
apartments formerly occupied by his mother, and accepts her as his wife.
The formalities of the interview, and of her presentation to Abraham as
his daughter-in-law, are all untold. "And he loved her." This is the
first mention of the social affections. It comes in probably because
Isaac had not before seen his bride, and now felt his heart drawn toward
her, when she was presented to his view. All things were evidently done
in the fear of God, as became those who were to be the progenitors of
the seed of promise. We have here a description of the primeval
marriage. It is a simple taking of a woman for a wife before all
witnesses, and with suitable feelings and expression of reverence toward
God, and of desire for his blessing. It is a pure and holy relation,
reaching back into the realms of innocence, and fit to be the emblem of
the humble, confiding, affectionate union between the Lord and his
people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 25](gen025.md)

</div>
