<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Haggai Index](hag)  
  [Previous](hag000)  [Next](hag002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Haggai Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001)

[Haggai 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hag 1:1</span></span>

In the second year of Darius - , i. e., Hystaspis. The very first word
of prophecy after the captivity betokens that they were restored, not
yet as before, yet so, as to be hereafter, more than before. The earthly
type, by God's appointment, was fading away, that the heavenly truth
might dawn. The earthly king was withdrawn, to make way for the
heavenly. God had said of Jeconiah [Jer
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#030), "No man of his seed shall
prosper, sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling anymore in
Israel:" and so now prophecy begins to be dated by the years of a
foreign earthly ruler, as in the Baptism of the Lord Himself [Luk
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#001). Yet God gives back in mercy more
than He withdraws in chastisement. The earthly rule is suspended, that
people might look out more longingly for the heavenly.

In the sixth month - They counted by their own months, beginning with
Nisan, the first of the ecclesiastical year (which was still used for
holy purposes and in sacred history), although, having no more any
kings, they dated their years by those of the empire, to which they were
subject (See [Zac 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#007); [Zac
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#001)) in the sixth month, part of our
July and August, their harvest was past, and the dearth, which they,
doubtless ascribed (as we do) to the seasons, and which Haggai pointed
out to be a judgment from God, had set in for this year also. The months
being lunar, the first day of the month was the festival of the new
moon, a popular feast [Pro 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#020) which
their forefathers had kept [Isa
1:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013), while they neglected the
weightier matters of the law, and which the religious in Israel had
kept, even while separated from the worship at Jerusalem ([Kg2
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#023); add [Amo
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#005); [Hos
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#011)). In its very first day, when the
grief for the barren year was yet fresh, Haggai was stirred to exhort
them to consider their way; a pattern for Christian preachers, to bring
home to people's souls the meaning of God's judgments. God directs the
very day to be noted, in which He called the people anew to build His
temple, both to show the readiness of their obedience, and a precedent
to us to keep in memory days and seasons, in which He stirs our souls to
build more diligently His spiritual temple in our souls .

By the hand of Haggai - God does almost everything which He does for a
person through the hands of people. He commits His words and works for
people into the hands of human beings as His stewards, to dispense
faithfully to His household. [Luk
12:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#042). Hence, He speaks so often of
the law, which He commanded "by the hand of Moses;" but also as to other
prophets, Nathan [Sa2 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#025), Ahijal,
[Kg1 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#015); [Kg1
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#016); [Ch2
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2010.htm#015). Jehu [Kg1
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#007), Jonah [Kg2
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025), Isaiah [Isa
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#002), Jeremiah [Jer
37:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#002), and the prophets generally. Hos.
7:20; [Ch2 29:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#025) the very prophets of
God, although gifted with a Divine Spirit, still were willing and
conscious instruments in speaking His words.

Unto Zerubbabel - (so called from being born in Babylon) "the son of
Sheatiel." By this genealogy Zerubbabel is known in the history of the
return from the captivity in Ezra and Nehemiah [Ezr
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#002), [Ezr
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#008); [Ezr
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#002); [Neh
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001). God does not say by Jeremiah,
that Jeconiah should have no children, but that he should in his
lifetime be childless, as it is said of those married to the uncle's or
brother's widow [Lev 20:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#020), "they
shall die childless." Jeremiah rather implies that he should have
children, but that they should die untimely before him. For he calls
Jeconiah [Jer 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#030), "a man who shall
not prosper in his days; for there shall not prosper a man of his seed,
sitting on the throne of David, and ruling anymore in Israel." He should
die (as the word means) "bared" of all, alone and desolate. The own
father of Shealtiel appears to have been Neri [Luk
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#027), of the line of Nathan son of
David; not, of the line of the kings of Judah. Neri married, one must
suppose, a daughter of Assir, son of Jeconiah [Ch1
3:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#017) whose grandson Shealtiel was;
and Zerubbabel was the own son of Pedaiah, the brother of Shealtiel, as
whose son he was in the legal genealogy inscribed, according to the law
as to those who die childless [Deu
23:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#005), or as having been adopted by
Shealtiel being himself childless, as Moses was called the son of the
daughter of Pharaoh [Exo 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#010). So
broken was the line of the unhappy Jehoiachin, two thirds of whose own
life was passed in the prison [Jer
52:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#031), into which Nebuchadnezzar did
cast him.

Governor of Judah - The foreign name betokens that the civil rule was
now held from a foreign power, although Cyrus showed the Jews the
kindness of placing one of themselves, of royal extraction also, as his
deputy over them.

The lineage of David is still in authority, connecting the present with
the past, but the earthly kingdom had faded away. Under the name
"Sheshbazzar" Zerubbabel is spoken of both as the "prince" and the
"governor" [Ezr 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#014), of Judah. With
him is joined "Joshuah the son of Josedech, the high priest," whose
father went into captivity [Ch1 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#015),
when his grandfather Seraiah was slain by Nebuchadnezzar [Kg2
25:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#018). The priestly line is also
preserved. Haggai addresses these two, the one of the royal, the other
of the priestly, line, as jointly responsible for the negligence of the
people; he addresses the people only through them. Together, they are
types of Him, the true King and true priest, Christ Jesus, who by the
resurrection raised again the true temple, His Body, after it had been
destroyed .

[Haggai 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hag 1:2</span></span>

Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, saying, This people say - Not
Zerubbabel or Joshua, but "this people." He says not, "My people," but
reproachfully "this people," as, in acts, disowning Him, and so
deserving to be disowned by Him. "The time is not come," literally "It
is not time to come, time for the house of the Lord to be built" . They
might yet sit still; the time for them "to come" was not yet, for not
yet was the "time for the house of the Lord to be built." Why it was not
time, they did not say. The government did not help them; the original
grant by Cyrus [Ezr 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#007) was exhausted;
the Samaritans hindered them, because they would not own them, (amid
their mishmash of worship, "worshiping," our Lord tells them [Joh
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022), "they know not what"), as
worshipers of the same God. It was a bold excuse, if they said, that the
70 years during which the temple was to lie waste, were not yet ended.

The time had long since come, when, 16 years before, Cyrus had given
command that the house of God should be built. The prohibition to build,
under Artaxerxes or Pseudo-Smerdis, applied directly to the city and its
walls, not to the temple, except so far as the temple itself, from its
position, might be capable of being used as a fort, as it was in the
last siege of, Jerusalem. Yet in itself a building of the size of the
temple, apart from outer buildings, could scarcely so be used. The
prohibition did not hinder the building of stately private houses, as
appears from Haggai's rebuke. The hindrances also, whatever they were,
had not begun with that decree. The death of Pseudo-Smerdis had now, for
a year, set them free, if had they had any zeal for the glory and
service of God. Otherwise, Haggai would not blamed them. God, knowing
that He would bend the heart of Darius, as He had that of Cyrus,
requires the house to be built without the king's decree. It was built
in faith, that God would bring through what He had enjoined, although
outward things were as adverse now as before. And what He commanded He
prospered Ezra 5-6.

There was indeed a second fulfillment of 70 years, from the destruction
of the temple by Nebuchadnezzar 586 b.c., to its consecration in the 6th
year of Darius 516 b.c. But this was through the willfulness of man,
prolonging the desolation decreed by God, and Jeremiah's prophecy
relates to the people not to the temple.

"The prophet addresses his discourse to the chiefs (in Church and state)
and yet accuses directly, not their listlessness but that of the people,
in order both to honor them before the people and to teach that their
sins are to be blamed privately not publicly, lest their authority
should be injured, and the people incited to rebel against them; and
also to shew that this fault was directly that of the people, whom he
reproves before their princes, that, being openly convicted before them,
it might be ashamed, repent, and obey God; but that indirectly this
fault touched the chiefs themselves, whose office it was to urge the
people to this work of God" . "For seldom is the prince free from the
guilt of his subjects, as either assenting to, or winking at them, or
not coercing them, though able."

Since also Christians are the temple of God, all this prophecy of Haggai
is applicable to them . "When thou seest one who has lapsed thinking and
preparing to build through chastity the temple which he had before
destroyed through passion, and yet delaying day by day, say to him,
'Truly thou also art of the people of the captivity, and sayest, The
time is not yet come for building the house of the Lord.' Whoso has once
settled to restore the temple of God, to him every time is suited for
building, and the prince, Satan, cannot hinder, nor, the enemies around.
As soon as being thyself converted, thou callest upon the name of the
Lord, He will say, "Behold Me" . "To him who willeth to do right, the
time is always present; the good and right-minded have power to fulfill
what is to the glory of God, in every time and place."

[Haggai 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hag 1:3</span></span>

And the word of the Lord came - o "Before, he prophesied nothing, but
only recited the saying of the people; now he refutes it in his
prophecy, and repeats, again and again, that he says this not of
himself, but from the mind and mouth of God." It is characteristic of
Haggai to inculcate thus frequently, that his words are not his own, but
the words of God. Yet "the prophets, both in their threats and
prophecies, repeat again and again, "Thus saith the Lord," teaching us,
how we should prize the word of God, hang upon it, have it ever in our
mouth, reverence, ruminate on, utter, praise it, make it our continual
delight."

[Haggai 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hag 1:4</span></span>

Is it time for you - You, being what you are, the creatures of God, "to
dwell in your ceiled houses," more emphatically, in your houses, and
those "ceiled," probably with costly woods, such as cedar . But where
then was the excuse of want of means? They imitated, in their alleged
poverty, what is spoken of as magnificent in their old kings, Solomon
and Shallum, but not having, as Solomon first did ([Kg1
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#009), ויספן), "covered the house of God
with beams and rows of cedar" . "Will ye dwell in houses artificially
adorned, not so much for use as for delight, and shall My
dwelling-place, wherein was the Holy of holies, and the cherubim, and
the table of showbread, be bestreamed with rains, desolated in solitude,
scorched by the sun?"

"With these words carnal Christians are reproved, who have no glow of
zeal for God, but are full of self-love, and so make no effort to
repair, build, or strengthen the material temples of Christ, and houses
assigned to His worship, when aged, ruinous, decaying or destroyed, but
build for themselves curious, voluptuous, superfluous dwellings. In
these the love of Christ gloweth not; these Isaiah threateneth, [Isa
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#008), [Isa
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012). "Woe to you who join house to
house and field to field, and regard not the work of the Lord!"

To David and Solomon the building of God's temple was their heart's
desire; to early Christian Emperors, to the ages of faith, the building
of Churches; now mostly, owners of lands build houses for this world's
profit, and leave it to the few to build in view of eternity, and for
the glory of God.

[Haggai 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hag 1:5</span></span>

And now, thus saith the Lord of hosts; "Consider," (literally "set your
heart upon) your ways," what they had been doing, what they were doing,
and what those doings had led to, and would lead to. This is ever
present to the mind of the prophets, as speaking God's words, that our
acts are not only "ways" in which we go, each day of life being a
continuance of the day before; but that they are ways which lead,
somewhere in God's Providence and His justice; to some end of the "way,"
good or bad. So God says by Jeremiah [Jer
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#008). "I set before you the way of
life and the way of death;" and David [Psa
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011), "Thou wilt show me the path of
life," where it follows, "In Thy presence is the fullness of joy and at
Thy Right Hand there are pleasures forevermore;" and Solomon [Pro
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#023), "Reproofs of instruction are the
way of life;" and, he is in [Pro
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#017), "the way of life who keepeth
instruction; and he who forsaketh rebuke, erreth;" and [Pro
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#024), "The way of life is above to
the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath;" and of the adulterous
woman, [Pro 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#027). "Her house are the
ways of hell, going down to the chambers of death" and [Pro
5:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#005), "her feet go down unto death;
her steps take hold on hell; lest thou shouldest ponder the path of
life." Again, [Pro 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#012); [Pro
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#025). "There is a way that seemeth
right unto a man, and the end thereof are the ways of death;" and
contrariwise [Pro 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#018), "The path of
the righteous is a shining light, shining more and more until the
mid-day" [Pro 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#013). "The ways of
darkness" are the ways which end in darkness; and when Isaiah says [Isa
59:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#008), "The way of peace hast thou not
known," he adds, "whosoever goeth therein shall not know peace." They
who choose not peace for their way, shall not find peace in and for
their end.

On these your ways, Haggai says, "set your hearts," not thinking of them
lightly, nor giving a passing thought to them, but fixing your minds
upon them; as God says to Satan [Job
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#008), "Hast thou set thy heart on My
servant Job?" and God is said to set His eye or His face upon man for
good [Jer 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#006); or for evil [Jer
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#010), He speaks also, not of setting
the mind, applying the understanding, giving the thoughts, but of
"setting the heart," as the seat of the affections. It is not a dry
weighing of the temporal results of their ways, but a loving dwelling
upon them, for repentance without love is but the gnawing of remorse.

Set your heart on your ways; - i. e., your affections, thoughts, works,
so as to be circumspect in all things; as the apostle Paul says [Ti1
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#021), "Do nothing without
forethought," i. e., without previous judgment of reason; and Solomon
[Pro 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#025), "Let thine eyes look right
on, and let thine eyelids look straight before thee;" and the son of
Sirach, "Son, do nothing without counsel and when thou hast done it thou
wilt not repent." For since, according to a probable proposition,
nothing in human acts is indifferent, i. e., involving neither good nor
ill deserts, they who do not thus set their hearts upon their ways, do
they not daily incur almost countless sins, in thought, word, desire,
deed, yea and by omission of duties? Such are all fearless persons who
heed not to fulfill what is written [Pro
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#023), 'Keep your heart with all
watchfulness. '"

"He "sows much" to his own heart, but "brings in little," who by reading
and hearing knows much of the heavenly commands, but by negligence in
deeds bears little fruit. "He eats and is not satisfied," who, hearing
the words of God, coveteth the gains or glory of the world. Well is he
said not to be "satisfied," who eateth one thing, hungereth after
another. He drinks and is not inebriated, who inclineth his ear to the
voice of preaching, but changeth not his mind. For through inebriation
the mind of those who drink is changed. He then who is devoted to the
knowledge of God's word, yet still desireth to gain the things of the
world, drinks and is not inebriated. For were he inebriated, no doubt he
would have changed his mind and no longer seek earthly things, or love
the vain and passing things which he had loved. For the Psalmist says of
the elect [Psa 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#008), "they shall be
inebriated with the richness of Thy house," because they shall be filled
with such love of Almighty God, that, their mind being changed, they
seem to be strangers to themselves, fulfilling what is written [Mat
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#024), 'If any will come after Me, let
him deny himself. '"

[Haggai 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hag 1:6</span></span>

Ye have sown much - The prophet expresses the habitualness of these
visitations by a vivid present. He marks no time and so expresses the
more vividly that it was at all times. It is one continually present
evil. "Ye have sown much and there is a bringing in little; there is
eating and not to satisfy; there is drinking and not to exhilarate;
there is clothing and not to be warm It is not for the one or the other
years, as, since the first year of Darius Hystaspis; it is one continued
visitation, coordinate with one continued negligence. As long as the sin
lasted, so long the punishment. The visitation itself was twofold;
impoverished harvests, so as to supply less sustenance; and various
indisposition of the frame, so that what would, by God's appointment in
nature, satisfy, gladden, warm, failed of its effect. "And he that
laboreth for hire, gaineth himself hire into a bag full of holes"
(literally "perforated.") The labor pictured is not only fruitless, but
wearisome and vexing. There is a seeming result of all the labor,
something to allure hopes; but immediately it is gone. The pagan
assigned a like baffling of hope as one of the punishments of hell ,
"Better and wiser to seek to be blessed by God, Who bestoweth on us all
things. And this will readily come to those who choose to be of the same
mind with Him and prefer what is for His glory to their own. For so
saith the Saviour Himself to us [Mat
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033), Seek ye first the kingdom of God
and His righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you."

"He loses good deeds by evil acts, who takes account of his good works,
which he hits before his eyes, and forgets the faults which creep in
between; or who, after what is good, returns to what is vain and evil" .
"Money is seen in the pierced bag, when it is cast in, but when it is
lost, it is not seen. They then who look how much they give, but do not
weigh how much they gain wrongly, cast their rewards into a pierced bag.
Looking to the Hope of their confidence they bring them together; not
looking, they lose them."

"They lose the fruit of their labor, by not persevering to the end, or
by seeking human praise, or by vain glory within, not keeping spiritual
riches under the guardianship of humility. Such are vain and
unprofitable men, of whom the Saviour saith, [Mat
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#002). 'Verily I say unto you, they have
their reward. '"

[Haggai 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hag 1:8</span></span>

Go up into the mountain - Not Mount Lebanon, from where the cedars had
been brought for the first temple; from where also Zerubbabel and Joshua
had procured some out of Cyrus' grant [Ezr
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#007), at the first return from the
captivity. They were not required to buy, expend, but simply to give
their own labor. They were themselves to "go up to the mountain," i. e.,
the mountainous country where the trees grew, "and bring" them. So, in
order to keep the Feast of Tabernacles, Ezra made a proclamation [Neh
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#015) "in all their cities and in
Jerusalem, go ye up to the mountain and bring leafy branches of vines,
olives, myrtles, palms." The palms, anyhow, were timber. God required
not goodly stones, such as had been already used, and such as hereafter,
in the temple which was built, were the admiration even of disciples of
Jesus [Mat 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#001), but which were, for
the wickedness of those who rejected their Saviour, "not to be left, one
stone upon another." He required not costly gifts, but the heart. The
neglect to build the temple was neglect of Himself, who ought to be
worshiped there. His worship sanctified the offering; offerings were
acceptable, only if made with a free heart.

And I will have pleasure in it - God, who has declared that He has no
[Mic 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#007) "pleasure in thousands of
rams, ten thousands of rivers of oil," had delight in [Psa
147:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#011) "them that feared Him," that
are "upright in their way," [Pro 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#020)
that "deal truly" [Pro 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#022) in the
"prayer" of the "upright" [Pro 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#008),
and so in the temple too, when it should be built to His glory.

And will be glorified - o God is glorified in man, when man serves Him;
in Himself, when He manifests aught of His greatness; in His great
doings to His people [Isa 26:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#015); [Isa
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#023); [Isa
60:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#021); [Isa
61:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#003), as also in the chastisement of
those who disobey Him [Exo 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#004); [Eze
28:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#022). God allows that glory, which
shines ineffably throughout His creation, to be obscured here through
man's disobedience, to shine forth anew on his renewed obedience. The
glory of God, as it is the end of the creation, so is it His creature's
supreme bliss. When God is really glorified, then can He show forth His
glory, by His grace and acceptance. (Augustine, Serm. 380, n. 6.) "The
glory of God is our glory. The more sweetly God is glorified, the more
it profits us:" yet not our profit, but the glory of God is itself our
end; so the prophet closes in that which is our end, "God will be
glorified."

"Good then and well-pleasing to God is zeal in fulfilling whatever may
appear necessary for the good condition of the Church and its
building-up, collecting the most useful materials, the spiritual
principles in inspired Scripture, whereby he may secure and ground the
conception of God, and may shew that the way of the Incarnation was
well-ordered, and may collect what pertains to accurate knowledge of
spiritual erudition and moral goodness. Nay, each of us may be thought
of, as the temple and house of God. For Christ "dwelleth in us" by the
Spirit, and we are "temples of the living God," according to the
Scripture [Co2 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#016). Let each then
build up his own heart by right faith, having the Saviour as the
"precious foundation." And let him add thereto other materials,
obedience, readiness for anything, courage, endurance, continence. "So
being framed together by that which every joint supplieth, shall we
become a holy temple, a habitation of God through the Spirit" [Eph
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#016); [Eph
2:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#021). But those who are slow to
faith, or who believe but are sluggish in shaking off passions and sins
and worldly pleasure, thereby cry out in a manner, The time is not come
to build the house of the Lord."

[Haggai 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hag 1:9</span></span>

Ye looked - , literally "a looking;" as though he said, it has all been
one looking, "for much," for increase, the result of all sowing, in the
way of nature: "and behold it came to little," i. e., less than was
sown; as Isaiah denounced to them of old by God's word, [Isa
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#010). "the seed of a homer shall yield
an ephah," i. e., one tenth of what was sown. "And ye brought it home,
and I blew upon it," so as to disperse it, as, not the wheat, but the
chaff is blown before the wind. This, in whatever way it came to pass,
was a further chastisement of God. The little seed which they brought in
lessened through decay or waste. Why? saith the Lord of hosts. God asks
by his prophet, what He asks in the awakened conscience [Psa
39:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#011). "God with rebukes chastens man
for sin." Conscience, when alive, confesses for "what" sin; or it asks
itself, if memory does not supply the special sin. Unawakened, it
complains about the excess of rain, the drought, the blight, the mildew,
and asks, not itself, why, in God's Providence, these inflictions came
in these years? They felt doubtless the sterility in contrast with the
exceeding prolificalness of Babylonia, as they contrasted the "light
bread," [Num 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#005). the manna, with
[Num 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#005). the plenteousness of Egypt.
They ascribed probably their meagre crops (as we mostly do) to mere
natural causes, perhaps to the long neglect of the land during the
captivity. God forces the question upon their consciences, in that
Haggai asks it in His Name, in whose hands all powers stand, "saith the
Lord of host." They have not to talk it over among themselves, but to
answer Almighty God, "why?" That "why?" strikes into the inmost depths
of conscience!

Because of My house which is waste, and ye run - literally, "are
running," all the while, "each to his own house" They were absorbed in
their material interests, and had no time for those of God. When the
question was of God's house, they stir not from the spot; when it is of
their own concerns, they run. Our Lord says, [Mat
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033). "Seek ye first the kingdom of
God and His righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto
you." Man reverses this, seeks his own things first, and God withholds
His blessing.

"This comes true of those who prefer their own conveniences to God's
honor, who do not thoroughly uproot self-love, whose penitence and
devotion are shewn to be unstable, for on a slight temptation they are
overcome. Such are they who are bold, self-pleasing, wise and great in
their own eyes, who do not ground their conversation on true and solid
humility."

(Cyr.) "To those who are slow to fulfill what is for the glory of God,
and the things whereby His house, the Church, is firmly stayed, neither
the heavenly dew cometh, which enricheth hearts and minds, nor the
fruitfulness of the earth; i. e., right action; not food nor wine nor
use of oil. But they will be ever strengthless and joyless, unenriched
by spiritual oil, and remain without taste or participation of the
blessing through Christ."

[Haggai 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">hag 1:10</span></span>

Therefore, for you, - on your account; (As in Ps. 44:43.) for your sins,
(Jon.) He points out the moral cause of the drought, whereas men think
of this or that cause of the variations of the seasons, and we, e. g.,
take into our mouths Scriptural words, as "murrain of cattle," and the
like, and think of nothing less than why it was sent, or who sent it.
Haggai directs the mind to the higher Cause, that as they withheld their
service from God, so, on their account and by His will, His creatures
withheld their service from them.

[Haggai 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">hag 1:11</span></span>

And I called for a drought upon the land - God called to the people and
they would not hear. It is His ever-repeated complaint to them. "I
called unto you, and ye would not hear." He called to His inanimate
creatures to punish them, and "they" obeyed. So Elisha tells the woman,
whose son he had restored to life, [Kg2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#001). "The Lord hath called to the
famine, and it shall also come to the land seven years."

And upon men, - in that the drought was oppressive to man. The prophet
may also allude to the other meaning of the word, "waste," "desolation."
They had left the house of the Lord "waste," therefore God called for
waste, desolation, upon them.

[Haggai 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">hag 1:12</span></span>

Then Zerubbabel, and all the remnant of the people - , not, "the rest of
people" but "the remnant," those who remained over from the captivity,
the fragment of the two tribes, which returned to their own land,
"hearkened unto the voice of the Lord." This was the beginning of a
conversion. In this one thing they began to do, what, all along, in
their history, and most in their decay before the captivity they refused
to do - obey God's word. So God sums up their history, by Jeremiah, [Jer
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#021). "I spake unto thee in thy
prosperity, thou saidst, I will not hear. This is thy way from thy
youth, that thou hearkenedst not unto My voice." [Zep
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#002) still more briefly , "she
hearkened not unto (any) voice." Now in reference, it seems, to that
account of their disobedience, Haggai says, using the self-same formula
, "they hearkened unto the voice of the Lord, "according to the words of
Haggai." They obeyed, not vaguely, or partly, but exactly, "according to
the words" which the messenger of God spake.

And they feared the Lord - o "Certainly the presence of the Divine
Majesty is to be teared with great reverence." "The fear of punishment
at times transports the mind to what is better, and the infliction of
sorrows harmonizes the mind to the fear of God; and that of the Proverbs
comes true, [Pro 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#013). "He that
feareth the Lord shall be recompensed," and [Pro
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#023) "the fear of the Lord tendeth to
life;" and Wisdom (Ecclesiasticus 1:11). "The fear of the Lord is honor
and glory, and [Pro 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#012) the fear of
the Lord shall rejoice the heart, and giveth joy and gladness and a long
life." See how gently and beseemingly God smites us."

"See how the lovingkindness of God immediately goes along with all
changes for the better. For Almighty God changes along with those who
will to repent, and promises that He will be with them; which what can
equal? For when God is with us, all harm will depart from us, all good
come in to us."

[Haggai 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">hag 1:13</span></span>

And Haggai, the Lord's messenger - Malachi, whose own name was framed to
express that he was "the Lord's messenger," and Haggai alone use the
title, as the title of a prophet; perhaps as forerunners of the great
prophet whom Malachi announced. Malachi also speaks of the priest, as
[Mal 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007) "the messenger of the Lord of
hosts," and prophesies of John Baptist as [Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001) "the messenger" of the Lord, who
should go before His face. Haggai, as he throughout repeats that his
words were God's words, frames a new word to express, in the language of
the New Testament; [Co2 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020) that he
had an embassy from God; "in the Lord's message."

I am with you - All the needs and longings of the creature are summed up
in those two words, "I with you." "Who art Thou and who am I? Thou, He
Who Is; I, he who am not;" nothing, yea worse than nothing. Yet "if [Rom
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#031), God be for us," Paul asks, "who
can be against us?" Our blessed Lord's parting promise to the Apostles,
and in them to the Church, was, [Mat
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020). "Lo I am with you alway, even
to the end of the world." The all-containing assurance goes beyond any
particular promise of aid, as , "I will help you, and will protect you,
so that your building shall have its completion." This is one fruit of
it , "since I am in the midst of you, no one shall be able to hinder
your building." But, more widely, the words bespeak "His" presence in
love, who knows all our needs, and is Almighty to support and save us in
all. So David says [Psa 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004), "when I
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for
Thou art with me:" and God says by another [Psa
91:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#015), I will be "with him in
trouble," and by Isaiah [Isa 43:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#002),
"When thou passest through the waters," I will be "with thee."

[Haggai 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">hag 1:14</span></span>

And the Lord stirred up the spirit - The words are used of any strong
impulse from God to fulfill His will, whether in those who execute His
will unknowingly as Pul [Ch1 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#026), to
carry off the trans-Jordanic tribes, or the Philistines and Arabians
against Jehoram, [Ch2 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#016). or the
Medes against Babylon [Jer 51:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#011), or
knowingly, as of Cyrus to restore God's people and rebuild the temple
[Ezr 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001), or of the people themselves
to return [Ezr 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#005) , "The spirit of
Zerubbabel and the spirit of Joshua were stirred, that the government
and priesthood may build the temple of God: the spirit of the people
too, which before was asleep in them; not the body, not the soul, but
the spirit. which knoweth best how to build the temple of God." "The
Holy Spirit is stirred up in us, that we should enter the house of the
Lord, and do the works of the Lord."

"Again, observe that they did not set themselves to choose to do what
should please God, before He was with them and stirred up their spirit.
We shall know hence also, that although one choose zealously to do good
and be in earnest therein, yet he will accomplish nothing, unless God be
with him, raising him up to dare, and sharpening him to endure, and
removing all torpor. For so the wondrous Paul says of those entrusted
with the divine preaching [Co1 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#011),
I labored more abundantly than they all, yet added very wisely, yet not
I, but the grace of God which was with me, and the Saviour Himself saith
to the holy Apostles, [Joh 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005).
Without Me ye can do nothing. For He is our desire, He, our courage to
any good work; He our strength, and, if He is with us, we shall do well
[Eph 2:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#021), building ourselves to a
holy temple, a habitation of God in the Spirit; if He depart and
withdraws, how should any doubt, that we should fail, overcome by
sluggishness and want of courage?"

[Haggai 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">hag 1:15</span></span>

In the four and twentieth day of the month - The interval of
twenty-three days must have been spent in preparation, since the message
came on the first of the month, and the obedience was immediate.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Haggai Chapter 2](hag002)

</div>
