<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](plm001)  [Next](heb001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Hebrews

Section 1. Preliminary Remarks

It need not be said that this Epistle has given rise to much discussion
among writers on the New Testament. Indeed there is probably no part of
the Bible in regard to which so many conflicting views have been
entertained. The name of the author; the time and place where the
Epistle was written; the character of the book; its canonical authority;
the language in which it was composed; and the persons to whom it was
addressed - all have given rise to great difference of opinion. Among
the causes of this are the following: - The name of the author is not
mentioned. The church to which it was sent, if sent to any particular
church, is not designated. There are no certain marks of time in the
Epistle, as there often are in the writings of Paul, by which we can
determine the time when it was written.

It is not the design of these notes to go into an extended examination
of these questions. Those who are disposed to pursue these inquiries,
and to examine the questions which have been started in regard to the
Epistle, can find ample means in the larger works that have treated of
it; and especially in Lardner; in Michaelis' Introduction; in the
Prolegomena of Kuinoel; in Hug's Introduction; and particularly in
Professor Stuart's invaluable Commentary on the Epistle to the Hebrews.
No other work on this portion of the New Testament is so complete as
his, and in the Introduction he has left nothing to be desired in regard
to the literature of the Epistle.

Early on controversies arose in the church in regard to a great variety
of questions pertaining to this Epistle, which are not yet fully
settled. Most of those questions, however, pertain to the literature of
the Epistle, and however they may be decided, are not such as to affect
the respect which a Christian ought to have for it as a part of the word
of God. They pertain to the inquiries, to whom it was written; in what
language, and at what time it was composed; questions which in whatever
way they may be settled, do not affect its canonical authority, and
should not shake the confidence of Christians in it as a part of divine
revelation. The only inquiry on these points which it is proper to
institute in these notes is, whether the claims of the Epistle to a
place in the canon of Scripture are of such a kind as to allow
Christians to read it as a part of the oracles of God? May we sit down
to it feeling that we are perusing that which has been given by
inspiration of the Holy Spirit as a part of revealed truth? Other
questions are interesting in their places, and the solution of them is
worth all which it has cost; but they need not embarrass us here, nor
claim our attention as preliminary to the exposition of the Epistle. All
that will be attempted, therefore, in this Introduction, will be such a
"condensation" of the evidence collected by others, as shall show that
this Epistle has of right a place in the volume of revealed truth, and
is of authority to regulate the faith and practice of mankind.

Section 2. To Whom Was the Epistle Written?

It purports to have been written to the "Hebrews." This is not found,
indeed, in the body of the Epistle, though it occurs in the subscription
at the end. It differs from all the other epistles of Paul in this
respect, and from most of the others in the New Testament. In all of the
other epistles of Paul, the church or person to whom the letter was sent
is specified in the commencement. This, however, commences in the form
of an essay or homily; nor is there anywhere in the Epistle any direct
intimation as to what church it was sent. The subscription at the end is
of no authority, since it cannot be supposed that the author himself
would affix it to the Epistle, and since it is known that many of those
subscriptions are false. See the remarks at the close of the notes on
Romans, and the notes 1 Corinthians. Several questions present
themselves here which we may briefly investigate:

\(I\) "What is the evidence that it was written to the Hebrews?" In
reply to this we may observe:

\(1\) That the inscription at the commencement, "The Epistle of Paul the
Apostle to the Hebrews," though not affixed by the author, may be
allowed to express the current sense of the church in ancient times in
reference to a question on which they had the best means of judging.
These inscriptions at the commencement of the epistles have hitherto in
general escaped the suspicion of spuriousness, to which the
subscriptions at the close are justly exposed. "Michaelis." They should
not in any case be called in question, unless there is good reason from
the Epistle itself, or from some other source. This inscription is found
in all our present Greek manuscripts, and in nearly all the ancient
versions. It is found in the Peshito, the Old Syriac version, which was
made in the first or in the early part of the second century. It is the
title given to the Epistle by the fathers of the second century, and
onward - Stuart.

\(2\) the testimony of the fathers. Their testimony is unbroken and
uniform. With one accord they declare this, and this should be regarded
as testimony of great value. Unless there is some good reason to depart
from such evidence, it should be regarded as decisive. In this case,
there is no good reason for calling it in question, but every reason to
suppose it to be correct; nor so far as I have found is there any one
who has doubted it.

\(3\) the internal evidence is of the highest character that it was
written to Hebrew converts. It treats subjects of Hebrew institutions.
It explains their nature. It makes no allusion to Gentile customs or
laws. It all along supposes that those to whom it was sent were familiar
with the Jewish history; with the nature of the temple service; with the
functions of the priestly office; and with the whole structure of their
religion. No other person than those who had been Jews are addressed
throughout the Epistle. There is no attempt to explain the nature or
design of any customs except those with which they were familiar. At the
same time, it is equally clear that they were Jewish converts - converts
from Judaism to Christianity - who are addressed. The writer addresses
them as Christians, not as those who were to be converted to
Christianity; he explains to them the Jewish customs as one would do to
those who had been converted from Judaism; he endeavors to guard them
from apostasy, as if there were danger that they would relapse again
into the system from which they were converted. These considerations
seem to be decisive; and in the view of all who have written on the
Epistle, as well as of the Christian world at large, they settle the
question. It has never been held that the Epistle was directed to
Gentiles; and in all the opinions and questions which have been started
on the subject, it has been admitted that, wherever they resided, the
persons to whom the Epistle was addressed were originally Hebrews who
had never been converted to the Christian religion.

\(II\) "To what particular church of the Hebrews was it written?" Very
different opinions have been held on this question. The celebrated Storr
held that it was written to the Hebrew part of the churches in Galatia;
and that the Epistle to the Galatians was addressed to the Gentile part
of those churches. Semler and Noessett maintained that it was written to
the churches in Macedonia, and particularly to the church of
Thessalonica. Bolten maintains that it was addressed to the Jewish
Christians who fled from Palestine in a time of persecution about the
year 60 a.d., and who were scattered through Asia Minor. Michael Weber
supposed that it was addressed to the church at Corinth. Ludwig
conjectured that it was addressed to a church in Spain. Wetstein
supposes that it was written to the church at Rome. Most of these
opinions are mere conjectures, and all of them depend upon circumstances
which furnish only slight evidence of probability. Those who are
disposed to examine these, and to see them confuted, may consult
Stuart's Commentary on the Hebrews, Introduction Sections 5-9.

The common, and the almost universally received opinion is that the
Epistle was addressed to the Hebrew Christians in Palestine. The reasons
for this opinion, briefly, are the following:

\(1\) The testimony of the ancient church was uniform on this point -
that the Epistle was not only written to the Hebrew Christians, but to
those who were in Palestine. Lardner affirms this to be the testimony of
Clement of Alexandria, Jerome, Euthalius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, and
Theophylact; and adds that this was the general opinion of the ancients.
Works, vol. iv. pp 80, 81. ed. London, 1829.

\(2\) The inscription at the commencement of the Epistle leads to this
supposition. That inscription, though not appended by the hand of the
author, was early affixed to it. It is found not only in the Greek
manuscripts, but in all the early versions, as the Syriac and the Itala;
and was doubtless affixed at a very early period, and by whomsoever
affixed, expressed the current sense at the time. It is hardly possible
that a mistake would be made on this point; and unless there is good
evidence to the contrary, this ought to be allowed to determine the
question. That inscription is, "The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the
Hebrews." But who are the Hebrews - the Ἑβρᾶιοι Hebraioi? Professor
Stuart has endeavored to show that this was a term that was employed
exclusively to denote the "Jews in Palestine," in contradistinction from
foreign Jews, who were called "Hellenists." Compare my notes on [Act
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001). Bertholdt declares that there is
not a single example which can be found in early times of Jewish
Christians out of Palestine being called "Hebrews." See a Dissertation
on the Greek Language in Palestine. and of the meaning of the word
"Hellenists," by Hug, in the Bib. Repository, Vol. I, 547, 548. Compare
also Robinson's Lexicon on the word Ἑβρᾶιος Hebraios. If this is so, and
if the inscription is of any authority, then it goes far to settle the
question. The word "Hebrews" occurs only three times in the New
Testament [Act 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001); [Co2
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#022); [Phi
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#005) in the first of which it is
certain that it is used in this sense, and in both the others of which
it is probable. There can be no doubt, it seems to me, that an ancient
writer acquainted with the usual sense of the word "Hebrew," would
understand an inscription of this kind - "written to the Hebrews" - as
designed for the inhabitants of Palestine, and not for the Jews of other
countries.

\(3\) there are some passages in the Epistle itself which Lardner
supposes indicate that this Epistle was written to the Hebrews in
Palestine, or to those there who had been converted from Judaism to
Christianity. As those passages are not conclusive, and as their force
has been called in question, and with much propriety, by Professor
Stuart (pp. 32-34). I shall merely refer to them. They can be examined
at leisure by those who are disposed, and though they do not prove that
the Epistle was addressed to the Hebrew Christians in Palestine, yet
they can be best interpreted on that supposition, and a special
significancy would be attached to them on this supposition. They are the
following: [Heb 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002); [Heb
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#002); [Heb
2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#001); [Heb
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012); [Heb
4:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#004); [Heb
10:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#026), [Heb
10:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#032); [Heb
13:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#013). The argument of Lardner is
that these would be more applicable to their condition than to others; a
position which I think cannot be doubted. Some of them are of so general
character, indeed, as to be applicable to Christians elsewhere; and in
regard to some of them it cannot be certainly demonstrated that the
state of things referred to existed in Judea, but taken together they
would be more applicable by far to them than to the circumstances of any
others of which we have knowledge; and this may be allowed to have some
weight at least in determining to whom the Epistle was sent.

\(4\) the internal evidence of the Epistle corresponds with the
supposition that it was written to the Hebrew Christians in Palestine.
The passages referred to in the previous remarks (3) might be adduced
here as proof. But there is other proof. It might have been otherwise.
There might be such strong internal proof that an epistle was not
addressed to a supposed people, as completely to neutralize all the
evidence derived from an inscription like that prefixed to this Epistle,
and all the evidence derived from tradition. But it is not so here. All
the circumstances referred to in the Epistle; the general strain of
remark; the argument: the allusions, are just such as would be likely to
be found in an epistle addressed to the Hebrew Christians in Palestine,
and such as would not be likely to occur in an epistle addressed to any
other place or people. They are such as the following:

\(a\) The familiar acquaintance with the Jewish institutions supposed by
the writer to exist among those to whom it was sent - a familiarity
hardly to be expected even of Jews who lived in other countries.

\(b\) The danger so frequently adverted to of their relapsing into their
former state; of apostatizing from Christianity, and of embracing again
the Jewish rites and ceremonies - a danger that would exist nowhere else
in so great a degree as in Judea. Compare [Heb
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#001); [Heb
3:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#007), [Heb
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#015); [Heb
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001); [Heb
6:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#001); [Heb
10:26-35](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#026).

\(c\) The nature of the discussion in the Epistle - not turning upon the
obligation of circumcision, and the distinction of meats and drinks,
which occupied so much of the attention of the apostles and early
Christians in other places - but a discussion relating to the whole
structure of the Mosaic economy, the pre-eminence of Moses or Christ,
the meaning of the rites of the temple, etc. These great questions would
be more likely to arise in Judea than elsewhere, and it was important to
discuss them fully, as it is done in this Epistle. In other places they
would be of less interest, and would excite less difficulty.

\(d\) The allusion to local places and events; to facts in their
history; and to the circumstances of public worship, which would be
better understood there than elsewhere. There are no allusions - or if
there are they are very brief and infrequent - to pagan customs games,
races, and philosophical opinions, as there are often in the other
epistles of the New Testament. Those to whom the Epistle was sent, are
presumed to have an intimate and minute knowledge of the Hebrew history,
and such a knowledge as could be hardly supposed elsewhere. Compare Heb.
11, particularly [Heb 11:32-39](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#032). Thus,
it is implied that they so well understood the subjects referred to
relating to the Jewish rites, that it was not necessary that the writer
should specify them particularly. See [Heb
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#005). Of what other persons could this
be so appropriately said as of the dwellers in Palestine?

\(e\) The circumstances of trial and persecution so often referred to in
the Epistle, agree well with the known condition of the church in
Palestine. That it was subjected to great trials we know; and though
this was extensively true of other churches, yet it is probable that
there were more vexatious and grievous exactions; that there was more
spite and malice; that there were more of the trials arising from the
separation of families and the losses of property attending a profession
of Christianity in Palestine than elsewhere in the early Christian
church. These considerations - though not so conclusive as to furnish
absolute demonstration - go far to settle the question. They seem to me
so strong as to preclude any reasonable doubt, and are such as the mind
can repose on with a great degree of confidence in regard to the
original destination of the Epistle.

\(3\) "was it addressed to a particular church in Palestine, or to the
Hebrew Christians there in general?" Whether it was addressed to the
churches in general in Palestine, or to some particular church there, it
is now impossible to determine. Prof. Stuart inclines to the opinion
that it was addressed to the church in Caesarea. The ancients in general
supposed it was addressed to the church in Jerusalem. There are some
local references in the Epistle which look as though it was directed to
some particular church. But the means of determining this question are
put beyond our reach, and it is of little importance to settle the
question. From the allusions to the temple, the priesthood, the
sacrifices, and the whole train of special institutions there, it would
seem probable that it was directed to the church in Jerusalem. As that
was the capital of the nation, and the center of religious influence;
and as there was a large and flourishing church there, this opinion
would seem to have great probability; but it is impossible now to
determine it. If we suppose that the author sent the Epistle, in the
first instance, to some local church, near the central seat of the great
influence which he intended to reach by it - addressing to that church
the particular communications in the last verses - we shall make a
supposition which, so far as can now be ascertained, will accord with
the truth in the case.

Section 3. The Author of the Epistle

To those who are familiar with the investigations which have taken place
in regard to this Epistle, it need not be said that the question of its
authorship has given rise to much discussion. The design of these notes
does not permit me to go at length into this inquiry. Those who are
disposed to see the investigation pursued at length, and to see the
objections to the Pauline origin examined in a most satisfactory manner,
can find it done in the Introduction to the Epistle to the Hebrews, by
Prof. Stuart, pp. 77-260. All that my purpose requires is to state, in a
very brief manner, the evidence on which it is ascribed to the apostle
Paul. That evidence is, briefly, the following:

\(1\) That derived from the church at Alexandria. Clement of Alexandria
says, that Paul wrote to the Hebrews, and that this was the opinion of
Pantaenus, who was at the head of the celebrated Christian school at
Alexandria, and who flourished about 180 a.d. Pantaenus lived near
Palestine. He must have been acquainted with the prevailing opinions on
the subject, and his testimony must be regarded as proof that the
Epistle was regarded as Paul's by the churches in that region. Origen,
also of Alexandria, ascribes the Epistle to Paul; though he says that
the "sentiments" are those of Paul, but that the words and phrases
belong to some one relating the apostle's sentiments, and as it were
commenting on the words of his master. The testimony of the church at
Alexandria was uniform after the time of Origen, that it was the
production of Paul. Indeed there seems never to have been any doubt in
regard to it there, and from the commencement it was admitted as his
production. The testimony of that church and school is particularly
valuable, because:

\(a\) it was near to Palestine, where the Epistle was probably sent;

\(b\) Clement particularly had traveled much, and would be likely to
understand the prevailing sentiments of the East;

\(c\) Alexandria was the seat of the most celebrated theological school
of the early Christian ages, and those who were at the head of this
school would be likely to have correct information on a point like this;
and,

\(d\) Origen is admitted to have been the most learned of the Greek
fathers, and his testimony that the "sentiments" were those of Paul may
be regarded as of unique value.

\(2\) it was inserted in the translation into the Syriac, made very
early in the second century, and in the Old Italic version, and was
hence believed to be of apostolic origin, and is by the inscription
ascribed to Paul. This may be allowed to express the general sense of
the churches at that time, as this would not have been done unless there
had been a general impression that the Epistle was written by him. The
fact that it was regarded early as an inspired book is also conclusively
shown by the fact that the Second Epistle of Peter, and the Second
Epistle and Third Epistle of John, are not found in that version. They
came later into circulation than the other epistles, and were not
possessed, or regarded as genuine, by the author of that version. The
Epistle to the Hebrews is found in these versions, and was, therefore,
regarded as one of the inspired books. In those versions it bears the
inscription, "To the Hebrews."

\(3\) this Epistle was received as the production of Paul by the Eastern
churches. Justin Martyr, who was born at Samaria, quotes it, about the
year 140 a.d. It was found, as has been already remarked, in the Peshito
- the Old Syriac Version, made in the early part of the second century
Jacob, bishop of Nisibis, also (about 325 a.d.) repeatedly quotes it as
the production of an apostle. Ephrem Syrus, or the Syrian, abundantly
ascribes this Epistle to Paul. He was the disciple of Jacob of Nisibis,
and no man was better qualified to inform himself on this point than
Ephrem. No man stands deservedly higher in the memory of the Eastern
churches. After him, all the Syrian churches acknowledged the canonical
authority of the Epistle to the Hebrews. But the most important
testimony of the Eastern church is that of Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea,
in Palestine. He is the well-known historian of the church, and he took
pains from all quarters to collect testimony in regard to the Books of
Scripture. He says, "There are fourteen epistles of Paul, manifest and
well known: but yet there are some who reject that to the Hebrews,
alleging in behalf of their opinion, that it was not received by the
church of Rome as a writing of Paul." The testimony of Eusebius is
particularly important.

He had heard of the objection to its canonical authority. He had weighed
that objection. Yet in view of the testimony in the case, he regarded it
as the undoubted production of Paul. As such it was received in the
churches in the East; and the fact which he mentions, that its
genuineness had been disputed by the church of Rome, and that he
specifies no other church, proves that it had not been called in
question in the East. This seems to me to be sufficient testimony to
settle this inquiry. The writers here referred to lived in the very
country to which the Epistle was evidently written, and their testimony
is uniform. Justin Martyr was born in Samaria; Ephrem passed his life in
Syria; Eusebius lived in Cesarea, and Origen passed the last twenty
years of his life in Palestine. The churches there were unanimous in the
opinion that this Epistle was written by Paul, and their united
testimony should settle the question.

Indeed when their testimony is considered, it seems remarkable that the
subject should have been regarded as doubtful by critics, or that it
should have given rise to so much protracted investigation. I might add
to the testimonies above referred to, the fact that the Epistle was
declared to be Paul's by the following persons: Archelaus, Bishop of
Mesopotamia, about 300 a.d.; Adamantius, about 330 a.d.; Cyril, of
Jerusalem, about 348 a.d.; the Council of Laodicea, about 363 a.d.;
Epiphanius, about 368 a.d.; Basil, 370 a.d.; Gregory Nazianzen, 370
a.d.; Chrysostom, 398 a.d., etc. etc. Why should not the testimony of
such men and churches be admitted? What more clear or decided evidence
could we wish in regard to any fact of ancient history? Would not such
testimony be ample in regard to an anonymous oration of Cicero, or poem
of Virgil or Horace? Are we not constantly acting on far feebler
evidence in regard to the authorship of many productions of celebrated
English writers?

\(4\) in regard to the Western churches, it is to be admitted that, like
the Second Epistle of Peter, and the Second Epistle and Third Epistle of
John, the canonical authority was for some time doubted, or was even
called in question. But this may be accounted for. The Epistle had not
the name of the author. All the other epistles of Paul had. As the
Epistle was addressed to the Hebrews in Palestine, it may not have been
soon known to the Western churches. As there were spurious epistles and
gospels at an early age, much caution would be used in admitting any
anonymous production to a place in the sacred canon. Yet it was not long
before all these doubts were removed, and the Epistle to the Hebrews was
allowed to take its place among the other acknowledged writings of Paul.
It was received as the Epistle of Paul by Hilary, Bishop of Poictiers,
about 354 a.d.; by Lucifer, Bishop of Cagliari, 354 a.d.; by Victorinus,
360 a.d.; by Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, 360 a.d.; by Rufinus, 397 a.d.,
etc. etc.

Jerome, the well-known Latin Father, uses in regard to it the following
language: "This is to be maintained, that this Epistle, which is
inscribed to the Hebrews, is not only received by the churches at the
East as the apostle Paul's, but has been in past times by all
ecclesiastical writers in the Greek language; although most Latins think
that Barnabas or Clement was the author." Still, it was not rejected by
"all" the Latins. Some received it in the time of Jerome as the
production of Paul. See Stuart, pp. 114, 115, for the full testimony of
Jerome. Augustine admitted that the Epistle was written by Paul. He
mentions that Paul wrote fourteen epistles, and specifies particularly
the Epistle to the Hebrews. He often cites it as a part of Scripture,
and quotes it as the production of an apostle - Stuart, p. 115. From the
time of Augustine it was undisputed. By the Council of Hippo, 393 a.d.,
the Third Council of Carthage, 397 a.d., and the Fifth Council of
Carthage, 419 a.d., it was declared to be the Epistle of Paul, and was
commended to the churches as such.

\(5\) as another proof that it is the writing of Paul, we may appeal to
the internal evidence:

\(a\) The author of the Epistle was the companion and friend of Timothy.
"Know ye that our brother Timothy is set at liberty - or is sent away -
ἀπολελυμένον apolelumenon - with whom if he come speedily, I will make
you a visit." [Heb 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#023). Sent away,
perhaps, on a journey, to visit some of the churches, and expected soon
to return. In [Phi 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#019), Paul speaks
of sending Timothy to them "so soon as he should see how it would go
with him," at the same time expressing a hope that he should himself see
them shortly. What is more natural than to suppose that he had now sent
Timothy to Philippi; that during his absence he wrote this Epistle; that
he was waiting for his return; and that he proposed, if Timothy should
return soon, to visit Palestine with him? And who would more naturally
say this than the apostle Paul - the companion and friend of Timothy; by
whom he had been accompanied in his travels; and by whom he was regarded
with special interest as a minister of the gospel?

\(b\) In [Heb 13:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#018), he asks their
prayers that he might be restored to them; and in [Heb
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#023), he expresses a confident
expectation of being able soon to come and see them. From this it is
evident that he was then imprisoned, but had hope of speedy release - a
state of things in exact accordance with what existed at Rome. [Phi
2:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#017).

\(c\) He was in bonds when he wrote this Epistle. [Heb
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#034), "ye had compassion of me in my
bonds;" an expression that will exactly apply to the case of Paul. He
was in "bonds" in Palestine; he was two whole years in Caesarea a
prisoner [Act 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#027); and what was more
natural than that the Christians in Palestine should have had compassion
on him, and ministered to his needs? To what other person would these
circumstances so certainly be applicable?

\(d\) The salutation [Heb 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#024), "they
of Italy salute you," agrees with the supposition that it was written by
Paul when a prisoner at Rome. Paul writing from Rome, and acquainted
with Christians from other parts of Italy, would be likely to send such
a salutation. In regard to the "objections" which may be made to this
use of the passage, the reader may consult Stuart's Introduction to the
Hebrews, p. 127, following.

\(e\) The "doctrines" of the Epistle are the same as those which are
taught by Paul in his undisputed writings. It is true that this
consideration is not conclusive, but the want of it would be conclusive
evidence against the position that Paul wrote it. But the resemblance is
not general. It is not such as any man would exhibit who held to the
same general system of truth. It relates to "peculiarities" of doctrine,
and is such as would be manifested by a man who bad been reared and
trained as Paul had:

\(1\) No one can doubt that the author was formerly a Jew - and a Jew
who had been familiar to an uncommon degree with the institutions of the
Jewish religion. Every rite and ceremony; every form of opinion; every
fact in their history, is perfectly familiar to him. And though the
other apostles were Jews, yet we can hardly suppose that they had the
familiarity with the minute rites and ceremonies so accurately referred
to in this Epistle, and so fully illustrated. With Paul all this was
perfectly natural. He had been brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and
had spent the early part of his life at Jerusalem in the careful study
of the Old Testament, in the examination of the prevalent opinions, and
in the attentive observance of the rites of religion. The other apostles
had been born and trained, apparently, on the banks of Gennesareth, and
certainly with few of the opportunities which Paul had had for becoming
acquainted with the institutions of the temple service. This
consideration is fatal, in my view, to the claim which has been set up
for Clement as the author of the Epistle. It is wholly incredible that a
foreigner should be so familiar with the Jewish opinions, laws,
institutions, and history, as the author of this Epistle manifestly was.

\(2\) there is the same preference for Christianity over Judaism in this
Epistle which is shown by Paul in his other epistles, and exhibited in
the same form. Among these points are the following - "The gospel
imparts superior light." Compare [Gal
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#003), [Gal
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009); [Co1
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020); [Eph
4:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011); [Co2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018); with [Heb
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001); [Heb
2:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#002); [Heb
8:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#009); [Heb
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001); [Heb
11:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#039). "The gospel holds out
superior motives and encouragements to piety." Compare [Gal
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#023); [Gal
4:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#002); [Rom
8:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015); [Gal
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001); [Gal
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013); [Co1
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#019); [Gal
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#015); with [Heb
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009), [Heb
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014); [Heb
12:18-24](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#018), [Heb
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#028); [Heb
8:6-13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#006). "The gospel is superior in
promoting the real and permanent happiness of mankind." Compare [Gal
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013); [Co2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007), [Co2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#009); [Rom
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020); [Rom
4:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#024); [Eph
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#007); [Rom
5:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001); [Gal
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016); and the same views in [Heb
12:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#018); [Heb
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009); [Heb
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#004), [Heb
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#011); [Heb
6:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#018); [Heb
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025); [Heb
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024). "The Jewish dispensation was a
type and shadow of the Christian." See [Col
2:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016); [Co1
10:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001); [Rom
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014); [Co1
15:45-47](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#045); [Co2
3:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013); [Gal
4:22-31](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#022); [Gal
4:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001); and for the same or similar
views, see [Heb 9:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009); [Heb
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001); [Heb
8:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001); [Heb
9:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#022). "The Christian religion was
designed to be perpetual, while the Jewish was intended to be
abolished."

See [Co2 3:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#010), [Co2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013), [Co2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018); [Co2
4:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#014); [Rom
7:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#004); [Gal
3:21-25](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#021); [Gal
4:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001); [Gal
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001); and for similar views compare
[Heb 8:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#006), [Heb
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#013); [Heb
7:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#017); [Heb
10:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001). "The person of the Mediator
is presented in the same light by the writer of the Epistle to the
Hebrews and by Paul." See [Phi 2:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006);
[Col 1:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015); [Co2
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009); [Eph
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#009); [Co1
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006); [Co1
15:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025); and for the same and similar
views, see [Heb 1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002); [Heb
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009), [Heb
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014); [Heb
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002); [Heb
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#008); [Heb
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#013). "The death of Christ is the
propitiatory sacrifice for sin." See [Ti1
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015); [Co1
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#003); [Rom
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032); [Rom
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024); [Gal
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#004); [Gal
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020); [Co1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007); [Eph
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#007); [Col
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#014); [Ti1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#006); [Co1
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020); [Co1
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#023); [Rom
5:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012); [Rom
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020), [Rom
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#028); [Rom
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003); [Ti1
2:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005). For similar views see [Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003); [Heb
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009); [Heb
5:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#008); Heb. 7; [Heb
8:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001); Heb. 9; Heb. 10: "The general
method and arrangement of this Epistle and the acknowledged epistles of
Paul are the same." It particularly resembles the Epistles to the Romans
and the Galatians, where we have first a doctrinal and then a practical
part.

The same is true also to some extent of the Epistles to the Ephesians,
Colossians, and Philippians. The Epistle to the Hebrews is on the same
plan. As far as [Heb 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#019), it is
principally doctrinal; the remainder is mainly practical. "The manner of
appealing to, and applying the Jewish Scriptures, is the same in this
Epistle as in those of Paul." The general structure of the Epistle, and
the slightest comparison between them, will show this with sufficient
clearness. The general remark to be made in view of this comparison is,
that the Epistle to the Hebrews is just such an one as Paul might be
expected to write; that it agrees with what we know to have been his
early training, his views, his manner of life, his opinions, and his
habit in writing; that it accords better with his views than with those
of any other known writer of antiquity; and that it falls in with the
circumstances in which he was known to be placed, and the general object
which he had in view. So satisfactory are these views to my mind, that
they seem to have all the force of demonstration which can be had in
regard to any anonymous publication, and it is a matter of wonder that
so much doubt has been experienced in reference to the question who was
the author.

It is difficult to account for the fact that the name of the author was
omitted. It is found in every other Epistle of Paul, and in general it
is appended to the epistles in the New Testament. It is omitted,
however, in the three Epistles of John, for reasons which are now
unknown. And there may have been similar reasons also unknown for
omitting it in this case. The simple fact is, that it is anonymous; and
whoever was the author, the same difficulty will exist in accounting for
it. If this fact will prove that Paul was not the author, it would prove
the same thing in regard to any other person, and would thus be
ultimately conclusive evidence that it had no author. What were the
reasons for omitting the name can be only matter of conjecture. The most
probable opinion, as it seems to me, is this. The name of Paul was
odious to the Jews. He was regarded by the nation as an apostate from
their religion, and everywhere they showed special malignity against
him.

See the Acts of the Apostles. The fact that he was so regarded by them
might indirectly influence even those who had been converted from
Judaism to Christianity. They lived in Palestine. They were near the
temple, and were engaged in its ceremonies and sacrifices - for there is
no evidence that they broke off from those observances on their
conversion to Christianity. Paul was abroad. It might have been reported
that he was preaching against the temple and its sacrifices, and even
the Jewish Christians in Palestine might have supposed that he was
carrying matters too far. In these circumstances it might have been
imprudent for him to have announced his name at the outset, for it might
have aroused prejudices which a wise man would wish to allay. But if he
could present an argument, somewhat in the form of an essay, showing
that he believed that the Jewish institutions were appointed by God, and
that he was not an apostate and an infidel; if he could conduct a
demonstration that would accord in the main with the prevailing views of
the Christians in Palestine, and that was adapted to, strengthen them in
the faith of the gospel, and explain to them the true nature of the
Jewish rites, then the object could be gained without difficulty, and
then they would be prepared to learn that Pant was the author, without
prejudice or alarm. Accordingly he thus conducts the argument; and at
the close gives them such intimations that they would understand who
wrote it without much difficulty. If this was the motive, it was an
instance of tact such as was certainly characteristic of Paul, and such
as was not unworthy any man. I have no doubt that this was the true
motive. It would be soon known who wrote it; and accordingly we have
seen it was never disputed in the Eastern churches.

Section 4. The Time When Written

In regard to the time when this Epistle was written, and the place
where, critics have been better agreed than on most of the questions
which have been started in regard to it. Mill was of opinion that it was
written by Paul in the year 63 a.d., in some part of Italy, soon after
he bad been released from imprisonment at Rome. Wetstein was of the same
opinion. Tillemont also places this Epistle in the year 63 a.d., and
supposes that it was written while Paul was at Rome, or at least in
Italy, and soon after he was released from imprisonment. Basnage
supposes it was written about the year 61, and during the imprisonment
of the apostle. Lardner supposes also that it was written in the
beginning of the year 63 a.d., and soon after the apostle was released
from his confinement. This also is the opinion of Calmet. The
circumstances in the Epistle which will enable us to form an opinion on
the question about the time and the place are the following:

\(1\) It was written while the temple was still standing, and before
Jerusalem was destroyed. This is evident from the whole structure of the
Epistle. There is no allusion to the destruction of the temple or the
city, which there certainly would have been if they had been destroyed.
Such an event would have contributed much to the object in view, and
would have furnished an unbreakable argument that the institutions of
the Jews were intended to be superseded by another and a more perfect
system. Moreover, there are allusions in the Epistle which suppose that
the temple service was then performed. See [Heb
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009); [Heb
8:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#004). But the city and temple were
destroyed in the year 70 a.d., and, of course, the Epistle was written
before that year.

\(2\) it was evidently written before the civil wars and commotions in
Judea, which terminated in the destruction of the city and nation. This
is clear, because there are no allusions to any such disorders or
troubles in Palestine, and there is no intimation that they were
suffering the evils incident to a state of war. Compare [Heb
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#004). But those wars commenced 66
a.d., and evidently the Epistle was written before that time.

\(3\) they were not suffering the evils of violent persecution. They had
indeed formerly suffered (compare [Heb
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#032), [Heb
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#034)); James and Stephen had been put
to death Acts 7; Acts 12; but there was no violent and bloody
persecution then raging in which they were called to defend their
religion at the expense of blood and life. [Heb
10:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#032). But the persecution under
Nero began in the year 64 a.d., and though it began at Rome, and was
confined to a considerable degree to Italy, yet it is not improbable
that it extended to other places, and it is to be presumed that if such
a persecution were raging at the time when the Epistle was written there
would be some allusion to this fact. It may be set down, therefore, that
it was written before the year 64 ad.

\(4\) It is equally true that the Epistle was written during the latter
part of the apostolic age. The author speaks of the former days in which
after they were illuminated they had endured a great fight of
afflictions, and when they were made a gazing-stock, and were plundered
by their oppressors [Heb 10:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#032); and
he speaks of them as having been so long-converted that they ought to
have been qualified to teach others [Heb
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012); and, hence, it is fairly to be
inferred that they were not recent converts, but that the church there
had been established for a considerable period. It may be added, that it
was after the writer had been imprisoned - as I suppose in Caesarea (see
Section 3) - when they had ministered to him; [Heb
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#034). But this was as late as the
year 60 ad.

\(5\) At the time when Paul wrote the Epistles to the Ephesians,
Philippians, and Colossians, he had hopes of deliverance. Timothy was
evidently with him. But now he was absent; [Heb
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#023). In the Epistle to the
Philippians [Phi 2:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#019) he says, "But
I trust in the Lord Jesus to send Timotheus shortly unto you, that I may
be also of good comfort, when I know your state." He expected,
therefore, that Timothy would come back to him at Rome. It is probable
that Timothy was sent soon after this. The apostle had a fair prospect
of being set at liberty, and sent him to them. "During his absence" at
this time, it would seem probable, this Epistle was written. Thus, the
writer says [Heb 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#023), "Know ye that
our brother Timothy is set at liberty" - or rather, "sent away," or
"sent abroad" (see the note in that place); "with whom if be come
shortly, I will see you." That is, if he returns soon, as I expect him,
I will pay you a visit. It is probable that the Epistle was written
while Timothy was thus absent at Philippi, and when he returned, Paul
and he went to Palestine, and thence to Ephesus. If so it was written
somewhere about the year 63 a.d. as this was the time when Paul was set
at liberty.

\(6\) the Epistle was written evidently in Italy. Thus, in [Heb
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#024), the writer says, "They of Italy
salute you." This would be the natural form of salutation on the
supposition that it was written there. He mentions none by name, as he
does in his other epistles, for it is probable that none of those who
were at Rome would be known by name in Palestine. But there was a
general salutation, showing the interest which they had in the
Christians in Judea, and expressive of regard for their welfare. This
expression is, to my mind, conclusive evidence that the Epistle was
written in Italy; and in Italy there was no place where this would be so
likely to occur as at Rome.

Section 5. The Language in which It Was Written

This is a vexed and still unsettled question, and it does not seem to be
possible to determine it with any considerable degree of certainty.
Critics of the ablest name have been divided on it, and what is
remarkable, have appealed to the same arguments to prove exactly
opposite opinions - one class arguing that the style of the Epistle is
such as to prove that it was written in Hebrew, and the other appealing
to the same proofs to demonstrate that it was written in Greek. Among
those who have supposed that it was written in Hebrew are the following,
namely: - Some of the fathers - as Clement of Alexandria, Theodoret,
John Damascenus, Theophylact; and among the moderns, Michaelis has been
the most strenuous defender of this opinion. This opinion was also held
by the late Dr. James P. Wilson, who says, "It was probably written in
the common language of the Jews;" that is, in that mixture of Hebrew,
Syriac, and Chaldee, which was usually spoken in the time of the
Saviour, and which was known as the Syro-Chaldaic.

On the other hand, the great body of critics have supposed it was
written in the Greek language. This was the opinion of Fabricius,
Lightfoot, Whitby, Beausobre, Capellus, Basnage, Mill, and others, and
is also the opinion of Lardnet, Hug, Stuart, and perhaps of most modern
critics. These opinions may be seen examined at length in Michaelis'
Introduction, Hag, Stuart, and Lardner.

The arguments in support of the opinion that it was written in Hebrew
are, briefly, the following:

\(1\) The testimony of the fathers. Thus, Clement of Alexandria says,
"Paul wrote to the Hebrews in the Hebrew language, and Luke carefully
translated it into Greek." Jerome says, "Paul as a Hebrew wrote to the
Hebrews in Hebrew - Scripserat ut Hebraeus Hebraeis Hebraice;" and then
he adds, "this Epistle was translated into Greek, so that the coloring
of the style was made diverse in this way from that of Paul's."

\(2\) the fact that it was written for the use of the Hebrews, who spoke
the Hebrew, or the "Talmudic" language, is alleged as a reason for
supposing that it must have been written in that language.

\(3\) it is alleged by Michaelis, that the style of the Greek, as we now
have it, is far more pure and Classical than Paul elsewhere employs, and
that hence it is to be inferred that it was translated by some one who
was master of the Greek language. On this, however, the most eminent
critics disagree.

\(4\) it is alleged by Michaelis, that the quotations in the Epistle, as
we have it, are made from the Septuagint, and that they are foreign to
the purpose which the writer had in view as they are now quoted, whereas
they are exactly in point as they stand in the Hebrew. Hence he infers
that the original Hebrew was quoted by the author, and that the
translator used the common version at hand instead of making an exact
translation for himself. Of the fact alleged here, however, there may be
good ground to raise a question; and if it were so, it would not prove
that the writer might not have used the common and accredited
translation, though less to his purpose than the original. Of the fact,
moreover, to which Michaelis here refers, Prof. Stuart says, "He has not
adduced a single instance of what he calls a "wrong translation" which
wears the appearance of any considerable probability." The only instance
urged by Michaelis which seems to me to be plausible is [Heb
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#007). These are the principal arguments
which have been urged in favor of the opinion that this Epistle was
written in the Hebrew language. They are evidently not conclusive. The
only argument of any considerable weight is the testimony of some of the
fathers, and it may be doubted whether they gave this as a matter of
historic fact or only as a matter of opinion. See Hug's Introduction,
144. It is morally certain that in one respect their statement cannot be
true. They state that it was translated by Luke; but it is capable of
the clearest proof that it was not translated by Luke, the author of the
Gospel and the Acts of the Apostles, since there is the most remarkable
dissimilarity in the style.

On the other hand there are alleged in favor of the opinion that it was
written in Greek the following considerations, namely:

\(1\) The fact that we have no Hebrew original. If it was written in
Hebrew, the original was early lost. None of the fathers say that they
had seen it; none quote it. All the copies that we have are in Greek. If
it was written in Hebrew, and the original was destroyed, it must have
been at a very early period, and it is remarkable that no one should
have mentioned the fact or alluded to it. Besides, it is scarcely
conceivable that the original should have so soon perished, and that the
translation should have altogether taken its place. If it was addressed
to the Hebrews in Palestine, the same reason which made it proper that
it should have been written in Hebrew would have led them to retain it
in that language, and we might have supposed that Origen, or Eusebius,
or Jerome, who lived there, or Ephrem the Syrian, would have adverted to
the fact that there was there a Hebrew original. The Jews were
remarkable for retaining their sacred books in the language in which
they were written, and if this were written in Hebrew it is difficult to
account for the fact that it was so soon suffered to perish.

\(2\) the presumption - a presumption amounting to almost a moral
certainty - is, that an apostle writing to the Christians in Palestine
would write in Greek. This presumption is based on the following
circumstances:

\(a\) The fact that all the other books of the New Testament were
written in Greek, unless the Gospel by Matthew is an exception.

\(b\) This occurred in cases where it would seem to have been as
improbable as it was that one writing to the Hebrews should use that
language. For instance, Paul wrote to the church in Rome in the Greek
language, though the "Latin" language was what was in universal use
there.

\(c\) The Greek was a common language in the East. It seems to have been
familiarly spoken, and to have been commonly understood.

\(d\) Like the other books of the New Testament, this Epistle does not
appear to have been intended to be confined to the Hebrews only. The
writings of the apostles were regarded as the property of the church at
large. Those writings would be copied and spread abroad. The Greek
language was a far better language for such a purpose than the Hebrew
language. It was polished and elegant; was adapted to the purpose of
discoursing on moral subjects; was fitted to express delicate shades of
thought, and was the language which was best understood by the world at
large.

\(e\) It was the language which Paul would naturally use unless there
was a strong reason for his employing the Hebrew. Though he was able to
speak in Hebrew [Act 21:40](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#040), yet he had
spent his early days in Tarsus, where the Greek was the vernacular
tongue, and it was probably that which he had first learned. Besides
this, when this Epistle was written he had been absent from Palestine
about 25 years, and in all that time he had been there but a few days.
He had been where the Greek language was universally spoken. He had been
among Jews who spoke that language. It was the language used in their
synagogues, and Paul had addressed them in it. After thus preaching,
conversing, and writing in that language for 25 years, is it any wonder
that he should prefer writing in it; that he should naturally do it; and
is it not to be presumed that he would do it in this case? These
presumptions are so strong that they ought to be allowed to settle a
question of this kind unless there is positive proof to the contrary.

\(3\) there is internal proof that it was written in the Greek language.
The evidence of this kind consists in the fact that the writer bases an
argument on the meaning and force of Greek words, which could not have
occurred had he written in Hebrew. Instances of this kind are such as
these:

\(a\) In Heb. 2: he applies a passage from [Psa
8:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001) to prove that the Son of God
must have had a human nature, which was to be exalted above the angels,
and placed at the head of the creation. The passage is, "Thou hast made
him a little while inferior to the angels. [Heb
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#007), margin. In the Hebrew, in [Psa
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005), the word rendered "angels," is
אלהים 'Elohiym - God; and the sense of "angels" attached to that word,
though it may sometimes occur, is so unusual, that an argument would not
have been built on the Hebrew language.

\(b\) In [Heb 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001), the writer has
explained the name "Melchizedek," and translated it "king of Salem" -
telling what it is in "Greek" - a thing which would not have been done
had he written in Hebrew, where the word was well understood. It is
possible, indeed, that a translator might have done this, but the
explanation seems to be interwoven with the discourse itself, and to
constitute a part of the argument.

\(c\) In [Heb 9:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#016), there is an
argument on the meaning of the word "covenant" - διαθήκη diathēkē -
which could not have occurred had the Epistle been in Hebrew. It is
founded on the double meaning of that word - denoting both a "covenant"
and a "testament," or "will." The Hebrew word - בּרית beriyt - has no
such double signification. It means only "covenant," and is never used
in the sense of the word "will," or testament. The proper translation of
that word would be συνθήκη sunthēkē - but the translators of the
Septuagint uniformly used the former - διαθήκη diathēkē and on this word
the argument of the apostle is based. This could not have been done by a
translator; it must have been by the original author, for it is
incorporated into the argument.

\(d\) In [Heb 10:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#003), the author shows
that Christ came to make an atonement for sin, and that in order to this
it was necessary that he should have a human body. This he shows was not
only necessary, but was predicted. In doing this, he appeals to [Psa
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006) - "A body hast thou prepared for
me." But the Hebrew here is, "Mine ears hast thou opened." This passage
would have been much less pertinent than the other form - "a body hast
thou prepared me; " - and indeed it is not easy to see how it would bear
at all on the object in view. See [Heb
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#010). But in the Septuagint, the
phrase stands as he quotes it - "a body hast thou prepared for me;" a
fact which demonstrates, whatever difficulties there may be about the
"principle" on which he makes the quotation, that the Epistle was
written in Greek. It may be added, that it has nothing of the appearance
of a translation. It is not stiff, forced, or constrained in style, as
translations usually are. It is impassioned, free, flowing, full of
animation, life, and coloring, and has all the appearance of being an
original composition. So clear have these considerations appeared, that
the great body of critics now concur in the opinion that the Epistle was
originally written in Greek

Section 6. The Design and General Argument of the Epistle

The general purpose of this Epistle is, to preserve those to whom it was
sent from the danger of apostasy. Their danger on this subject did not
arise so much from persecution, as from the circumstances that were
fitted to attract them again to the Jewish religion. The temple, it is
supposed, and indeed it is evident, was still standing. The morning and
evening sacrifice was still offered. The splendid rites of that imposing
religion were still observed. The authority of the law was undisputed.
Moses was a lawgiver, sent from God, and no one doubted that the Jewish
form of religion had been instituted by their fathers in conformity with
the direction of God. Their religion had been founded amidst remarkable
manifestations of the Deity - in flames, and smoke, and thunder; it had
been communicated by the ministration of angels; it had on its side and
in its favor all the venerableness and sanction of a remote antiquity;
and it commended itself by the pomp of its ritual, and by the splendor
of its ceremonies. On the other hand, the new form of religion had
little or nothing of this to commend it. It was of recent origin. It was
founded by the Man of Nazareth, who had been trained up in their own
land, and who had been a carpenter, and who had had no extraordinary
advantages of education. Its rites were few and simple. It had no
splendid temple service; none of the pomp and pageantry, the music and
the magnificence of the ancient religion. It had no splendid array of
priests in magnificent vestments, and it had not been imparted by the
ministry of angels. Fishermen were its ministers; and by the body of the
nation it was regarded as a schism, or heresy, that enlisted in its
favor only the most humble and lowly of the people.

In these circumstances, how natural was it for the enemies of the gospel
in Judea to contrast the two forms of religion, and how keenly would
Christians there feel it! All that was said of the antiquity and the
divine origin of the Jewish religion they knew and admitted; all that
was said of its splendor and magnificence they saw; and all that was
said of the humble origin of their own religion they were constrained to
admit also. their danger was not that arising from persecution. It was
that of being affected by considerations like these, and of relapsing
again into the religion of their fathers, and of apostatizing from the
gospel; and it was a danger which beset no other part of the Christian
world.

To meet and counteract this danger was the design of this Epistle.
Accordingly, the writer contrasts the two religions in all the great
points on which the minds of Christians in Judea would be likely to be
affected, and shows the superiority of the Christian religion over the
Jewish in every respect, and especially in the points that had so much
attracted their attention, and affected their hearts. He begins by
showing that the author of the Christian religion was superior in rank
to any and all who had ever delivered the word of God to man. He was
superior to the prophets, and even to the angels. He was over all
things, and all things were subject to him. There was, therefore, a
special reason why they should listen to him, and obey his commands;
[Heb 1:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001) and Heb. 2: He was
superior to Moses, the great Jewish lawgiver, whom they venerated so
much, and on whom they so much prided themselves; Heb. 3: Having shown
that the Great Founder of the Christian religion was superior to the
prophets, to Moses, and to the angels, the writer proceeds to show that
the Christian religion was characterized by having a High Priest
superior to that of the Jews, and of whom the Jewish high priest was but
a type and emblem.

He shows that all the rites of the ancient religion, splendid as they
were, were also but types, and were to vanish away - for they had had
their fulfillment in the realities of the Christian faith He allows that
the Christians High Priest derived his origin and his rank from a more
venerable antiquity than the Jewish high priest did - because he went
back to Melchizedek, who lived long before Aaron, and that he had far
superior dignity from the fact that he had entered into the Holy of
Holies in heaven. The Jewish high priest entered once a year into the
most holy place in the temple; the Great High Priest of the Christian
faith had entered into the Most Holy place - of which that was but the
type and emblem - into heaven. In short, whatever there was of dignity
and honor in the Jewish faith had more than its counterpart in the
Christian religion; and while the Christian religion was permanent, that
was fading.

The rites of the Jewish system, magnificent as they were, were designed
to be temporary. They were mere types and shadows of things to come.
They had their fulfillment in Christianity That had an Author more
exalted in rank by far than the author of the Jewish system; it had a
High Priest more elevated and enduring; it had rites which brought men
nearer to God; it was the substance of what in the temple service was
type and shadow. By considerations such as these the author of this
Epistle endeavors to preserve them from apostasy. Why should they go
back? Why should they return to a less perfect system? Why go back from
the substance to the shadow? Why turn away from the true sacrifice to
the type and emblem? Why linger around the earthly tabernacle, and
contemplate the high priest there, while they had a more perfect and
glorious High Priest, who had entered into the heavens? And why should
they turn away from the only perfect sacrifice - the great offering made
for transgression - and go back to the bloody rites which were to be
renewed every day?

And why forsake the perfect system - the system that was to endure for
ever - for that which was soon to vanish away? The author of this
Epistle is very careful to assure them that if they thus apostatized,
there could be no hope for them. If they now rejected the sacrifice of
the Son of God, then was no other sacrifice for sin. That was the last
great sacrifice for the sins of men. It was designed to close all bloody
offerings. It was not to be repeated. If that was rejected, there was no
other. The Jewish rites were soon to pass away; and even if they were
not, they could not cleanse the conscience from sin. Persecuted then
though they might be; reviled, ridiculed, opposed, yet they should not
abandon their Christian hope, for it was their all; they should not
neglect him who spake to them from heaven, for in dignity, rank, and
authority, he far surpassed all who in former times had made known the
will of God to men.

This Epistle, therefore, occupies a most important place in the book of
revelation, and without it that book would be incomplete. It is the most
full explanation which we have of the meaning of the Jewish
institutions. In the Epistle to the Romans we have a system of religious
doctrine, and particularly a defense of the great doctrine of
justification by faith. Important doctrines are discussed in the other
epistles; but there was something wanted that would show the meaning of
the Jewish rites and ceremonies, and their connection with the Christian
scheme; something which would show us how the one was preparatory to the
other; and I may add, something that would restrain the imagination in
endeavoring to show how the one was designed to introduce the other. The
one was a system of "types" and "shadows." But on nothing is the human
mind more prone to wander than on the subject of emblems and analogies.

This has been shown abundantly in the experience of the Christian
church, from the time of Origen to the present. Systems of divinity,
commentaries, and sermons, have shown everywhere how prone men of ardent
imaginations have been to find types in everything pertaining to the
ancient economy; to discover hidden meanings in every ceremony; and to
regard every pin and hook and instrument of the tabernacle as designed
to inculcate some truth, and to shadow forth some fact or doctrine of
the Christian revelation. It was desirable to have one book that should
tell how that is; to fetter down the imagination and bind it by severe
rules, and to restrain the vagaries of honest but credulous devotion.
Such a book we have in the Epistle to the Hebrews. The ancient system is
there explained by one who had been brought up in the midst of it, and
who understood it thoroughly; by one who had a clear insight into the
relation which it bore to the Christian economy; by one who was under
the influence of divine inspiration, and who could not err.

The Bible would have been incomplete without this book: and when I think
of the relation between the Jewish and the Christian systems; when I
look on the splendid rites of the ancient economy, and ask their
meaning; when I wish a full guide to heaven, and ask for that which
gives completeness to the whole, I turn instinctively to the Epistle to
the Hebrews. When I wish also that which shall give me the most elevated
view of the Great Author of Christianity and of his work, and the most
clear conceptions of the sacrifice which he made for sin: and when I
look for considerations that shall be most effectual in restraining the
soul from apostasy, and for considerations to enable it to bear trials
with patience and with hope, my mind recurs to this book, and I feel
that the book of revelation, and the hopes of man, would be incomplete
without it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 1](heb001)

</div>
