<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos000)  [Next](hos002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

[Hosea 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 1:1</span></span>

The word of the Lord, that came unto Hosea - Hosea, at the very
beginning of his prophecy, declares that all this, which he delivered,
came, not from his own mind but from God. As Paul says, "Paul an
Apostle, not of men neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the
Father." He refers all to God, and claims all obedience to Him. That
word came to him; it existed then before, in the mind of God. It was
first God's, then it became the prophet's, receiving it from God. So it
is said, "the word of God came to John" [Luk
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#002).

Hosea - i. e., "Salvation, or, the Lord saveth." The prophet bare the
name of our Lord Jesus, whom he foretold and of whom he was a type. "Son
of Beeri, i. e., my well or welling-forth." God ordained that the name
of his father too should signify truth. From God, as from the fountain
of life, Hosea drew the living waters, which he poured out to the
people. "With joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation"
[Isa 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#003).

In the days of Uzziah ... - Hosea, although a prophet of Israel, marks
his prophecy by the names of the kings of Judah, because the kingdom of
Judah was the kingdom of the theocracy, the line of David to which the
promises of God were made. As Elisha, to whose office he succeeded,
turned away from Jehoram [Kg2 3:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#013),
saying, "get thee to the prophets of thy father, and to the prophets of
thy mother," and owned Jehoshaphat king of Judah only, so, in the title
of his prophecy, Hosea at once expresses that the kingdom of Judah alone
was legitimate. He adds the name of Jeroboam, partly as the last king of
Israel whom, by virtue of His promise to Jehu, God helped; partly to
show that God never left Israel unwarned. Jeroboam I was warned first by
the prophet 1 Kings 13, who by his own untimely death, as well as in his
prophecy, was a witness to the strictness of God's judgments, and then
by Ahijah 1 Kings 14; Baasha by Jehu, son of Hanani 1 Kings 16; Ahab, by
Elijah and Micaiah son of Imla; Ahaziah by Elijah 2 Kings 1; Jehoram by
Elisha who exercised his office until the days of Joash [Kg2
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#014).

So, in the days of Jeroboam II, God raised up Hosea, Amos and Jonah.
"The kings and people of Israel then were without excuse, since God
never ceased to send His prophets among them; in no reign did the voice
of the prophets fail, warning of the coming wrath of God, until it
came." While Jeroboam was recovering to Israel a larger rule than it had
ever had since it separated from Judah, annexing to it Damascus [Kg2
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#028) which had been lost to Judah
even in the days of Solomon, and from which Israel had of late so
greatly suffered, Hosea was sent to forewarn it of its destruction. God
alone could utter "such a voice of thunder out of the midst of such a
cloudless sky." Jeroboam doubtless thought that his house would, through
its own strength, survive the period which God had pledged to it. "But
temporal prosperity is no proof either of stability or of the favor of
God. Where the law of God is observed, there, even amid the pressure of
outward calamity, is the assurance of ultimate prosperity. Where God is
disobeyed, there is the pledge of coming destruction. The seasons when
men feel most secure against future chastisement, are often the preludes
of the most signal revolutions."

[Hosea 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hos 1:2</span></span>

The beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea or in Hosea - God first
revealed Himself and His mysteries to the prophet's soul, by His secret
inspiration, and then declared, through him, to others, what He had
deposited in him. God enlightened him, and then others through the light
in him.

And the Lord said unto Hosea - For this thing was to be done by Hosea
alone, because God had commanded it, not by others of their own mind. To
Isaiah God first revealed Himself, as sitting in the temple, adored by
the Seraphim: to Ezekiel God first appeared, as enthroned above the
cherubim in the holy of holies; to Jeremiah God announced that, ere yet
he was born, He had sanctified him for this office: to Hosea He
enjoined, as the beginning of his prophetic office, an act contrary to
man's natural feelings, yet one, by which he became an image of the
Redeemer, uniting to Himself what was unholy, in order to make it holy.

Go take unto thee - Since Hosea prophesied some eighty years, he must
now have been in early youth, holy, pure, as became a prophet of God.
Being called thus early, he had doubtless been formed by God as a chosen
instrument of His will, and had, like Samuel, from his first childhood,
been trained in true piety and holiness. Yet he was to unite unto him,
so long as she lived, one greatly defiled, in order to win her thereby
to purity and holiness; herein, a little likeness of our Blessed Lord,
who, in the Virgin's womb, to save us, espoused our flesh, in us sinful,
in Him all-holy, without motion to sin; and, further, espoused the
Church, formed of us who, "whether Jews or Gentiles," were all under
sin, aliens from God and gone away from Him, "serving divers lusts and
passions [Eph 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027), to make it a
glorious Church, without spot or wrinkle."

A wife of whoredoms - i. e., take as a wife, one who up to that time had
again and again been guilty of that sin. So "men of bloods" [Psa
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#006) are "men given up to
bloodshedding;" and our Lord was "a Man of Sorrows [Isa
53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003), not occasional only, but
manifold and continual, throughout His whole life. She must, then, amid
the manifold corruption of Israel, have been repeatedly guilty of that
sin, perhaps as an idolatress, thinking of it to be in honor of their
foul gods (see the [Hos 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#013), note;
[Hos 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#014), note). She was not like
those degraded ones, who cease to bear children; still she must have
manifoldly sinned. So much the greater was the obedience of the prophet.
Nor could any other woman so shadow forth the manifold defilements of
the human race, whose nature our incarnate Lord vouchsafed to unite in
His own person to the perfect holiness of the divine nature.

And children of whoredoms - For they shared the disgrace of their
mother, although born in lawful marriage. The sins of parents descend
also, in a mysterious way, on their children, Sin is contagious, and,
unless the entail is cut off by grace, hereditary. The mother thus far
portrays man's revolts, before his union with God; the children, our
forsaking of God, after we have been made His children. The forefathers
of Israel, God tells them, "served other gods, on the other side of the
flood" [Jos 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#014), (i. e., in Ur of
the Chaldees, from where God called Abraham) "and in Egypt." It was out
of such defilement, that God took her [Eze
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#003), [Eze
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#008), and He says, "Thou becamest
Mine" [Eze 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#008). whom He maketh His,
He maketh pure; and of her, not such as she was in herself by nature,
but as such as He made her, He says, "I remember thee, the kindness of
thy youth, the love of thine espousals when thou wentest after Me, in
the wilderness" [Jer 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#002). But she soon
fell away; and thenceforth there were among them (as there are now among
Christians,) "the children of God, the children of the promise, and the
children of whoredoms, or of the devil."

For the land ... - This is the reason why God commands Hosea to do this
thing, in order to shadow out their foulness and God's mercy. What no
man would dare to do [Jer 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001), except
at God's bidding, God in a manner doth, restoring to union with Himself
those who had gone away from Him. "The land," i. e., Israel, and
indirectly, Judah also, and, more widely yet, the whole earth.

Departing from - Literally, "from after the Lord." Our whole life should
be [Phi 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013), forgetting the things
which are behind, to follow after Him, whom here we can never fully
attain unto, God in His Infinite Perfection, yet so as, with our whole
heart, "fully to follow after Him." To depart from the Creator and to
serve the creature, is adultery; as the Psalmist says, "Thou hast
destroyed all them, that go a whoring from Thee" [Psa
73:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#027). He who seeks anything out of
God, turns from following Him, and takes to him something else as his
god, is unfaithful, and spiritually an adulterer and idolater. For he is
an adulterer, who becomes another's than God's.

[Hosea 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hos 1:3</span></span>

So he went - He did not demur, nor excuse himself, as did even Moses
[Exo 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#018), or Jeremiah [Jer
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#006), or Peter [Act
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#004), and were rebuked for it,
although mercifully by the All-Merciful. Hosea, accustomed from
childhood to obey God and every indication of the will of God, did at
once, what he was bidden, however repulsive to natural feeling, and
became, thereby, the more an image of the obedience of Christ Jesus, and
a pattern to us, at once to believe and obey God's commands, however
little to our minds.

Gomer, the daughter of Diblaim - "Gomer" is completion; "Diblaim," a
double lump of figs; which are a figure of sweetness. These names may
mean, that "the sweetness of sins is the parent of destruction;" or that
Israel, or mankind had completely forsaken God, and were children of
corrupting pleasure.

Holy Scripture relates that all this was done, and tells us the births
and names of the children, as real history. As such then, must we
receive it. We must not imagine things to be unworthy of God, because
they do not commend themselves to us. God does not dispense with the
moral law, because the moral law has its source in the mind of God
Himself. To dispense with it would be to contradict Himself. But God,
who is the absolute Lord of all things which he made, may, at His
Sovereign will, dispose of the lives or things which He created. Thus,
as Sovereign Judge, He commanded the lives of the Canaanites to be taken
away by Israel, as, in His ordinary providence, He has ordained that the
magistrate should not bear the sword in vain, but has made him His
"minister, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that doeth evil" [Rom
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004). So, again, He, whose are all
things, willed to repay to the Israelites their hard and unjust
servitude, by commanding them "to spoil the Egyptian" [Exo
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#022).

He, who created marriage, commanded to Hosea, whom he should marry. The
prophet was not defiled, by taking as his lawful wife, at God's bidding,
one defiled, however hard a thing this was. "He who remains good, is not
defiled by coming in contact with one evil; but the evil, following his
example, is turned into good." But through his simple obedience, he
foreshadowed Him, God the Word, who was called "the friend of publicans
and sinners" [Mat 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#019); who warned
the Pharisees, that "the publicans and harlots should (enter unto the
kingdom of God before them" [Mat
21:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#031); and who now vouchsafes to
espouse, dwell in, and unite Himself with, and so to hallow, our sinful
souls. The acts which God enjoined to the prophets, and which to us seem
strange, must have had an impressiveness to the people, in proportion to
their strangeness. The life of the prophet became a sermon to the
people. Sight impresses more than words. The prophet, being in his own
person a mirror of obedience, did moreover, by his way of life, reflect
to the people some likeness of the future and of things unseen. The
expectation of the people was wound up, when they saw their prophets do
things at God's command, which they themselves could not have done. When
Ezekiel was bidden to show no sign of mourning, on the sudden death of
"the desire of his eyes" [Eze
24:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#016), his wife; or when he dug
through the wall of his house, and carried forth his household stuff in
the twilight, with his face covered [Eze
12:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#003); the people asked, "Wilt thou
not tell us what these things are to us, that thou doest so?" ([Eze
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#019), add [Eze
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#010)). No words could so express a
grief beyond all power of grieving, as Ezekiel's mute grief for one who
was known to be "the desire of his eyes," yet for whom he was forbidden
to show the natural expressions of grief, or to use the received tokens
of mourning. God Himself declares the ground of such acts to have been,
that, rebellious as the house of Israel was [Eze
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#002), "with eyes which saw not, and
ears which heard not," they might yet consider such acts as these.

[Hosea 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 1:4</span></span>

Call his name Jezreel - that is, in its first sense here, "God will
scatter." The life of the prophet, and his union with one so unworthy of
him, were a continued prophecy of God's mercy. The names of the children
were a life-long admonition of His intervening judgments. Since Israel
refused to hear God's words, He made the prophet's sons, through the
mere fact of their presence among them, their going out and coming in,
and the names which He gave them, to be preachers to the people. He
depicted in them and in their names what was to be, in order that,
whenever they saw or heard of them, His warnings might be forced upon
them, and those who would take warning, might be saved. If, with their
mother's disgrace, these sons inherited and copied their mother's sins,
then their names became even more expressive, that, being such as they
were, they would be scattered by God, would not be owned by God as His
people, or be pitied by Him.

I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu - Yet Jehu
shed this blood, the blood of the house of Ahab, of Joram and Jezebel
and the seventy sons of Ahab, at God's command and in fulfillment of His
will. How was it then sin? Because, if we do what is the will of God for
any end of our own, for anything except God, we do, in fact, our own
will, not God's. It was not lawful for Jehu to depose and slay the king
his master, except at the command of God, who, as the Supreme King, sets
up and puts down earthly rulers as He wills. For any other end, and done
otherwise than at God's express command, such an act is sin. Jehu was
rewarded for the measure in which he fulfilled God's commands, as Ahab
who had "sold himself to work wickedness," had yet a temporal reward for
humbling himself publicly, when rebuked by God for his sin, and so
honoring God, amid an apostate people. But Jehu, by cleaving, against
the will of God, to Jeroboam's sin, which served his own political ends,
showed that, in the slaughter of his master, he acted not, as he
pretended, out of zeal [Kg2 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#016) for
the will of God, but served his own will and his own ambition only.

By his disobedience to the one command of God, he showed that he would
have equally disobeyed the other, had it been contrary to his own will
of interest. He had no principle of obedience. And so the blood, which
was shed according to the righteous judgment of God, became sin to him
who shed it in order to fulfill, not the will of God, but his own. Thus
God said to Baasha, "I exalted thee out of the dust, and made the prince
over My people Israel" [Kg1 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#002),
which he became by slaying his master, the son of Jeroboam, and all the
house of Jeroboam. Yet, because he followed the sins of Jeroboam, "the
word of the Lord came against Baasha, for all the evil that he did in
the sight of the Lord, in being like the house of Jeroboam, and because
he killed him" [Kg1 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#007). The two
courses of action were inconsistent; to destroy the son and the house of
Jeroboam, and to do those things, for which God condemned him to be
destroyed. Further yet. Not only was such execution of God's judgments
itself an offence against Almighty God, but it was sin, whereby he
condemned himself, and made his other sins to be sins against the light.
In executing the judgment of God against another, he pronounced His
judgment against himself, in that he that "judged," in God's stead, "did
the same things" [Rom 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#001). So awful a
thing is it, to be the instrument of God in punishing or reproving
others, if we do not, by His grace, keep our own hearts and hands pure
from sin.

And will cause to cease the kingdom of the house of Israel - Not the
kingdom of the house of Jehu, but all Israel. God had promised that the
family of Jehu should sit on the throne to the fourth generation.
Jeroboam II, the third of these, was now reigning over Israel, in the
fulness of his might. He "restored the coast of Israel from the entering
of Hamath" [Kg2 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025), i. e., from the
Northern extremity, near Mount Hermon, where Palestine joins on to
Syria, and, which Solomon only in all his glory had won for Israel,
"unto the sea of the plain" [Ch2
8:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#003), the Dead sea, regaining all
which Hazael had conquered [Kg2
10:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#032), and even subduing Moab also
(see the note at [Amo 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#014)),
"according to the word of the Lord by Jonah the son of Amittan." He had
recovered to Israel, Damascus, which had been lost to Judah, ever since
the close of the reign of Solomon [Kg1
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#024). He was a warlike prince, like
that first Jeroboam, who had formed the strength and the sin of the ten
tribes. Yet both his house and his kingdom fell with him. The whole
history of that kingdom afterward is little more than that of the murder
of one family by another, such as is spoken of in the later chapters of
Hosea; and Israel, i. e., the ten tribes, were finally carried captive,
fifty years after the death of Zechariah, Jeroboam's son. Of so little
account is any seeming prosperity or strength.

[Hosea 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hos 1:5</span></span>

I will break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel - The valley of
Jezreel is a beautiful and a broad valley or plain, stretching, from
West to East, from Mount Carmel and the sea to the Jordan, which it
reaches through two arms, between the Mountains of Gilboa, little
Hermon, and Tabor; and from South to North from the Mountains of Ephraim
to those of Galilee. Nazareth lay on its northern side. It is called
"the great plain" (1 Macc. 12:49), "the great plain of Esdraelon"
(Judith 1:8). There God had signally executed His judgments against the
enemies of His people, or on His people, when they became His enemies.
There He gave the great victories over the invading hosts of Sisera
([Jdg 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#004) ff), and of Midian, with the
children of the East. [Jdg 6:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#033). There
also He ended the life and kingdom of Saul [Sa1
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#001); [Sa1
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#001), [Sa1
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#007), [Sa1
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#010), visiting upon him, when his
measure of iniquity was full, his years of contumacy, and his
persecution of David, whom God had chosen. Jezreel became a royal
residence of the house of Ahab [Kg1
18:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#046); [Kg1
21:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#001); [Kg2
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#010), [Kg2
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#025), [Kg2
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#030); [Kg2
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#001), [Kg2
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#011). There, in the scenes of Ahab's
wickedness and of Jehu's hypocritical zeal; there, where he drave
furiously, to avenge, as he alleged, on the house of Ahab, the innocent
blood which Ahab had shed in Jezreel, Hosea foretells that the kingdom
of Israel should be broken In the same plain, at the battle with
Shalmaneser, near Betharbel (see the note at [Hos
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#014)), Hosea lived to see his
prophecy fulfilled. The strength of the kingdom was there finally
broken; the sufferings there endured were one last warning before the
capture of Samaria (see the note at [Hos
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#015)).

The name of Jezreel blends the sins with the punishment. It resembles,
in form and in sound, the name of Israel, and contains a reversal of the
promise contained in the name of Israel, in which they trusted.
"Yisrael" (as their name was originally pronounced) signifies, "he is a
prince with God; Yidsreel, God shall scatter." They who, while they
followed the faith, for which their forefather Jacob received from God
the name of Israel, had been truly Israel, i. e., "princes with God,"
should now be "Yidsreel," "scattered by God."

[Hosea 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hos 1:6</span></span>

Call her name Lo-ruhamah - The name is rendered in Paul "not beloved"
[Rom 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025), in Peter, "hath not
obtained mercy" [Pe1 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#010). Love and
mercy are both contained in the full meaning of the intensive form of
the Hebrew word, which expresses the deep tender yearnings of the inmost
soul over one loved; as in the words [Psa
103:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#013), "As a father pitieth (yearneth
over) his own children, so the Lord pitieth (yearneth over) them that
fear Him." It is "tender love" in Him who pitieth; "mercy," as shown to
him who needeth mercy. The punishment, foretold under the name of the
daughter, "Unpitied," is a great enlargement of that conveyed under the
name of the first son, "God shall scatter." Judah too was carried
captive, and scattered; but after the 70 years, she was restored. The 10
tribes, it is now foretold, when scattered, should, as a whole, be cut
off from the tender mercy of God, scattered by Him, and as a whole,
never be restored. Those only were restored, who, when Judah returned
from captivity, clave to her, or subsequently, one by one, were united
to her.

But I will utterly take them away - Literally, "for, taking away, I will
take away from them, or with regard to them," namely, everything . He
specifies nothing; He excepts nothing; only, with that awful emphasis,
He dwells on the taking away, as that which He had determined to do to
the utmost. This is the thought, which He wills to dwell on the As a
little while after, God says, that He would be nothing to them, so here,
where He in fact repeats this one thought, "take away, take away, from
them," the guilty conscience of Israel would at once, supply, "all."
When God threatens, the sinful or awakened soul sees instinctively what
draws down the lightning of God's wrath, and where it will fall.

[Hosea 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">hos 1:7</span></span>

I will have mercy on the house of Judah - For to them the promises were
made in David, and of them, according to the flesh, Christ was to come.
Israel, moreover, as being founded in rebellion and apostasy, had gone
on from bad to worse. All their kings clave to the sin of Jeroboam; not
one did right in the sight of God; not one repented or hearkened to God.
Whereas Judah, having the true Worship of God, and the reading of the
law, and the typical sacrifices, through which it looked on to the great
Sacrifice for sin, was on the whole, a witness to the truth of God (see
the note at [Hos 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#012)).

And will save them by the Lord their God, not by bow ... - Shortly after
this, God did, in the reign of Hezekiah, save them by Himself from
Sennacherib, when the Angel of the Lord smote in one night 185,000 in
the camp of the Assyrians. "Neither in that night, nor when they were
freed from the captivity at Babylon, did they bend bow or draw sword
against their enemies or their captors. While they slept, the Angel of
the Lord smote the camp of the Assyrians. At the prayers of David and
the prophets and holy men, yea, and of the angels [Zac
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#012) too, the Lord stirred up the
spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, to set them free "to go up to Jerusalem,
and build the temple of the Lord God of Israel" [Ezr
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#003). But much more, this is the
special promise of the Gospel, that God would deliver, not outwardly,
but inwardly; not by human wars, but in peace; not by man, but by
Himself. "By the Lord their God," by Himself who is speaking, or, The
Father by the Son, (in like way as it is said, "The Lord rained upon
Sodom fire from the Lord" [Gen 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024)).

They were saved in Christ, the Lord and God of all, not by carnal
weapons of warfare, but by the might of Him who saved them, and shook
thrones and dominions, and who by His own Cross triumpheth over the
hosts of the adversaries, and overthroweth the powers of evil, and
giveth to those who love Him, "to tread on serpents and scorpions and
all the power of the enemy." They were saved, not for any merits of
their own, nor for anything in themselves. But when human means, and
man's works, such as he could do of his own free-will, and the power of
his understanding, and the natural impulses of his affections, had
proved unavailing, then he redeemed them by His Blood, and bestowed on
them gifts and graces above nature, and filled them with His Spirit, and
gave them "to will and to do of His good pleasure." But this promise
also was, and is, to the true Judah, i. e., to those who, as the name
means, "confess and praise" God, and who, receiving Christ, who, as Man,
was of the tribe of Judah, became His children, being re-born by His
Spirit."

[Hosea 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hos 1:8</span></span>

Now when she had weaned ... - Eastern women very commonly nursed their
children two, or even three (2 Macc. 7:27) years. The weaning then of
the child portrays a certain interval of time between these two degrees
of chastisement; but after this reprieve, the last and final judgment
pictured here was to set in irreversibly.

[Hosea 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hos 1:9</span></span>

Call his name Lo-ammi - that is, "not My people." The name of this third
child expresses the last final degree of chastisement. As the
"scattering by God" did not involve the being wholly "unpitied;" so
neither did the being wholly "unpitied" for the time involve the being
wholly rejected, so as to be no more His people. There were
corresponding degrees in the actual history of the kingdom of Israel.
God withdrew his protection by degrees. Under Jeroboam, in whose reign
was this beginning of Hosea's prophecy, the people was yet outwardly
strong. This strength has been thought to be expressed by the sex of the
oldest child, that he was a son. On this, followed extreme weakness,
full of mutual massacre and horrible cruelty, first, in a long anarchy,
then under Zechariah, Shallurn, Menahem, Pekahiah, Pekah, Hosea, within,
and through the invasions of Pul, Tiglathpileser, Shalmaneser, kings of
Assyria, from without. The sex of the daughter, "Lo Ruhamah, Unpitied,"
corresponds with this increasing weakness, and breaking of the spirit.
When she was weaned, i. e., when the people were deprived of all
consolation and all the spiritual food whereby they had here to been
supported, prophecy, teaching, promises, sacrifices, grace, favor,
consolation, it became wholly "Lo-ammi, not My people." As a distinct
part of God's people, it was cast off forever; and yet it became
outwardly strong, as the Jews became powerful, and often were the
persecutors of the Christians. The same is seen in individuals. God
often first chastens them lightly, then more heavily, and brings them
down in their iniquities; but if they still harden themselves, He
withdraws both His chastisements and His grace, so that the sinner even
prospers in this world, but, remaining finally impenitent, is cast off
forever.

I will not be your God - Literally "I will not be to you," or, "for
you;" "for you," by providence; "to you," by love. The words say the
more through their silence. They do not say what God will not be to
those who had been His people. They do not say that He will not be their
Defender, Nourisher, Saviour, Deliverer, Father, Hope, Refuge; and so
they say that He will be none of these, which are all included in the
English, "I will not be your God." For, as God, He is these, and all
things, to us. "I will not be to you." God, by His love, vouchsafes to
give all and to take all. He gives Himself wholly to His own, in order
to make them wholly His. He makes an exchange with them. As God the Son,
by His Incarnation, took the Manhood into God, so, by His Spirit
dwelling in them, He makes men gods, "partakers of the Divine Nature"
[Pe2 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#004). They, by His adoption,
belong to Him; He, by His promise and gift, belongs to them.

He makes them His; He becomes their's. This mutual exchange is so often
expressed in Holy Scripture, to show how God loveth to give Himself to
us, and to make us His; and that where the one is, there is the other;
nor can the one be without the other. This was the original covenant
with Israel: "I will be your God, and you shall be My people" [Lev
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#012); [Exo
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#007); and as such, it is often repeated
in Jeremiah [Jer 11:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#004); [Jer
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#007); [Jer
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#022); [Jer
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001), [Jer
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033); [Jer
32:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#038) and Ezekiel [Eze
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#020); [Eze
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#011); [Eze
36:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#028); [Eze
37:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#023), [Eze
37:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#027). Afterward, this is expressed
still more affectionately. "I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be
My sons and daughters" [Co2 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#018). And
in Christ the Son, God saith, "I will be his Father, and he shall be My
son" [Sa2 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014). God, who saith not
this to any out of Christ, nor even to the holy Angels, (as it is
written, "Unto which of the Angels said He at any time, I will be to him
a Father, and he shall be to Me a son?" [Heb
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005)), saith it to us in Christ. And
so, in turn, the Church and each single soul which is His, saith, or
rather He saith it in them [Sol 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#016),
"My beloved is mine, and I am His," and more boldly yet, I am my
Beloved's, and my Beloved is mine" [Sol
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#003). Whence also at the holy communion
we say, "then we dwell in Christ and Christ in us; we are one with
Christ, and Christ with us;" and we pray that "we may evermore dwell in
Him, and He in us."

[Hosea 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">hos 1:10</span></span>

Yet - (literally, and) the number of the children of Israel ... Light
springeth out of darkness; joy out of sorrow; mercy out of chastisement;
life out of death. And so Holy Scripture commonly, upon the threat of
punishment, promises blessings to the penitent "Very nigh to the
severest displeasure is the dispersion of sorrows and the promised close
of darkness." What God takes away, He replaces with usury; things of
time by things eternal; outward goods and gifts and privileges by
inward; an earthly kingdom by heaven. Both Peter [Pe1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#010) and Paul [Rom
9:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025) tell us that this prophecy is
already, in Christ, fulfilled in those of Israel, who were the true
Israel, or of the Gentiles, to whom the promise was made [Gen
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018), "In thy Seed shall all the
nations be blessed," and who, whether Jews or Gentiles, believed in Him.
The Gentiles were adopted into the Church, which, at the Day of
Pentecost, was formed of the Jews, and in which Jews and Gentiles became
one in Christ [Gal 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028). Yet of the
Jews alone, not only did "many tens of thousands in Jerusalem believe"
[Act 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#020), but Peter and James both
write "to the dispersed of the ten tribes" [Jam
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001); [Pe1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001); and the Apostles themselves were
Jews. Although, then, those Jews who believed in Christ were few in
comparison of those who rejected Him, yet they were, in themselves,
many, and, through those who, in Christ Jesus, were "begotten by them
through the Gospel" [Co1 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015), they
were numberless. Yet this prophecy, although accomplished in part, will,
according to Paul [Rom 11:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025), be
yet more completely fulfilled in the end.

In the place where it was said - (or where it shall be said, i. e., at
the first) unto them, ye are not My people, there it shall, in
after-time, be said unto them, ye are the sons of the living God Both
the times here spoken of by the prophet were yet future, for Israel,
although they had apostatised from God, had not yet been disowned by
God, who was still sending to them prophets, to reclaim them. They
ceased to be owned as God's people, when, being dispersed abroad, they
had no share in the sacrifices, no temple-worship, no prophets, no
typical reconciliation for sin. God took no more notice of them than the
pagan. The prophet then speaks of two futures; one, when it shall be
said to them, "ye are not My people;" and a yet further future, in which
it should he said, "ye are the sons of the living God." The place of
both was to be the same. The place of their rejection, the dispersion,
was to be the place of their restoration. And so Peter says that this
Scripture was fulfilled in them, while still "scattered abroad through
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia." The place, then, where
they shall be called the "sons of the living God," is, wheresoever they
should believe in Christ. Although separated in body, they were united
by faith. And so it shall be unto the end. "Nothing now constraineth to
go up to Jerusalem, and still to seek for the temple of stones, for
neither will they worship God, as aforetime, by sacrifices of sheep or
oxen; but their worship will be faith in Christ and in His commandments,
and the sanctification in the Spirit, and the regeneration through Holy
Baptism, making the glory of sonship their's, who are worthy thereof and
are called thereto by the Lord" .

It shall be said, ye are the sons of the living God - It was the special
sin of Israel, the source of all his other sins, that he had left the
"living God," to serve dead idols. In the times of the Gospel, not only
should he own God as his God, but he should have the greatest of all
gifts, that the living God, the fountain of all life, of the life of
nature, of grace, of glory, should be his Father, and as being his
Father, should communicate to him that life, which he has and is. For He
who is life, imparts life. God doth not only pour into the souls of His
elect, grace and faith, hope and love, or all the manifold gifts of His
Spirit, but He, the living God, maketh them to he His living sons, by
His Spirit dwelling in them, by whom He adopteth them as His sons,
through whom He giveth them grace. For by His Spirit He adopteth them as
sons. "We have received the spirit of adoption of sows, whereby we cry,
Abba, Father. And if sons, then heirs; heirs of God and joint-heirs of
Christ" [Rom 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015).

God not only giveth us grace, but adopteth us as sons. He not only
accounteth us, but He maketh us sons; He maketh us sons, not outwardly,
but inwardly; not by inward grace only, but by His Spirit: not only by
the birth from the Spirit, but in the Only-Begotten Son; sons of God,
because members of Christ, the Son of God; sons of God, by adoption, as
Christ is by Nature; but actual sons of God, as Christ is actually and
eternally the Son of God. God is our Father, not by nature, but by
grace; yet He is really our Father, since we are born of Him, "sons of
the living God," born of the Spirit. He giveth us of His Substance, His
Nature, although not by nature; not united with us, (as it is,
personally, with His Son,) but dwelling in us, and making us "partakers
of the Divine Nature." "Sons of the living God" must be living by Him
and to Him, by His life, yea, through Himself living in them, as our
Saviour saith, "If any man love Me, he will keep My words, and My Father
will love him, and We will come unto him, and make Our abode with him"
[Joh 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023).

[Hosea 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">hos 1:11</span></span>

Then shall the children of Judah and the children of Israel be gathered
together - A little image of this union was seen after the captivity in
Babylon, when some of the children of Israel, i. e., of the ten tribes,
were united to Judah on his return, and the great schism of the two
kingdoms came to an end. More fully, both literal Judah and Israel were
gathered into one in the one Church of Christ, and all the spiritual
Judah and Israel; i. e., as many of the Gentiles as, by following the
faith, became the sons of faithful Abraham, and heirs of the promise to
him.

And shall make themselves one Head - The act of God is named first,
"they shall be gathered;" for without God we can do nothing. Then
follows the act of their own consent, "they shall make themselves one
Head;" for without us God doth nothing in us. God gathereth, by the call
of His grace; they make to themselves one Head, by obeying His call, and
submitting themselves to Christ, the one Head of the mystical body, the
Church, who are His members. In like way, Ezekiel foretells of Christ,
of the seed of David, under the name of David; "I will set up one
Shepherd over them, and He shall feed them, even My servant David; and I
the Lord will be their God, and My servant David a Prince among them"
[Eze 34:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023); and again; "I will make
them one nation in the land, upon the mountains of Israel; and one king
shall be king to them all; and they shall be no more two nations,
neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms anymore at all" [Eze
37:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#022). But this was not wholly
fulfilled, until Christ came, for after the captivity they were under
Zorobabel as chief, and Joshua as high priest.

And shall come up out of the land - To "come up" or "go up" is a title
of dignity; from where, in our time, people are said to go up to the
metropolis, or the University; and in Holy Scripture, to "come up," or
"go up," out of Egypt ([Gen 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#001); [Gen
45:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#025), etc.), or Assyria [Kg2
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#003); [Kg2
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#009), [Kg2
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013); [Isa
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#001), [Isa
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#010), or Babylon [Kg2
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001); [Ezr
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#001); [Ezr
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#006); [Neh
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#006); [Neh
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001), to the land of promise, or from
the rest of the land to the place which God chose [Exo
34:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#024) to place His name there, Shiloh,
[Sa1 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#022), or, afterward, Jerusalem;
([Sa2 19:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#034); [Kg1
12:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#027); [Psa
122:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#004), etc.) and it is foretold that
"the mountain of the Lord's house shall be exalted above the hills; and
many nations shall come and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain
of the Lord" [Isa 2:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002); [Mic
4:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001). The land from which they should
go up is, primarily and in image, Babylon, from where God restored the
two tribes; but, in truth and fully, it is the whole aggregate of lands,
the earth, the great "city of confusion," which Babel designates. Out of
which they shall go up, "not with their feet but with their affections,"
to the "city set upon a hill" [Mat
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014), "the heavenly Jerusalem" [Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022), and heaven itself, where we are
"made to sit together with Christ" [Eph
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006), and where "our conversation is"
[Phi 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020), that where He is, there may
we "His servants be" [Joh 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#026). They
ascend in mind above the earth and the things of earth, and the lowness
of carnal desires, that so they may, in the end, come up out of the
earth, "to meet the Lord in the air, and forever be with the Lord" [Th1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017).

For great is the day of Jezreel - God had denounced woe on Israel, under
the names of the three children of the prophet, Jezreel, Lo-Ammi,
Lo-Ruhamah; and now, under those three names, He promises the reversal
of that sentence, in Christ. He begins with the name, under which he had
begun to pronounce the woe, the first son, Jezreel. "Jezreel" means "God
shall sow," either for increase, or to scatter. When God threatened,
"Jezreel" necessarily meant, "God shall scatter;" here, when God
reverses His threatening, it means, "God shall sow." But the issue of
the seed is either single, as in human birth, or manifold, as in the
seed-corn. Hence, it is used either of Him who was eminently, "the Seed
of Abraham, the Seed of the woman," or the manifold harvest, which He,
the seed-corn [Joh 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024), should bring
forth, when sown in the earth, by His vicarious Death. It means, then,
Christ or His Church. Christ, the Only-Begotten Son of God before all
worlds, was, in time, also "conceived by the Holy Spirit, of the Virgin
Mary," the Son of God Alone, in a way in which no other man was born of
God. Great then should be the day, when "God should sow," or give the
increase in mercy, as before He scattered them, in His displeasure.

The Great Day wherein "God should sow, was, first, the day which the
Lord hath made" [Psa 118:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#024), the
Incarnation, in which God the Son became Man, "the seed of the woman;"
then, it was the Passion, in which, like a seed-corn, He was sown in the
earth; then, the Resurrection, when He rose, "the Firstborn among many
brethren;" then, all the days in which "He bare much fruit." It is the
one day of salvation, in which, generation after generation, a new seed
hath been or "shall be born" unto Him, and "shall serve Him" [Psa
22:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#030). Even unto the end, every
time of any special growth of the Church every conversion of Pagan tribe
or people, is "a day of Jezereel," a day in which "the Lord soweth."
Great, wonderful, glorious, thrice-blessed is the day of Christ, for in
it He hath done great things for us, gathering together under Himself,
the Head, those scattered abroad, "without hope and without God in the
world;" making "not My people" into "My people" and those not beloved
into His "beloved," the objects of His tender, yearning compassion, full
of His grace and mercy. For so it follows,

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 2](hos002)

</div>
