<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa035)  [Next](isa037.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 36](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 36:0</span></span>

This chapter commences the historical portion of Isaiah, which continues
to the close of [Isa 39:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#001.md). The main
subject is the destruction of Sennacherib and his army. It contains also
an account of the sickness and recovery of Hezekiah; the song with which
he celebrated his recovery; and an account of his ostentation in showing
his treasures to the ambassadors of the king of Babylon. In [Ch2
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#032.md), the following record occurs:
'Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and his goodness, behold they are
written in the vision of Isaiah, the son of Amoz;' and it is to this
portion of Isaiah to which the author of the Book of Chronicles
doubtless refers.

There was an obvious propriety in Isaiah's making a record of the
invasion and destruction of Sennacherib. That event has occupied a
considerable portion of his prophetic announcements; and as he lived to
see them fulfilled, it was proper that he should record the event. The
prophecy and its fulfillment can thus be compared together; and while
there is the strongest internal testimony that the prophecy was uttered
before the event, there is also the most striking and clear fulfillment
of all the predictions on the subject.

A parallel history of these transactions occurs in 2 Kings 17-20, and in
2 Chr. 32. The history in Chronicles, though it contains an account of
the same transaction, is evidently by another hand, as it bears no
further resemblance to this, than that it contains an account of the
same transactions. But between the account here and in 2 Kings there is
a most striking resemblance, so much so as to show that they were mainly
by the same hand. It has been made a matter of inquiry whether Isaiah
was the original author, or whether he copied a history which he found
in the Book of Kings, or whether both he and the author of the Book of
Kings copied from some original document which is now lost, or whether
the collectors of the prophetic writings after the return from the
captivity at Babylon, judging that such a history would appropriately
explain the prophecies of Isaiah, copied the account from some
historical record, and inserted it among his prophecies. This last is
the opinion of Rosenmuller - an opinion which evidently lacks all
historical evidence, and indeed all probability. The most obvious and
fair supposition undoubtedly is, that this history was inserted here by
Isaiah, or that he made this record according to the statement in [Ch2
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#032.md). Gesenius also accords
substantially with Rosenmuller in supposing that this history is an
elaboration of that in the Book of Kings, and that it was reduced to its
present form by some one who collected and edited the books of Isaiah
after the Babylonian captivity. Vitringa supposes that both the accounts
in Kings and in Isaiah have been derived from a common historical
document, and have been adopted and somewhat abridged and modified by
the author of the Book of Kings and by Isaiah.

It is impossible now to determine the truth in regard to this subject;
nor is it of much importance. Those who are desirous of seeing the
subject discussed more at length may consult Vitringa, Rosenmuller, and
Gesenius. The view of Gesenius is chiefly valuable because he has gone
into a comparison of the account in Isaiah with that in Kings. The
following remarks are all that occur to me as desirable to make, and
express the conclusion which I have been able to form on the subject:

1\. The two accounts have a common origin, or are substantially the
production of the same hand. This is apparent on the face of them. The
same course of the narrative is pursued, the same expressions occur, and
the same style of composition is found. It is possible, indeed, that the
Holy Spirit might have inspired two different anthors to adopt the same
style and expressions in recording the same events, but this is not the
mode elsewhere observed in the Scriptures. Every sacred writer is
allowed to pursue his own method of narration, and to express himself in
a style and manner of his own.

2\. There is no evidence that the two accounts were abridged from a more
full narrative. Such a thing is possible; nor is there any impropriety
in the supposition. But it lacks historical support. That there were
histories among the Jews which are now lost; that there were public
records which were the fountains from where the authors of the histories
which we now have drew their information, no one can doubt who reads the
Old Testament. Thus we have accounts of the writings of Gaff, and Iddo
the seer, and Nathan, and the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and of
the Book of Jehu the prophet [Ch2
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#029.md); [Ch2
20:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#034.md); [Kg1
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#001.md), all of which are now lost,
except so far as they are incorporated in the historical and prophetic
books of the Old Testament. It is possible, therefore, that these
accounts may have been abridged from some such common record, but there
is no historical testimony to the fact.

3\. There is no evidence that these chapters in Isaiah were inserted by
Ezra, or the other inspired men who collected the Sacred Writings, and
published a recension, or an edition of them after the return from
Babylon. That there was such a work performed by Ezra and his
contemporaries is the testimony of all the Jewish historians (see Dr.
Alexander "On the Canon of Scripture"). But there is no historical
evidence that they thus introduced into the writings of Isaiah an entire
historical narrative from the previous histories, or that they composed
this history to be inserted here. It is done nowhere else. And had it
been done on this occasion, we should have had reason to expect that
they would have inserted historical records of the fulfillment of all
the other prophecies which had been fulfilled. We should have looked,
therefore, for historical statements of the downfall of Damascus and
Syria; of the destruction of Samaria, of Moab of Babylon, and of Tyre,
as proofs of the fulfillment of the predictions of Isaiah. There can be
no reason why the account of the destruction of Sennacherib should have
been singled out and inserted in preference to others. And this is
especially true in regard to Babylon. The prophecy of Isaiah Isa. 13; 14
had been most striking and clear; the fulfillment had also been most
remarkable; Ezra and his contemporaries must have felt a much deeper
interest in that than in the destruction of Sennacherib; and it is
unaccountable, therefore, if they inserted this narrative respecting
Sennacherib, that they did not give us a full account also of the
overthrow of Babylon, and of their deliverance, as showing the
fulfillment of the prophecies on that subject.

4\. The author of the Books of Kings is unknown. There is reason to
believe that these books, as well as the Books of Chronicles, and some
other of the historical books of the Old Testament, were written by the
prophets; or at least compiled and arranged by some inspired man, from
historical sketches that were made by the prophets. To such sketches or
narratives we find frequent reference in the books themselves. Thus
Nathan the prophet, and Ahijah the Shilonite, and Iddo the seer,
recorded the acts of Solomon [Ch2
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#029.md); thus the same Iddo the seer, and
Shemaiah the prophet, recorded the acts of Rehoboam [Ch2
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#015.md); thus the acts of Jehoshaphat
were written in the Book of Jehu [Ch2
20:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#034.md); and thus Isaiah wrote the acts
of king Uzziah [Ch2 26:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#022.md), and also of
Hezekiah [Ch2 32:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#032.md). Many of these
historical sketches or fragments have not come down to us; but all that
was essential to us has been doubtless incorporated into the sacred
narrative, and transmitted to our own times. It is not improbable that
many of these histories were mere fragments or public documents;
narratives or sketches of a single reign, or some important fact in a
reign, which were subsequently revised and inserted in the more extended
history, so that, after all, it may be that we have all, or nearly all,
of these fragments incorporated in the histories which we now possess.

5\. As Isaiah is thus known to have written some portions of the history
of the kings, it is probable that his history would be incorporated into
the record of the kings by whomsoever that record might be composed.
Indeed, the composition of the entire Books of Kings has been ascribed
by many writers to Isaiah, though Grotius and some others ascribe it to
Jeremiah. The general, and the probable opinion is, however, that the
Books of the Kings were digested into their present form by Ezra. It is
probable, therefore, I think, that Isaiah wrote the chapters in Kings
respecting the invasion of Sennacherib; that the compiler of the Books
of Kings, whoever he might be, adopted the fragment as a part of his
history, and that the portion which we have here in Isaiah is the same
fragment revised, abridged in some places, and enlarged in others, to
adapt it to his purpose in introducing it into his book of prophecy. But
it is admitted that this is conjecture. Every consideration, however,
must lead us to suppose that this is the work of Isaiah (compare the
Introduction, Section 5).

The portion of history contained in these chapters differs from the
record in the Kings in several respects. There is no difference in
regard to the historical facts, but the difference has respect to the
fulness of the narratives, and to the change of a few words. The most
material difference is that a few sentences, and members of sentences,
are omitted in Isaiah which are found in Kings. These variations will be
noticed in the exposition, and it is not necessary more particularly to
refer to them here.

The thirty-sixth chapter contains the following parts, or subjects:

1\. Sennacherib, having taken most of the strongholds of Judea, sent
Rabshakeh with a great force to besiege Jerusalem, and to summon it to
surrender [Isa 36:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#001.md).

2\. Hezekiah sent an embassy to meet with Rabshakeh, evidently to induce
him to depart from the city [Isa 36:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#003.md).

3\. This embassy Rabshakeh addressed in a proud, insolent, and taunting
speech, reproaching them with putting their trust in Egypt, and with
their feebleness, and assuring them that Sennacherib had come up against
the city at the command of Yahweh [Isa
36:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#004.md).

4\. The Jewish embassy requested Rabshakeh to speak in the Aramean or
Syrian language, that the common people on the wall might not hear [Isa
36:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#011.md).

5\. To this he replied, that he came that they might hear; to endearour
to draw them off from trusting to Hezekiah, and to induce them to submit
to Sennacherib, promising them abundance in the land to which he would
take them [Isa 36:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#012.md).

6\. To all this, the embassy of Hezekiah said nothing, but returned, as
they had been instructed, into the city, with deep expressions of sorrow
and grief [Isa 36:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#021.md).

[Isaiah 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 36:1</span></span>

In the fourteenth year of Hezekiah - Of his reign, 709 b.c.

That Sennacherib - Sennacherib was son and successor of Shalmaneser,
king of Assyria, and began to reign A.M. 3290, or 714 b.c., and reigned,
according to Calmet, but four years, according to Prideaux eight years,
and according to Gesenius eighteen years. The immediate occasion of this
war against Judah was the fact that Hezekiah had shaken off the yoke of
Assyria, by which his father Ahaz and the nation had suffered so much
under Tiglath-pileser, or Shalmaneser [Kg2
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#007.md). To reduce Judea again to
subjection, as well as to carry his conquests into Egypt, appears to
have been the design of this celebrated expedition. He ravaged the
country, took the strong towns and fortresses, and prepared then to lay
siege to Jerusalem itself. Hezekiah, however, as soon as the army of
Sennacherib had entered Judea, prepared to put Jerusalem into a state of
complete defense. At the advice of his counselors he stopped the waters
that flowed in the neighborhood of the city, and that might furnish
refreshment to a besieging army, built up the broken walls, enclosed one
of the fountains within a wall, and prepared shields and darts in
abundance to repel the invader [Ch2
32:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#002.md).

Sennacherib, seeing that all hope of easily taking Jerusalem was taken
away, apparently became inclined to hearken to terms of accommodation.
Hezekiah sent to him to propose peace, and to ask the conditions on
which he would withdraw his forces. He confessed his error in not paying
the tribute stipulated by his father, and his willingness to pay now
what should be demanded by Sennacherib. Sennacherib demanded three
hundred talents of silver, and thirty talents of gold. This was paid by
Hezekiah, by exhausting the treasury, and by stripping even the temple
of its gold [Kg2 18:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013.md). It was
evidently understood in this treaty that Sennacherib was to withdraw his
forces, and return to his own land. But this treaty he ultimately
disregarded (see the note at [Isa
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#008).md). He seems, however, to have
granted Hezekiah some respite, and to have delayed his attack on
Jerusalem until his return from Egypt. This war with Egypt he prosecuted
at first with great success, and with a fair prospect of the conquest of
that country.

But having laid siege to Pelusium, and having spent much time before it
without success, he was compelled at length to raise the siege, and to
retreat. Tirhakah king of Ethiopia having come to the aid of Sevechus,
the reigning monarch of Egypt, and advancing to the relief of Pelusium,
Sennacherib was compelled to raise the siege, and retreated to Judea.
Here, having taken Lachish, and disregarding his compact with Hezekiah,
he sent an army to Jerusalem under Rabshakeh to lay siege to the city.
This is the point in the history of Sennacherib to which the passage
before us refers (see Prideaux's "Connection," vol. i. pp. 138-141; Jos.
"Ant." x. 1; Gesenius "in loc;" and Robinson's Calmet).

All the defended cities - All the towns on the way to Egypt, and in the
vicinity of Jerusalem (see the notes at [Isa
10:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#028).md).

[Isaiah 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 36:2</span></span>

And the king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh - In [Kg2
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#017.md), it is said that he sent Tartan,
and Rabsaris, and Rabshakeh. In regard to Tartan, see the note at [Isa
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001.md). It is probable that Rabshakeh
only is mentioned in Isaiah because the expedition may have been mainly
under his direction, or more probably because he was the principal
speaker on the occasion to which he refers.

From Lachish - This was a city in the south of the tribe of Judah, and
was southwest of Jerusalem [Jos 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#023.md);
[Jos 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#039.md). It was situated in a
plain, and was the seat of an ancient Canaanite king. It was rebuilt and
fortified by Rehoboam [Ch2 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#009.md). It
was in some respects a border town, and was a defense against the
incursions of the Philistines. It was therefore situated between
Jerusalem and Egypt, and was in the direct way of Sennacherib in his
going to Egypt, and on his return. It lay, according to Eusebius and
Jerome, seven Roman miles from Eleutheropolis toward the south. No trace
of the town, however, is now to be found (see Robinson's "Bib.
Researches," vol. ii. pp. 388, 389).

With a great army - Sennacherib remained himself for a time at Lachish,
though he followed not long after. It is probable that he sent forward a
considerable portion of his immense army, retaining only so many forces
as he judged would be necessary to carry on the siege of Lachish. In
[Ch2 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#009.md), it is said that
Sennacherib, while he sent his servants to Jerusalem, 'laid siege to
Lachish and all his power with him;' but this must mean that he retained
with him a considerable part of his army, and doubtless all that
contributed to his magnificence and splendor. The word 'power' in [Ch2
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#009.md), means also 'dominion' (see the
margin), and denotes all the insignia of royalty: and this might have
been retained while a considerable part of his forces had been sent
forward to Jerusalem.

And he stood - He halted; he encamped there; He intended to make that
the point of attack.

By the conduit ... - (See the notes at [Isa
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003).md)

[Isaiah 36:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 36:3</span></span>

Then came forth unto him - Isaiah has here omitted what is recorded in
[Kg2 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#018.md), namely, that Rabshakeh and
his companions 'called to the king,' and as the result of that probably
Hezekiah sent out Eliakim.

Eliakim, Hilkiah's son, which was over the house - Respecting Eliakim,
and his character, see the notes at [Isa
22:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#020.md).

And Shebna the scribe - This may have been some other man than the one
mentioned in [Isa 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#015.md). He is there
said to have been 'over the house,' and it is stated that he should be
degraded from that office, and succeeded by Eliakim. It is possible,
however, that Hezekiah retained him as scribe, or as secretary (see the
analysis of [Isa 22:15-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#015).md).

And Joah, Asaph's son, the recorder - The "chronicler;" the officer to
whom was entrusted the keeping of the records of state. The Hebrew word
means 'the remembrancer;' him by whose means former events might be
recalled and remembered, perhaps an officer such as would be called
historiographer.

[Isaiah 36:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 36:4</span></span>

What confidence - What is the ground of your confidence? on what do you
trust? The appellation 'great king' was the customary title of the kings
of the Persians and Assyrians.

[Isaiah 36:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 36:5</span></span>

I say, sayest thou - In [Kg2 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#020.md),
this is 'thou sayest;' and thus many manuscripts read it here, and Lowth
and Noyes have adopted that reading. So the Syriac reads it. But the
sense is not affected whichever reading is adopted. It is designed to
show to Hezekiah that his reliance, either on his own resources or on
Egypt, was vain.

But they are but vain words - Margin, as Hebrew, 'A word of lips;' that
is, mere words; vain and empty boasting.

On whom dost thou trust, that thou rebellest against me? - Hezekiah had
revolted from the Assyrian power, and had refused to pay the tribute
which had been imposed on the Jews in the time of Ahaz [Kg2
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#007.md).

[Isaiah 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 36:6</span></span>

Lo, thou trustest - It is possible that Sennacherib might have been
apprised of the attempt which had been made by the Jews to secure the
cooperation of Egypt (see the notes at [Isa
30:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001.md); [Isa
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001) ff.md), though he might not have
been aware that the negotiation was unsuccessful.

In the staff of this broken reed - The same comparison of Egypt with a
broken reed, or a reed which broke while they were trusting to it,
occurs in [Eze 29:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#006.md). Reeds were
doubtless used often for staves, as they are now. They are light and
hollow, with long joints. The idea here is, that as a slender reed would
break when a man leaned on it, and would pierce his hand, so it would be
with Egypt. Their reliance would give way, and their trusting to Egypt
would be attended with injury to themselves (compare [Isa
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#005.md), [Isa
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#007.md); [Isa
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003).md).

[Isaiah 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 36:7</span></span>

But if thou say to me - If you shall make this plea, that you believe
Yahweh will protect you in your revolt. The word 'thou' here refers to
Hezekiah, or to the ambassadors speaking in his name. In [Kg2
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#022.md), it is, 'but if ye say unto me;'
that is, you ambassadors. The sense is substantially the same.

Is it not he ... - This is given as a reason why they should not put
their confidence in Yahweh. The reason is, that he supposed that
Hezekiah had removed all the altars of Yahweh from all parts of the
land, and that they could not calculate on the protection of a God whose
worship bad been abolished. It is probable that Sennacherib and
Rabshakeh had beard of the reformation which had been effected by
Hezekiah; of his destroying the groves and altars which had been
consecrated in the reign of his father to idolatry, and perhaps of the
fact that he had even destroyed the brass serpent which Moses had made,
and which had become an object of idolatrous worship [Kg2
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#004.md), and he may have supposed that
all these altars and groves had been devoted to Yahweh, and were
connected with his worship. He did not seem to understand that all that
Hezekiah had done was only to establish the worship of Yahweh in the
land.

High places - The worship of idols was usually performed in groves on
high places; or on the tops of hills and mountains. It seems to have
been supposed that worship in such places was more acceptable to the
Deity. Perhaps it may have been because they thus seemed nearer the
residence of the gods; or, perhaps, because there is sublimity and
solemnity in such places - a stillness and elevation above the world
which seem favorable to devotion (see [Sa1
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#012.md); [Kg1
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#004.md); [Kg2
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#002.md); [Ch2
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#019).md). Chapels, temples, and altars,
were erected on such places [Kg1
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#022.md); [Kg2
17:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#029.md), and ministers and priests
attended there to officiate ([Kg1
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#032.md); [Kg2
17:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#032).md). Even the kings of Judah,
notwithstanding the express prohibition of Moses Deut. 12, were engaged
in such acts of worship [Kg2 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#004.md);
[Kg2 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#004.md); [Kg2
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#004.md), [Kg2
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#035.md); [Ch2
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#017.md); [Ch2
20:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#033.md); and Solomon himself sacrificed
in chapels of this kind [Kg1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#002.md).
These places Hezekiah had destroyed; that is, he had cut down the
consecrated groves, and had destroyed the chapels and temples which had
been erected there. The fact that Ahaz, the father of Hezekiah, had been
distinguished for worshipping in such places had probably led the king
of Assyria to suppose that this was the proper worship of the God of the
Jews; and now that Hezekiah had destroyed them all, he seems to have
inferred that he was guilty of gross irreligion, and could no longer
depend on the protection of Yahweh.

And said to Judah and Jerusalem - He had commanded them to worship only
in Jerusalem, at the temple. This was in strict accordance with the law
of Moses; but this seems to have been understood by Sennacherib as in
fact almost or quite banishing the worship of Yahweh from the land.
Probably this was said to alienate the minds of the people from
Hezekiah, by showing them that he had taken away their rights and
privileges of worshipping God where they chose.

[Isaiah 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 36:8</span></span>

Now, therefore, give pledges - Margin, 'Hostages.' The Hebrew verb (ערב
‛ârab) means properly to mix or mingle; then, to exchange commodities by
barter or traffic; then, to become surety for anyone, to exchange with
him, to stand in his place; then, to pledge, to pledge one's life, or to
give security of any kind. Here it is used in a spirit of taunting or
derision, and is equivalent to what would be said among us, 'I will bet
you, or I will lay a wager, that if we should give you only two thousand
horses, you could not find men enough to ride them, or men that had
knowledge of horsemanship enough to guide them.' There was much severity
in this taunt. The Jews hoped to defend themselves. Yet here was an
immense army coming up to lay siege against them. What hope had they of
defense? So weak and feeble were they, that Rabshakeh said they could
not furnish even two thousand horsemen to resist all the host of the
Assyrians. There was also, doubtless, much truth in this taunt. It was
not permitted by the law of Moses for the Jews to keep cavalry, nor for
their kings to multiply horses. The reason of this may be seen in the
notes at [Isa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#007.md). Though some of the
kings, and especially Solomon, had disregarded this law of Moses, yet
Hezekiah had endeavored to restore the observance of the law, and it is
probable that he find no cavalry, and that the art of horsemanship was
little known in Jerusalem. As the Assyrians prided themselves on their
cavalry, they consequently looked with contempt on a people who were
destitute of this means of defense.

[Isaiah 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 36:9</span></span>

How then wilt thou turn away the face - The most unimportant captain in
the army of Assyria commands more horsemen than this, and how can you
expect to oppose even him, much more how can you be able to resist all
the mighty army of the Assyrians?

One captain of the least - The word 'captain' here (פחת pachat,
construct state from פחה pechâh) denotes a prefect or governor of a
province less than a satrap, an officer who was under the satrap, and
subject to him. It is applied to an officer in the Assyrian empire [Kg2
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#024.md); in the Chaldean empire [Jer
51:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#023.md); the Persian [Est
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#009.md); [Est
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#003.md); and to the prefects of Judea in
the time of Solomon [Kg1 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#015.md). The
word is of foreign origin.

[Isaiah 36:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 36:10</span></span>

And am I now come up without the Lord - Am I come up without his
permission or command? Rabshakeh here speaks in the name of his master;
and he means to say that he had the express command of Yahweh to inflict
punishment on the Jews. It is possible that there had been conveyed to
Sennacherib a rumour of what Isaiah had said (see [Isa
10:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005).md) that God would bring the
Assyrians upon the Jewish people to punish them for their sins, and that
Rabshakeh now pleads that as his authority, in order to show them that
resistance would be vain. Or it may be that he uses the name Yahweh here
as synonymous with the name of God, and means to say that he had been
divinely directed to come up in that expedition. All the ancient
warriors usually consulted the gods, and endeavored by auguries to
obtain the divine approbation of their plans of conquest, and Rabshakeh
may mean simply to say that his master came now under the divine
sanction and direction. Or, which is more probable, he made use of this
as a mere pretence for the purpose of influencing the people who heard
him, and to whom he said he was sent [Isa
36:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#012.md), in order to alienate their
minds from Hezekiah, and to induce them to surrender. He knew that it
was one of the principles of the Jews, however little they regarded it
in practice, to yield to his authority. Wicked people will be glad to
plead divine authority for their purposes and plans when they can have
the slightest pretence for it.

[Isaiah 36:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 36:11</span></span>

Speak, I pray thee, unto thy servants in the Syrian language - Hebrew,
ארמית 'ărâmı̂yt - 'Aramean.' Aram, or Aramea, properly meaning a high
region, or the highlands, was of wider extent than Syria Proper, and
comprehended not only Syria, but Mesopotamia. It usually denotes
however, Syria Proper, of which the capital was Damascus. The language
of all this country was probably the same - the Syrian or Aramean, a
language of the same family as the Hebrew, and having a strong
resemblance to that and to the Chaldee. This was not properly the
language of Assyria, where probably a dialect composed of the language
of the Medes and Persians was employed. But the Syriac language was
spoken in different parts of Assyria. It was spoken in Mesopotamia, and
doubtless in some of the provinces of the Assyrian empire, and might be
presumed to be understood by Rabshakeh, and those with him. The Jews had
contact with the Syrians, and those who had been sent out by Hezekiah
had learned to speak that. It is not probable that they understood the
Medo-Persian tongue that was spoken by the Assyrians usually. The Syriac
or Aramean was probably the most common language which was spoken in
that region. Its knowledge prevailed in the time of the Saviour, and was
that which he usually spoke.

In the Jews' language - (יחוּדית yehûdı̂yt). The language of Judah. It is
remarkable that they did not call it the Hebrew language. But there
might have been some national pride in regard to this. The Hebrew
language had been the common language of all the Jews, and had been
spoken by those of the kingdom of Israel or Samaria, as well as by those
of the kingdom of Judah. But after the revolt of the ten tribes it is
possible that they might have claimed the language as their own, and
regarded the Hebrew - the venerable language of their fathers - as
belonging to them especially, as they claimed everything that was sacred
or venerable in the nation, and hence, they spoke of it as the language
of Judah. The name of Judah, or Jews, which is derived from Judah, was,
after the removal of the ten tribes, given to the entire nation - a name
which is retained to the present time. In [Isa
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018.md), it is called the language of
Canaan (see the note on that place).

In the ears of the people that are on the wall - This conference took
place evidently near the city, and within hearing distance. Doubtless
the people of the city, feeling a curiosity to hear the message of the
Assyrian, crowded the walls. The Jewish ambassadors were apprehensive
that what was said by Rabshakeh would alienate their minds from
Hezekiah, and requested that the conference might be conducted in a
language which they could not understand.

[Isaiah 36:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 36:12</span></span>

Hath my master sent me to thy master and to thee? - To Hezekiah, and to
you alone. A part of my purpose is to address the people, to induce them
to leave Hezekiah, and to offer no resistance to the Assyrian.

To the men that sit on the wall ... - The meaning of this is, that the
inhabitants of the city, if they do not surrender, will be subjected to
the severest evils of famine. If they did not surrender, it was the
purpose of the Assyrian to lay siege to the city, and to reduce it. But
it was often the work of years to reduce and take a city. Nebuchadnezzar
spent thirteen years before Tyre, and the Greeks employed ten in
reducing ancient Troy. The sense here is, therefore, that unless the
people could be induced to surrender to Sennacherib, they would be
subjected to all the horrors of a siege, when they would be reduced to
the most deplorable state of necessity and want. The idea in the whole
verse is clearly expressed in the parallel place in [Ch2
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#011.md) : 'Doth not Hezekiah persuade
you to give over yourselves to die by famine and by thirst, saying, The
Lord our God shall deliver us out of the hand of the king of Assyria?'
In regard to the indelicacy of this passage, we may observe:

1\. That the Masoretes in the Hebrew text have so pointed the words
used, that in reading it the offensiveness would be considerably
avoided. It is common in the Hebrew Scriptures, when a word is used in
the text that is indelicate, to place another word in the margin, and
the vowel-points that belong to the word in the margin are applied to
the word in the text, and the word in the margin is thus commonly read.
In accordance with this custom among the Jews, it is evident that more
delicacy might have been observed by our translators in this, and in
some other places of the Scriptures.

2\. The customs, habits, and modes of expression of people in different
nations and times, differ. What appears indelicate at one time or in one
country, may not only be tolerated, but common in another. Many things
are esteemed indelicate among us which are not so in polite and refined
France; many expressions are so regarded now which were not in the time
when the Bible was translated into English. Many things may be to us
offensive which were not so to the Syrians, the Babylonians, and the
Jews; and many modes of expression which are common now, and consistent
with all our notions of refinement, may appear improper in some other
period of the world. There are many things in Shakespere, and in most of
the Old English writers, which cannot now be read without a blush. Yet
need I say that those expressions will be heard with unconcern in the
theater by those whose delicacy is most offended by some expression in
the Bible? There are things infinitely more offensive to delicacy in
Byron, and Moore, and even Burns, than there are in the Scriptures; and
yet are these not read without a murmur by those who make the loudest
complaints of the slightest departure from delicacy in the Bible?

3\. There is another remark to be made in regard to this. Isaiah is not
at all responsible for the indelicacy of the language here. He is simply
a historian. He did not say it; nor is he responsible for it. If there
is indelicacy in it, it is not in recording it, but in saying it; and
the responsibility is on Rabshakeh. If Isaiah undertook to make a record
of an important transaction, what right had he to abridge it, or
contract it, or to make it different from what it was?

4\. And again: it was of importance to give the true character of the
attack which was made on Jerusalem. The coming of Sennacherib was
attended with pride, and insolence, and blasphemy; and it was important
to state the true character of the transaction. and to record just what
was said and done. Hence, Isaiah, as a faithful historian, recorded the
coming of the Assyrians; the expressions of their haughtiness,
insolence, and pride; their vain boasting, and their reproaches of
Yahweh; and for the same reason he has recorded the gross and indelicate
language which they used to add to the trials of the Jews. Let him who
used the language, and not him who recorded it, bear the blame.

[Isaiah 36:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 36:13</span></span>

Then Rabshakeh stood - Indicating the posture of a man who intends to
speak to them at a distance.

And cried with a loud voice - So that those on the wall could bear.

The words of the king ... - (See the note at [Isa
36:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#004).md)

[Isaiah 36:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 36:14</span></span>

Let not Hezekiah deceive you - By inducing you to put your trust in
Yahweh or in himself; or with promises that you will be delivered.

Not be able to deliver you - In [Kg2
18:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#029.md), it is added, 'out of his hand;'
but the sense is substantially the same.

[Isaiah 36:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 36:15</span></span>

Make you trust in the Lord - Rabshakeh knew that Hezekiah was
professedly devoted to Yahweh, and that he would endeavor to induce the
people to trust in him. The Jews had now no other refuge but God, and as
long as they put their confidence there, even Rabshakeh knew that it was
hazardous to attempt to take and destroy their city. It was his policy,
therefore, first to endeavor to undermine their reliance on God, before
he could have any hope of success. The enemies of God's people cannot
succeed in their designs against them until they can unsettle their
confidence in Him.

[Isaiah 36:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 36:16</span></span>

Hearken not to Hezekiah - Do not listen to his entreaties to confide in
him, and in Yahweh; do not unite with him in endeavoring to make any
resistance or opposition to us.

Make an agreement with me by a present - The Septuagint read this, Ει ̓
βούλεσθε εὐλογηθῆναι Ei boulesthe eulogēthēnai - 'If you wish to be
blessed, or happy, come out to me.' The Hebrew is literally, 'Make with
me a blessing' (ברכה berâkâh). The idea of its being done 'by a
present,' is not in the Hebrew text. The word 'blessing' here probably
means the same as peace. 'Make peace with me,' perhaps because peace was
regarded as a blessing; and perhaps the word is used with a reference to
one of the significations of: ברך bārak, which is to kneel down, and
this word may refer to their kneeling down; that is, to their offering
allegiance to the king of Assyria. The former is, however, the more
probable sense, that the word means peace, because this was an evident
blessing, or would be the source of rich blessings to them. It is not,
however, used in this sense elsewhere in the Bible. The Chaldee renders
it, 'Make peace (שׁלמא shālâmâ') with me.'

And come out to me - Surrender yourselves to me. It is evident, however,
that he did not mean that be would then remove them from their city and
country, but he demanded a surrender, intending to come and remove them
at some other period [Isa 36:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#017.md).

And eat ye every one of his own vine - An emblem of safety, when every
man might be permitted to partake of the fruit of his own labor. All
that he now professed to desire was, that they should surrender the
city, and give up their means of defense, and then he would leave them
in security and quietness, until it should please his master to come and
remove them to a land as fertile as their own.

And drink ye every one - Another emblem of security and happiness. This
promise was made to induce them to surrender. On the one hand, he
threatened them with the dreadful evils of famine if they refused and
allowed their city to be besieged [Isa
36:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#012.md); and on the other, he promised
them, for a time at least, a quiet and secure residence in their own
city, and then a removal to a land not inferior to their own.

[Isaiah 36:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 36:17</span></span>

Until I come - These are the words of the king of Assyria delivered by
Rabshakeh. It was proposed that they should remain safely in Jerusalem
until Sennacherib should himself come and remove them to his own land.
He was now engaged in the siege of Lachish [Isa
36:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#002.md), and it is probable that he
purposed to take some other of the unsubdued towns in that part of
Palestine.

And take you away - It was common for conquerors in ancient times to
remove a vanquished people from their own country. They did this either
by sending them forth in colonies to people some unsettled region, or by
removing the body of them to the land of the conqueror. This was done
for various purposes. It was sometimes to make slaves of them; sometimes
for the purposes of triumph; but more commonly to secure them from
revolt. In this manner the ten tribes were removed from the kingdom of
Samaria; and thus also the Jews were carried to Babylon. Suetonius says
(chapter xxi.) of Augustus. that he removed the Suevi and the Sicambri
into Gaul, and stationed them on the Rhine. The same thing was also
practiced in Egypt, for the purpose of securing the people from revolt
[Gen 47:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#021.md).

A land like your own land - A fertile land, abounding in the same
productions as your own.

And wine - Palestine was celebrated for the vine. The idea is, that in
the land to which he would remove them, they should not want.

[Isaiah 36:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 36:18</span></span>

Hath any of the gods of the nations ... - This is said to show them the
impossibility, as he supposed, of being delivered from the arm of the
king of Assyria. He had conquered all before him, and not even the gods
of the nations had been able to rescue the lands where they were
worshipped from the hands of the victorious invader. He inferred,
therefore, that Yahweh, the God of Palestine, could not save their land.

[Isaiah 36:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 36:19</span></span>

Where are the gods of Hamath ... - In regard to these places, see the
notes at [Isa 10:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#009.md).

Where are the gods of Sepharvaim? - Sepharvaim was probably in
Mesopotamia. Ptolemy mentions a city there of the name of Sipphara, as
the most southern city of Mesopotamia, which is probably the same. It is
evident that it was in the vicinity of Hamath and Arphad, and these are
known to have been in Mesopotamia. When Shalmaneser carried Israel away
captive from Samaria, he sent colonies of people into Palestine in their
stead, among whom were the Sepharvaim [Kg2
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024.md), [Kg2
17:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#031.md).

And have they delivered Samaria - (See the note at [Isa
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#011).md). The author of the Books of
Chronicles expresses this in a more summary manner, and says, that
Rabshakeh joined Yahweh with the gods of the nations in the same
language of reproach: 'And he spake against the God of Jerusalem, as
against the gods of the people of the earth, which were the work of the
hands of man,' [Ch2 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#019.md).

[Isaiah 36:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 36:21</span></span>

But they held their peace - Hezekiah had commanded them not to answer.
They were simply to hear what Rabshakeh had to propose, and to report to
him, that he might decide on what course to pursue. It was a case also
in which it was every way proper that they should be silent. There was
so much insolence, self-confidence, blasphemy, the proposals were so
degrading, and the claims were so arrogant, that it was not proper that
they should enter into conference, or listen a moment to the terms
proposed. Their minds also were so horror-stricken with the language of
insolence and blasphemy, and their hearts so pained by the circumstances
of the city, that they would not feel like replying to him. There are
circumstances when it is proper to maintain a profound silence in the
presence of revilers and blasphemers, and when we should withdraw from
them, and go and spread the case before the Lord. This was done here
[Isa 37:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#001.md), and the result showed that
this was the course of wisdom.

[Isaiah 36:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 36:22</span></span>

With their clothes rent - This was a common mark of grief among the Jews
(see [Sa2 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#021.md); [Kg1
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#027.md); [Ezr
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#003.md); [Job
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#020.md); [Job
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#012.md); [Jer
36:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#024.md); and the notes at [Mat
26:65](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#065.md); notes at [Act
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#014).md). The causes of their griefs
were the insolence and arrogance of Rabshakeh; the proposal to surrender
the city; the threatening of the siege on the one hand, and of the
removal on the other, and the blasphemy of the name of their God, and
the reproach of the king. All these things filled their hearts with
grief, and they hastened to make report to Hezekiah.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 37](isa037.md)

</div>
