<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa010)  [Next](isa012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 11:0</span></span>

This chapter Isa. 11 is connected with the preceding as part of the same
general prophecy. In that, the prophet bad described the invasion of
Sennacherib, and had given the assurance that Jerusalem should be safe,
notwithstanding the threatened invasion. The general design of that
prophecy was "to console the people with the assurance of their
deliverance from impending calamity." But it was a general principle
with the Hebrew prophets, and particularly with Isaiah, when "any" event
tending to console the people, or to excite the nation's gratitude,
occurred, to east the eye forward to that great future deliverance which
they anticipated under the Messiah; see the Introduction, Section 7,
(3.) The contemplation of "present" objects dies away; the mind fixes
more intently on the glories of the Messiah's reign; the prophetic
vision ranges over the beauties of his person, and the glories of his
kingdom, until the prophet seems to have forgotten the subject with
which he commenced.

This was perfectly natural. It was by an obvious law of association in
the mind, by which the mention of deliverance, in any form, however
humble, would suggest that great deliverance on which the eye of every
Jew would rest. It hence follows, that wherever the prophet begins, he
usually ends with a glowing description of the reign of the Messiah.
However far from this central object of revealed religion he may
commenee, yet there is a tendency everywhere "to it" in the prophetic
writings; and the moment that, by any law of association, this object is
suggested, or the eye catches a glimpse of it, the former object sinks
out of view, and the person and reign of the Messiah becomes the sole
theme of the prophetic description. This is the case here. Isaiah had
commenced the prophecy with an account of the invasion of Sennacherib;
[Isa 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005), ... He had described the
deliverance from that danger; [Isa
10:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#033). The mention of this
deliverance directs his thoughts to that far greater deliverance which
would take place under the Messiah; and immediately Isa. 11 he commences
a glowing description of his coming and his reign. The "language" with
which he commenced the prophecy, is retained; the illustrations are
drawn from the subject "before" under consideration; but the description
pertains to the glories of the reign of the Messiah. The proof of this
will appear in the note at particular passages in the chapter. Its
general design is, to console the people by the prospect of a great
future deliverance under the Messiah, and by a prospect of the glosses
of his reign. He describes,

\(i\) The certainty that he would come, and his character; [Isa
11:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001).

\(ii\) The peace and prosperity which would follow from his advent; [Isa
11:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006).

\(iii\) The fact that, the Gentiles would he called to partake of the
privileges of his reign; [Isa 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010).

\(iv\) The restoration of the exiles to their native land under his
reign; [Isa 11:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011).

\(v\) The fact, that his reign would put a period to dissensions and
strifes between the contending nations of the Jews; [Isa
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#013); and

\(vi\) The universal prevalence of his religion, and the deliverance of
his people; [Isa 11:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#014).

[Isaiah 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 11:1</span></span>

And there shall come forth a rod - In the previous chapter, the prophet
had represented the Assyrian monarch and his army under the image of a
dense and flourishing forest, with all its glory and grandeur. In
opposition to this, he describes the illustrious personage who is the
subject of this chapter, under the image of a slender twig or shoot,
sprouting up from the root of a decayed and fallen tree. Between the
Assyrian, therefore, and the person who is the subject of this chapter,
there is a most striking and beautiful contrast. The one was at first
magnificent - like a vast spreading forest - yet should soon fall and
decay; the other was the little sprout of a decayed tree, which should
yet rise, expand and flourish.

A rod - (חטר choṭı̂r). This word occurs in but one other place; [Pro
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#003) : 'In the mouth of the foolish is
a "rod" of pride.' Here it means, evidently, a branch, a twig, a shoot,
such as starts up from the roots of a decayed tree, and is synonymous
with the word rendered "branch" (צמח tsemach) in [Isa
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002); see the Note on that place.

Out of the stem - (מגזע mı̂geza‛). This word occurs but three times in
the Old Testament; see [Job 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#008);
where it is rendered "stock:"

Though the root thereof wax old in the earth,

And the stock thereof die in the ground;

And in [Isa 40:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#024) : 'Yea, their
"stock" shall not take root in the earth.' It means, therefore, the
stock or stump of a tree that has been cut down - a stock, however,
which may not be quite dead, but where it may send up a branch or shoot
from its roots. It is beautifully applied to an ancient family that is
fallen into decay, yet where there may be a descendant that shall rise
and flourish; as a tree may fall and decay, but still there may be
vitality in the root, and it shall send up a tender germ or sprout.

Of Jesse - The father of David. It means, that he who is here spoken of
should be of the family of Jesse, or David. Though Jesse had died, and
though the ancient family of David would fall into decay, yet there
would arise from that family an illustrious descendant. The beauty of
this description is apparent, if we bear in recollection that, when the
Messiah was born, the ancient and much honored family of David had
fallen into decay; that the mother of Jesus, though pertaining to that
family, was poor, obscure, and unknown; and that, to all appearance, the
glory of the family had departed. Yet from that, as from a long-decayed
root in the ground, he should spring who would restore the family to
more than its ancient glory, and shed additional luster on the honored
name of Jesse.

And a branch - (נצר nêtser). A twig, branch, or shoot; a slip, scion, or
young sucker of a tree, that is selected for transplanting, and that
requires to be watched with special care. The word occurs but four
times; [Isa 60:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#021) : 'They shall
inherit the land forever, the branch of my planting;' [Isa
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#019) : 'But thou art cast out of thy
grave as an abominable branch;' [Dan
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#007). The word rendered branch in [Jer
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005); [Jer
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#015), is a different word in the
original (צמח tsemach), though meaning substantially the same thing. The
word "branch" is also used by our translators, in rendering several
other Hebrew words; "see" Taylor's "Concordance." Here the word is
synonymous with that which is rendered "rod" in the previous part of the
verse - a shoot, or twig, from the root of a decayed tree.

Out of his roots - As a shoot starts up from the roots of a decayed
tree. The Septuagint renders this, 'And a flower (ἄνθος anthos) shall
arise from the root.' The Chaldee, 'And a king shall proceed from the
sons of Jesse, and the Messiah from his sons' sons shall arise;' showing
conclusively that the ancient Jews referred this to the Messiah.

That this verse, and the subsequent parts of the chapter, refer to the
Messiah, may be argued from the following considerations:

\(1\) The fact that it is expressly applied to him in the New Testament.
Thus Paul, in [Rom 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#012), quotes the
tenth verse of this chapter as expressly applicable to the times of the
Messiah.

\(2\) The Chaldee Paraphrase shows, that this was the sense which the
ancient Jews put upon the passage. That paraphrase is of authority, only
to show that this was the sense which appeared to be the true one by the
ancient interpreters.

\(3\) The description in the chapter is not applicable to any other
personage than the Messiah. Grotius supposes that the passage refers to
Hezekiah; though, 'in a more sublime sense,' to the Messiah. Others have
referred it to Zerubbabel. But none of the things here related apply to
either, except the fact that they had a descent from the family of
Jesse; for neither of those families had fallen into the decay which the
prophet here describes.

\(4\) The peace, prosperity, harmony and order, referred to in the
subsequent portions of the chapter, are not descriptive of any portion
of the reign of Hezekiah.

\(5\) The terms and dcscriptions here accord with other portions of the
Scriptures, as applicable to the Messiah. Thus Jeremiah [Jer
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005); [Jer
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#015) describes the Messiah under the
similitude of a "branch, a germ or shoot - using, indeed, a different
Hebrew word, but retaining the same idea and image; compare [Zac
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#008). It accords also with the
description by Isaiah of the same personage in [Isa
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002); see the note on the place.

\(6\) I may add, that nearly all commentators have referred this to the
Messiah; and, perhaps, it would not be possible to find greater
unanimity in regard to the interpretation of any passage of Scripture
than on this.

[Isaiah 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 11:2</span></span>

And the Spirit of the Lord - The Spirit of Yahweh. Chaldee, 'And there
shall rest upon him the spirit of prophecy from before Yahweh.' In the
previous verse, the prophet had announced his origin and his birth. In
this, he proceeds to describe his extraordinary endowments, as eminently
holy, pure, and wise. There can be no doubt that reference is here had
to the Holy Spirit, the third person of the sacred Trinity, as
descending upon him in the fullness of his influences, and producing in
him perfect wisdom, knowledge, and the fear of the Lord. The Spirit of
Yahweh shall rest upon him - a Spirit producing wisdom, understanding,
counsel, might, etc. All these are lit the Scriptures traced to the
agency of the Holy Spirit; see [Co1
12:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008). The meaning here is, that the
Messiah should be endowed with these eminent prophetic gifts and
qualifications for his ministry by the agency of the Holy Spirit. It was
by that Spirit that the prophets had been inspired (see [Pe2
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#021); [Ti2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016)); and as the Messiah was to be a
prophet [Deu 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015), [Deu
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#018), there was a fitness that he
should be endowed in the same manner. If it be asked how one, who was
divine in his own nature, could be thus endowed by the aid of the
Spirit, the answer is, that he was also to be a man descended from the
honored line of David, and that as a man he might be furnished for his
work by the agency of the Holy Spirit. His human nature was kept pure;
his mind was made eminently wise; his heart always retained the fear and
love of God, and there is no absurdity in supposing that these
extraordinary endowments were to be traced to God. That he was thus
under the influence of the Holy Spirit, is abundantly taught in the New
Testament. Thus, in [Mat 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016), the
Holy Spirit is represented as descending on him at his baptism, In [Joh
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034), it is said, 'For he whom God
hath sent speaketh the words of God, for God giveth not the Spirit by
measure unto him;' compare [Col 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#019).

Shall rest upon him - That is, shall descend on him, and remain with
him. It shall not merely come upon him, but shall attend him
permanently; compare [Num 11:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#025).

The spirit of wisdom - The spirit producing wisdom, or making him wise.
Wisdom consists in the choice of the best means to secure the best ends.
This attribute is often given to the Messiah in the New Testament, and
was always evinced by him; compare [Co1
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030); [Eph
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#017); [Col
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003) : 'In whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge.'

And understanding - The difference between the words here rendered
wisdom and understanding is, that the former denotes wisdom properly;
and the latter, that judgment resulting from wisdom, by which we
distinguish things, or decide on their character.

The spirit of counsel - That by which be shall be qualified to "give"
counsel or advice; the qualification of a public instructor and guide;
see the note at [Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006).

And might - Strength, vigor, energy; that strength of heart and purpose
which will enable a man to meet difficulties, to encounter dangers, to
be bold, open, and fearless in the discharge of his duties. It is not
necessary to remark, that this characteristic was found in an eminent
degree in the Lord Jesus Christ.

Of knowledge - That is, the knowledge of the attributes and plans of
Yahweh; compare [Mat 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027) : 'Neither
knoweth any man the Father save the Son.' [Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018) : 'No man hath seen God at I any
time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he
hath declared him;' [Jo1 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020).

And of the fear of the Lord - The fear of Yahweh is often used to denote
piety in general, as consisting in a reverence for the divine commands,
and a dread of offending him; "that is," a desire to please him, which
is piety; compare [Job 28:28](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#028); [Psa
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#009); [Psa
111:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#010); [Pro
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007); [Pro
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#013); [Pro
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#033); [Pro
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#023). That this characteristic was
found eminently in the Lord Jesus, it is not necessary to attempt to
prove.

[Isaiah 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 11:3</span></span>

And shall make him of quick understanding - (והריחו vahărı̂ychô) The
Septuagint renders this, 'And the spirit of the fear of God shall fill
him.' The Chaldee, 'And the Lord shall draw him near to him in his
fear.' The Syriac, 'And he shall be resplendent (like the sun, or the
stars) in the fear of the Lord.' The Hebrew word used here is probably
derived from ריח rêyach, used only in Hiphil, "to smell;" and is kindred
with רוח rûach, "wind, breath," for fragrant substances "breathe out" an
odor. - "Gesenius." It then denotes "to take delight in smelling" [Exo
30:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#038); [Lev
26:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#031); and thence, by an easy
transition, to take delight in anything; [Amo
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#021). The reason is, that the objects
of smell are usually pleasant and agreeable; and especially such as were
the aromatics used in public worship. The sense here is, probably, that
he would take pleasure in the fear of Yahweh, that is, in piety, and in
devoting himself to his service. The interpretation given in our
translation, is that given by many expositors; though that above
suggested is probably the correct one. The word is used to denote
"pleasure" in a thing; it is not used anywhere, it is believed, to
denote a quick understanding; compare [Exo
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#021); [Phi
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018). The idea which is conveyed by
our translators is, probably, derived from "the discernment of the
quality" of objects by an acute sense of smell, and hence, they
interpreted the word to denote an acute discrimination of any objects.

And he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes - He sha 1 not judge
of things by their external appearance. or with partiality. This is
language which is applicable to a magistrate, and is spoken of the
Messiah as the descendant of David, and as sitting on his throne as a
ruler of his people. He who judges 'after the sight of his eyes,' does
it according to external appearances, showing favor to rank, to the
rich, and the great; or judging as things "appear" without a close and
careful inquiry into their true nature and bearings; compare [Joh
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#024) : 'Judge not according to the
appearance, but judge righteous judgment;' [Deu
1:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#016).

Neither reprove - יוכיח yôkiyach. This word means "to show, to prove; to
correct, reprove, convince; to reproach, or censure; to punish; to
judge, decide, etc." Here it is evidently used as synonymous with 'shall
he judge' in the former part of the parallelism - retaining the idea of
a just judge, who decides not according to the hearing of the ears, but
according to justice.

After the hearing of his ears - Not by plausible statements, and
ingenious defenses, but by weighing evidence, and by an impartial
examination of the true merits of the case. This belonged to the Lord
Jesus, because,

\(1\) He was never influenced by any undue regard to rank, honor, or
office. His opinions were always impartial; his judgments without bias
or favoritism.

\(2\) He was able to discern the true merits of every case. He knew what
was in man, saw the true state of the heart, and, therefore, was not
deceived or imposed upon as human judges are; see [Joh
2:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#024); compare [Rev
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#028); [Joh
6:64](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#064).

[Isaiah 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 11:4</span></span>

Shall he judge the poor - That is, he shall see that impartial justice
is done them; he shall not take part with the rich against the poor, but
shall show that he is the friend of justice. This is the quality of a
just and upright magistrate, and this character the Lord Jesus
everywhere evinced. He chose his disciples from among the poor; he
condescended to be their companion and friend; he provided for their
needs; and he pronounced their condition blessed; [Mat
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003). There may be a reference here to
the poor in spirit - the humble, the penitent; but the main idea is,
that he would not be influenced by any undue regard for the higher ranks
of life, but would be the friend and patron of the poor.

And reprove - הוכיח hô̂kiyach. And judge, decide, or argue for; that is,
he shall be their friend and their impartial judge; [Isa
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003).

With equity - With uprightness, or uncorrupted integrity.

For the meek of the earth - ענוי־ארץ ‛anevēy 'ārets. For the humble, the
lower class; referring to those who were usually passed by, or oppressed
by those in power.

And he shall smite the earth - By the "earth" here, or the land, is
meant evidently "the wicked," as the following member of the parallelism
shows. Perhaps it is intended to be implied, that the earth, when he
should come, would be eminently depraved; which was the fact. The
characteristic here is that of an upright judge or prince, who would
punish the wicked. To "smite" the earth, or the wicked, is expressive of
punishment; and this characteristic is elsewhere attributed to the
Messiah; see [Psa 2:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009); [Rev
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#027). The trait is that of a just,
upright, impartial exercise of power - such as would be manifested in
the defense of the poor and the innocent, and in the punishment of the
proud and the guilty.

With the rod of his mouth - The word שׁבט shêbet rendered here 'rod,'
denotes properly a stick, or staff; a rod for chastisement or correction
[Pro 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#013); [Pro
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#024); [Job
9:34](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#034); [Job
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#009); the staff, or scepter of a ruler
- as an emblem of office; a measuring rod; a spear, etc.; Note, [Isa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005). It is not elsewhere applied to
the mouth, though it is often used in other connections. It means that
which goes out of the mouth - a word command threatening decision; and
it is implied that it would go forth to pronounce sentence of
condemnation, and to punish. His word would be so just, impartial, and
authoritative, that the effect would be to overwhelm the wicked. In a
sense similar to this, Christ is said to have been seen by John, when
'out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword' [Rev
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016); that is, his commands and
decisions were so authoritative, and so certain in their execution, as
to be like a sharp sword; compare [Heb
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012); [Isa
49:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#002) : 'And he hath made my mouth like
a sharp sword.' The discriminating preaching, the pungent discourses,
the authoritative commands of the Lord Jesus, when on earth, showed, and
his judicial decisions in the day of judment will show, the manner of
the fulfillment of the prediction.

And with the breath of his lips - This is synonymous with the previous
member of the parallelism. 'The breath of his lips' means that which
goes forth from his lips - his doctrines, his commands, his decisions.

Shall he slay the wicked - That is, he shall condemn the wicked; or, he
shall sentence them to punishment. This is descriptive of a prince or
ruler, who by his commands and decisions effectually subdues and
punishes the wicked; that is, he does justice to all. Grotius interprets
this, 'by his prayers,' referring it to Hezekiah, and to the influence
of his prayers in destroying the Assyrians. The Chaldee Paraphrast
translates it, 'And by the word of his lips he shall slay the impious
Armillus.' By "Armillus," the Jews mean the last great enemy of their
nation, who would come after Gog and Magog and wage furious wars, and
who would slay the Messiah Ben Ephraim, whom the Jews expect, but who
would be himself slain by the rod of the Messiah Ben David, or the son
of David. - "Castell."

[Isaiah 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 11:5</span></span>

And righteousness shall be the gridle of his loins - The sense of this
verse is plain. He will always exhibit himself as a just and faithful
king. "The girdle of the loins" refers to the cincture, or band, with
which the ancients girded themselves. A part of their dress consisted of
an outward, loose, flowing robe. This robe it was necessary to gird up,
or to confine close to the body in active labor, or in running; and the
meaning of the figure used here is, probably, that the virtues of
righteousness and justice would adhere to him as closely and inseparably
as the garment does to the body to which it was bound. The figure of
representing the virtues as clothing, or describing them as parts of
dress with which we are invested, is common in the Scriptures:

I put on righteousness, and it clothes me;

My judgment was as a robe and a diadem.

[Job 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#014).

I will greatly rejoice in the Lord,

My soul shall be joyful in my God;

For he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation,

He hath covered me with the robe of righteousness,

As a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments,

And as a bride adorneth herself with her jewels.

[Isa 61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010).

Compare [Rev 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008), and Paul's
beautiful description in [Eph 6:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013).
In like manner, vice and wickedness are sometimes represented as so
closely adhering to a man as to be a part of his very clothing; [Psa
109:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#018) :

He clothed himself with cursing, like as with a garment.

Let it be unto him as the garment which covereth him,

And for a girdle, wherewith he is girded continually.

The Chaldee renders this, 'And the just shall be round about him on
every side - סחור סחור sehôr sehôr - and the servants of truth shall
come near to him.' The idea is, that he shall be distinguished for
justice and truth, and that a zeal for these shall make him strong and
active in executing the purposes of his reign. This closes the
description of the "personal" qualities of the Messiah. The account of
the effects of his reign follows in the subsequent verses.

[Isaiah 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 11:6</span></span>

The wolf also - In this, and the following verses, the prophet describes
the effect of his reign in producing peace and tranquility on the earth.
The description is highly poetical, and is one that is common in ancient
writings in describing a golden age. The two leading ideas are those of
"peace" and "security." The figure is taken from the condition of
animals of all descriptions living in a state of harmony, where those
which are by nature defenseless, and which are usually made the prey of
the strong, are suffered to live in security. By nature the wolf preys
upon the lamb, and the leopard upon the kid, and the adder is venomous,
and the bear, and the cow, and the lion, and the ox, cannot live
together. But if a state of things should arise, where all this
hostility would cease; where the wild animals would lay aside their
ferocity, and where the feeble and the gentle would be safe; where the
adder would cease to be venomous, and where all would be so mild and
harmless that a little child would be safe, and could lead even the most
ferocious animals, that state would represent the reign of the Messiah.
Under his dominion, such a change would be produced as that those who
were by nature violent, severe, and oppressive; those whose disposition
is illustrated by the ferocious and bloodthirsty propensities of the
lion and the leopard, and by the poison of the adder, would be changed
and subdued, and would be disposed to live in peace and harmony with
others. This is the "general" idea of the passage. We are not to cut the
interpretation to the quick, and to press the expressions to know what
particular class of people are represented by the lion, the bear, or the
adder. The "general" image that is before the prophet's mind is that of
peace and safety, "such as that would be" if a change were to be
produced in wild animals, making them tame, and peaceful, and harmless.

This description of a golden age is one that is common in Oriental
writers, where the wild beasts are represented as growing tame; where
serpents are harmless; and where all is plenty, peace, and happiness.
Thus Jones, in his commentary on Asiatic poetry, quotes from an Arabic
poet, "Ibn Onein," p. 380:

Justitia, a qua mansuetus fit lupus fame astrictus,

Esuriens, licet hinnulum candidurn videat -

'Justice, by which the ravening wolf, driven by hunger, becomes tame,
although he sees a white kid.' Thus, also, Ferdusi, a Persian poet:

Rerum Dominus, Mahmud, rex. potens,

Ad cujus aquam potum veniunt simul agnus et lupus -

'Mahmud, mighty king, lord of events, to whose fountain the lamb and the
wolf come to drink.' Thus Virgil, Eclogue iv. 21:

Ipsae lactae domum referent distenta capellae

Ubera; nec magnos metuent armenta leones -

Home their full udders, goats, unurged shall bear,

Nor shall the herd the lordly lion fear.

And immediately after:

Occidet et serpens, et fallax herba veneni

Occidet -

The snake, and poison's treacherous weed shall die.

Wrangham.

Again, Eclogue, v. 60:

Nec lupus insidias pecori, nec retia cervis

Ulla dolum mediantur: amat bonus otia Daphnis.

So also Horace, "Epod." 16:53, 54:

Nec yespertinus circumgemit ursus ovile,

Nec intumescit alta viperis humus.

See also "Claudian," Lib. ii. v. 25ff; and Theocritus, Idyl xxiv. 84, as
quoted by Gesenius and Rosenmuller.

These passages are beautiful, and highly poetic; but they do not equal
the beauty of the prophet. There is an exquisite sweetness in the
passage of Isaiah - in the picture which he has drawn - particularly in
the introduction of the security of the young child, which does not
occur in the quotations from the pagan poets.

That this passage is descriptive of the times of the Messiah, there can
be no doubt. It has been a question, to what particular part of his
reign the prophet has reference. Some have referred it to the time when
he came, and to the influence of his gospel in mitigating the ferocity
of his enemies, and ultimately disposing them to suffer Christens to
live with them - the infuriated enemies of the cross, under the emblem
of the wolf, the bear, the leopard, and the adder, becoming willing that
the Christian, under the emblem of the lamb, and the kid, should live
with them without molestation. This is the interpretation of Vitringa.
Others have referred it to the Millennium - as descriptive of a state of
happiness, peace, and universal security then. Others have referred it
to the second coming of the Messiah, as descriptive of a time when it is
supposed that he will reign personally on the earth, and when there
shall be universal security and peace, and when the nature of animals
shall be so far changed, that the ferocity of those which are wild and
ravenous shall cease, and they shall become harmless to the defenseless.
Without attempting to examine these opinions at length, we may, perhaps,
express the sense of the passage by the following observations:

\(1\) The eye of the prophet is fixed upon the reign of the Messiah, not
with reference to time, but with reference to the actual facts of that
reign. He saw the scene pass before his mind in vision (see the
Introduction, Section 7, 3: (4.) (5.), and it is not the nature of such
descriptions to mark the "time," but the order, the passing aspect of
the scene. "Under the reign of the Messiah," he saw that this would
occur. Looking down distant times, as on a beautiful landscape, he
perceived, under the mild reign of the Prince of peace, a state of
things which would be well represented by the wolf dwelling with the
lamb, the leopard crouching down with the kid, and a little child safe
in their midst.

\(2\) It was, "in fact," partially fulfilled in the earliest times of
the gospel, and has been everywhere. Under that gospel, the mad passions
of men have been subdued; their wild ferocious nature has been changed;
their love of conquest, and war, and blood taken away; and the change
has been such as would be beautifully symbolized by the change of the
disposition of the wolf and the leopard - suffering the innocent and the
harmless to live with them in peace.

\(3\) The scene will not be fully realized until the reign of the
Messiah shall be extended to all nations, and his gospel shall
everywhere accomplish its full effects. The vision of Isaiah here has
not yet received a full completion; nor will it until the earth shall be
full of the knowledge of the Lord, [Isa
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009). The mind is, therefore, still
directed onward. In future times, under the reign of the messiah, what
is here described shall occur - a state of security, and peace, and
happiness. Isaiah saw that splendid vision, as in a picture, pass before
the mind; the wars, and persecutions, and trials of the Messiah's
kingdom were, for a time at least, thrown into the back ground, or not
represented, and, in that future time, he saw what is here represented.
It has been partially fulfilled in all the changes which the Messiah's
reign has made in the natural ferocity and cruelty of men; in all the
peace which at any time the church has been permitted to enjoy; in all
the revolutions promoting human safety, welfare, and happiness, which
Christianity has produced. It is to receive the complete fulfillment -
τὸ ἀποτελέσμα to spotelesma - only in that future time when the gospel
shall be everywhere established on the earth. The essential thing,
therefore, in the prophecy, is the representation of the peace, safety,
and harmony which shall take place under the Messiah. So to speak, it
was a taking out, and causing to pass before the mind of the prophet,
all the circumstances of harmony, order, and love in his reign - as, in
a beautiful panoramic view of a landscape, the beauties of the whole
scene may be made to pass before the mind; the circumstances that might
even then, if surveyed closely, give pain, were hid from the view, or
lost in the loveliness of the whole scene.

\(4\) That it does not refer to any literal change in the nature of
animals, so that the ferocity of the untamed shall be wholly laid aside,
the disposition to prey on one another wholly cease, and the poisonous
nature of the adder be destroyed, seems to me to be evident:

\(a\) Because the whole description has a highly figurative and poetical
cast.

\(b\) Because such figurative expressions are common in all poetry, and
especially among the Orientals.

\(c\) Because it does not appear how the gospel has any tendency to
change the nature of the lion, the bear, or the serpent. It acts on men,
not on brutes; on human hearts, not on the organization of wild animals.

\(d\) Because such a state of things could not occur without a perpetual
miracle, changing the physical nature of the whole animal creation, The
lion, the wolf, the panther, are made to live on flesh. The whole
organization of their teeth and digestive powers is adapted to this, and
this alone. To fit them to live on vegetable food, would require a
change in their whole structure, and confound all the doctrines of
natural history. The adder is poisonous, and nothing but a miracle would
prevent the poisonous secretion, and make his bite innocuous. But where
is a promise of any such coutinued miracle as shall change the whole
structure of the animal creation, and make the physical world different
from what it is? It is indeed probable that wild animals and venomous
serpents will wholly retire before the progress of civilization and
Christianity, and that the earth may be inhabited everywhere with safety
- for such is the tendency of the advance of civilization - but this is
a very different thing from a change in the physical nature of the
animal creation.

The fair interpretation of this passage is, therefore, that revolutions
will be produced in the wild and evil passions of men - the only thing
with which the gospel has to do as great "as if" a change were produced
in, the animal creation, and the most ferocious and the most helpless
should dwell together. The wolf (זאב ze'êb) is a well-known animal, so
called from his yellow or golden color. The Hebrew name is formed by
changing the Hebrew letter ה (h) in the word זהב zâhâb, "gold," to the
Hebrew letter א - Bochart. The wolf, in the Scriptures, is described as
ravenous, fierce, cruel; and is the emblem of that which is wild,
ferocious, and savage among human beings; [Gen
49:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#027) : 'Benjamin shall ravin as a
wolf;' [Eze 22:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#027) : 'Her princes in
the midst thereof are like wolves ravening the prey;' [Mat
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015) : 'Beware of false prophets,
which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening
wolves;' [Joh 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#012); [Mat
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016); [Luk
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#003); [Act
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#029). The wolf is described as
sanguinary and bloody [Eze 22:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#027), and
as taking its prey by night, and as therefore particularly an object of
dread; [Jer 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#006) : 'A wolf of the
evenings shall spoil them; [Hab 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#008) :
'Their horses are more fierce than the evening wolves;' [Zep
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#003) : 'Her judges are evening wolves,
they gnaw not the bones until tomorrow.' in the Scriptures, the wolf is
constantly represented in contrast with the lamb; the one the emblem of
ferocity, the other of gentleness and innocence; [Mat
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016); [Luk
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#003). The pagan poets also regard the
wolf as an emblem of ferocity and cruelty:

Inde lupi cen

Raptores, atra in nebula quos improba ventris

Exegit caecos rabies, etc. -

(Virg. AEn. ii. 355ff.)

As hungry wolves, with raging appetite,

Scour through the fields, nor fear the stormy night -

Their whelps at home expect the promised food,

And long to temper their dry chaps in blood -

So rushed we forth at once.

Dryden.

Cervi, luporum praeda rapacium.

Hor. Car. Lib. iv. Ode iv. 50.

See a full illustration of the nature and habits of the wolf in Boehart,
"Hieroz." Part i. B. iii. ch. x. pp. 821-830. "Shall dwell." גר ger.
Shall sojourn, or abide. The word usually denotes a residence for a time
only, away from home, not a permanent dwelling. The idea here is, that
they shall remain peacefully together. The same image occurs in [Isa
65:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#025), in another form: 'The wolf and
the lamb shall feed together.'

The lamb - Everywhere the emblem of mildness, gentleness, and innocence;
and, therefore, applied often to the people of God, as mild,
inoffensive, and forbearing; [Joh
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015); [Luk
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#003); [Isa
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002). It is very often applied, by way
of eminence, to the Lord Jesus Christ; [Joh
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029); [Act
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#032); [Isa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#007); [Pe1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019); [Rev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006), [Rev
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008), [Rev
5:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#012); [Rev
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#016); [Rev
7:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009), [Rev
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#014), [Rev
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#017), "et al."

And the leopard - נמר nâmêr. The leopard, a well-known wild beast, was
regarded in Oriental countries as second in dignity only to the lion.
The Arabic writers say, 'He is second in rank to the lion, and, as there
is a natural hatred between them, victory is alternate between them.'
Hence, in the Scriptures, the lion and the leopard are often joined
together as animals of the same character and rank; [Sol
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008) :

From the lions' den,

From the mountains of the leopards.

See [Jer 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#006), and [Hos
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#007) :

Therefore I will be unto them as a lion,

As a leopard by the way will I observe them.

The leopard is distinguished for his spots; [Jer
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023) : 'Can the Ethiopian change his
skin, or the leopard his spots?' it has small white eyes, wide jaws,
sharp teeth, and is represented as extremely cruel to man. It was common
in Palestine, and was an object of great dread. It lurked for its prey
like the lion, and seized upon it suddenly [Jer
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#006); [Hos
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#007), and was particularly
distinguished for its velocity [Hab
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#008)), and is often referred to in the
classic writers as an emblem of fleetness. See "Bochart." The image used
here by Isaiah, that 'the leopard should lie down with the kid,' as an
emblem of peace and safety, occurs almost in the same form in the
Sybilline oracles, Lib. iii:

παρδάλιές τ ̓ ἐριφοίς ἅμα βοσκήσονται, -

parklies t' eriphois hama boskēsontai, -

'Leopards shall feed together with kids.' "See" Bochart, "Hieroz." Part
i. B. iii. ch. vii. pp. 786-791.

With the kid - The young of the goat; [Gen
37:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#021); [Lev
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#019); [Luk
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#029). Like the lamb, it was an emblem
of gentleness, mildness, and inoffensiveness.

And the calf - Another emblem of inoffensiveness and innocence.

And the young lion - The Hebrew word used here - כפיר kephı̂yr - denotes
one that is old enough to go abroad for prey. It is employed as
emblematic of dangerous enemies [Psa
34:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#002); [Psa
35:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#017); [Psa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#007); and also as emblematic of young
heroes, or defenders of a state; [Eze
38:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#015); [Nah
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#012).

And the fatling - The calf or other animal that was well fed, and that
would be therefore particularly an object of desire to a wild beast. The
beauty of the image is heightened, by the circumstance that now the
ravenous beast would live with that which usually excites its keenest
appetite, without attempting to injure it.

And a little child shall lead them - This is an especially beautiful
image introduced into the picture of peace and prosperity. Naturally,
the lion and the leopard are objects of dread to a young child. But
here, the state of peace and safety is represented as not only so entire
that the child might live with them in safety, but their natural
ferocity is so far subdued and tamed, that they could be led by him at
his will. The verisimilitude of the picture is increased by the
circumstance, that these wild beasts may be so far tamed as to become
subject to the will of a man, and even of a child.

[Isaiah 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 11:7</span></span>

And the cow and the bear shall feed - That is, together. Animals that by
nature do not dwell together, where by nature the one would be the prey
of the other, shall dwell together - animage of safety and peace.

And the lion shall eat straw like the ox - A representation of the
change that will take place under the reign of the Messiah in the
natural disposition of men, and in the aspect of society; as great as if
the lion were to lose his natural appetite for blood, and to live on the
usual food of the ox. This cannot be taken literally, for such an
interpretation would suppose a change in the physical organization of
the lion - of his appetites, his teeth, his digestive organs - a change
which it would be absurd to suppose will ever exist. It would in fact
make him a different being. And it is clear, therefore, that the whole
passage is to be interpreted in "moral" sense, as denoting great and
important changes in society, and in the hearts of men.

[Isaiah 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 11:8</span></span>

And the sucking child - An emblem here of harmlessness and innocence.
The change in the world, under the Messiah, shall be as great as if a
sucking infant should be able to play unharmed with a venomous serpent.

Shall play - Shall delight himself (שׁעשׁע shı̂‛ăsha‛) as children
usually engage in their sports; compare [Pro
8:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#030); [Psa
119:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#024).

On the hole of the asp - Over, or around the cavern, hole, or place of
retreat of the asp. He shall play over that place as safely as if the
nature of the asp was changed, and it had become innocuous. The Hebrew
word rendered here "asp" (פתן pethen) denotes the serpent usually called
the asp, whose poison is of such rapid operation that it kills almost
instantly: see [Job 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#014), [Job
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#016); [Psa
58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004); [Psa
91:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#013); [Deu
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#033). The word occurs in no other
places in the Old Testament. This serpent is small. It is found
particularly in Egypt, though also in other places; see the note at [Job
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#014). It is used here as the emblem
of the more sudden, malignant, and violent passions; and the idea is,
that under the Messiah a change would be performed in people of
malignant and deadly passions as signal "as if" the asp or adder were to
lose his venom, and become innocuous to a child.

And the weaned child - But still, a young and helpless child. The image
is varied, but the same idea is retained.

Shall put his hand - That is, he shall do it safely, or uninjured.

On the cockatrice' den - Margin, 'Adder's.' The word rendered here
"cockatrice" (צפעוני tsı̂p‛ônı̂y) occurs only in the fellowing places:
[Isa 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#029); [Isa
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#008); [Isa
59:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#005); [Pro
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#032); [Jer
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#017). In all these places, it is
rendered cockatrice, except in [Pro
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#032). The "cockatrice" was a fabulous
kind of serpent, supposed to be hatched from the egg of a cock. The
serpent here designated is, doubtless, a species of the "adder," more
venomous, perhaps, than the פתן pethen, but still belonging to the same
species. Bochart ("Hieroz." P. ii. lib. iii. ch. ix.) supposes that the
"basilisk" is intended - a species of serpent that, he says, was
supposed to poison even with its breath. The general idea is the same
here as above. It is in vain to attempt to spiritualize these
expressions, and to show that they refer to certain individuals, or that
the animals here designated refer to particular classes of the enemies
of the gospel. It is a mere poetic description, denoting great peace and
security; and all the changes in the mad, malignant, and envenomed
passions of people, that may be necessary to produce and perpetuate that
peace. Pope has versified this description in the following beautiful
manner:

The lambs with wolves shall graze the verdant mead,

And boys, in flowery bands, the tigers lead.

The steer and lion at one crib shall meet,

And harmless serpents lick the pilgrim's feet.

The smiling infant in his hand shall take

The crested basilisk, and speckled snake;

Pleased, the green luster of the scales survey,

And, with their forked tongue, shall innocently play.

Messiah.

[Isaiah 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 11:9</span></span>

They shall not hurt - That is, those who are designated above under the
emblems of the lion, the leopard, the bear, and the adder.

Nor destroy in all my holy mountain - Mount Zion; used here, as
elsewhere, to denote the seat of his reign on the earth, or his church;
the notes at [Isa 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008); [Isa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004). The disposition of people,
naturally ferocious and cruel, shall be changed so entirely, that the
causes of strife and contention shall cease. They shall be disposed to
do justice, and to promote each other's welfare everywhere.

For the earth - That is, in the times of the Messiah, It does not say
that it shall be immediate under his reign, but under his reign this
shall occur on the earth.

The knowledge of the Lord - This is put for piety, as the "fear" of the
Lord often is. The earth shall be full of a correct understanding of the
existence, perfections, plans, and claims of God; and shall be disposed
to yield to those claims - thus producing universal peace.

As the waters cover the sea - That is, the depths or the bottom of the
sea; compare [Hab 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#014). The vast
waters of the ocean cover all its depths, find their way into all the
caverns, flow into all the recesses on the shore - and thus shall the
knowledge of Yahweh spread like deep, flowing waters, until the earth
shall be pervaded and covered with it. It is evident that a time is here
spoken of which has not yet fully come, and the mind is still directed
onward, as was that of the prophet, to a future period when this shall
be accomplished. The prophecy has been indeed in part fulfilled.
Wherever the gospel has spread, its effect has been just that which is
predicted here. It has calmed and subdued the angry passions of people;
changed their feelings and their conduct; disposed them to peace; and
tended to mitigate national ferocity, to produce kindness to captives,
and to those who had been oppressed. It has mitigated laws that were
cruel and bloody; and has abolished customs, games, sports, and pastimes
that were ferocious and savage. It has often changed the bitter
persecutor, as it did Saul of Tarsus, to the mildness and gentleness of
a lamb; and it has spread an influence over nations tending to produce
humanity and benevolence. It has produced mildness, gentleness, and
love, in the domestic circle; changed a the cruel and lordly husband to
a companion and friend; and the character of the stern and inexorable
father to one of paternal kindness and peace. Wherever it has spread "in
truth" and not "in form merely," it has shed a mild, calming, and
subduing influence over the passions, laws, and customs of people. But
its effects have been but partially felt; and we are led, therefore, to
look forward to future times, when the prophecy shall be entirely
fulfilled, and the power of the gospel shall be felt in all nations.

[Isaiah 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 11:10</span></span>

And in that day - That future time when the reign of the Messiah shall
be established; Note, [Isa 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#002); [Isa
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001). The prophet, having described the
birth, and the personal characteristics of the great personage to whom
he referred, together with the peaceful effects of his reign, proceeds
to state the result of that reign in some other respects. The first is
[Isa 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010), that the "Gentiles" would
be brought under his reign; the second [Isa
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#014), that it would be attended with
the restoration of the scattered people of Judea; and the third [Isa
11:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015), that it would be followed by
the destruction of the enemies of the people of God.

There shall be a root of Jesse - There shall be a sprout, shoot, or
scion of the ancient and decayed family of Jesse; see the note at [Isa
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001). Chaldee, 'There shall be a son of
the sons of Jesse.' The word "root" here - שׁרשׁ shoresh - is evidently
used in the sense of a root that, is alive when the tree is dead; a root
that sends up a shoot or sprout; and is thus applied to him who should
proceed from the ancient and decayed family of Jesse; see [Isa
53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002). Thus in [Rev
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#005), the Messiah is called 'the" root"
of David,' and in [Rev 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016), 'the
root and the offspring of David.'

Which shall stand - There is reference here, doubtless, to the fact that
military ensigns were sometimes raised on mountains or towers which were
permanent, and which, therefore, could be rallying points to an arm or a
people. The idea is, that the root of Jesse, that is, the Messiah,
should be conspicuous, and that the nations should flee to him, and
rally around him as a people do around a military standard. Thus the
Saviour says [Joh 12:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#032) : 'And I, if I
be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me.'

For an ensign - For a standard, or a sign round which they shall rally.

Of the people - That is, as the parallelism shows, of the Gentiles.

To it shall the Gentiles seek - The pagan world shall look to it for
safety and deliverance. In the Scriptures, the world is spoken of as
divided into Jews and Gentiles. All who are not Jews come under this
appellation. This is a distinct prophecy, that other nations than the
Jews should be benefited by the work of the Messiah, and constitute a
part of his kingdom. This fact is often referred to by Isaiah, and
constitutes a very material feature in his prophecies; [Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001), [Isa
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#006); [Isa
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#022); [Isa
54:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#003); [Isa
60:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#003), [Isa
60:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#005), [Isa
60:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#011), [Isa
60:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#016); [Isa
61:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#006), [Isa
61:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#009); [Isa
62:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#002); [Isa
66:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#012), [Isa
66:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#019). The word "seek" here, is used
in the sense of seeking as a Deliverer, or a Saviour: they shall apply
to him for instruction, guidance, and salvation; or they shall apply to
him as a nation looks to its deliverer to protect it; compare [Isa
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#019); [Kg2
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#003); [Isa
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001).

And his rest - The rest, peace, and quietness, which he shall give. This
evidently includes all the rest or peace which he shall impart to those
who seek him. The word מנוחה menûchâh sometimes denotes "a resting
place," or a habitation [Num 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#033);
[Mic 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#010); [Psa
132:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#008); but it also denotes "a state of
rest, quietness;" [Rut 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#009); [Jer
45:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#003); [Psa
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#002); [Psa
95:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#011); [Deu
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#009); [Isa
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#012); [Isa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001). Here it evidently means the
latter. It may refer,

\(1\) To the peace which he gives to the conscience of the awaened and
troubled sinner [Mat 11:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028); or

\(2\) To the prosperity and peace which his reign shall produce.

Shall be glorious - Hebrew, 'Shall be glory.' That is, shall be full of
glory and honor. It shall be such as shall confer signal honor on his
reign. The Chaldee understands this of his place of residence, his
palace, or court. 'And the place of his abode shall be in glory.' The
Vulgate renders it, 'and his sepulchre shall be glorious.'

'By his rest, we are not to understand his grave - or his death - or his
Sabbath - or the rest he gives his people - but his place of rest, his
residence. There is no need of supplying a preposition before glory,
which is an abstract used for a concrete - glory, for glorious. The
church, Christ's home, shall be glorious from his presence, and the
accession of the Gentiles.' - (Alexander.) This is a beautiful
rendering; it is, moreover, consistent with the letter and spirit of the
passage. Some include both ideas.

[Isaiah 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 11:11</span></span>

And it shall come to pass - The prophet having, in the previous verse,
stated the effect of the reign of the Messiah on the Gentile world,
proceeds to state the result on the scattered Jews. Whether it is to be
a literal re-collecting of the scattered tribes to the land of their
fathers, has been a subject of debate, and is still so by expositors. We
may be able to determine what is the correct general interpretation
after the particular phrases have been examined.

In that day - That future time referred to in this whole prophecy. The
word "day" is often used to denote a long time - or the time during
which anything continues, as "the day" denotes all the hours until it is
terminated by night. So "day" denotes the time of a man's life - 'his
day;' or time in general; or the time when one shall be prominent, or be
the principal object at that time. Thus it is applied to the time of the
Messiah, as being the period of the world in which he will be the
prominent or distinguished object; [Joh
8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056) : 'Abraham rejoiced to see my
day;' [Luk 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#024) : 'So shall the Son
of man be in his day.' The expression here means, that somewhere in that
future time, when the Messiah should appear, or when the world should be
put under him as the Mediator, the event would take place which is here
predicted. As the word 'day' includes "all" the time of the Messiah, or
all his reign from his first to his second advent, it is not to be
supposed that the event would take place when he was personally on
earth. Isaiah saw it in vision, as "one" of the events which was to
occur after the 'root of Jesse' should stand as an ensign to the
nations.

That the Lord shall set his hand - That Yahweh shall undertake this, and
accomplish it. To set the hand to anything is to undertake to perform
it.

The second time - שׁנית shênı̂yth. This word properly means, as it is
here translated, the second time, implying that the prophet here speaks
of a deliverance which would resemble, in some respects, a "former"
deliverance or recovery. By the former recovery to which he here refers,
he cannot mean the deliverance from Egypt under Moses, for at that time
there was no recovery from scattered and distant nations. Besides, if
"that" was the reference by the former deliverance, then that mentioned
here as the 'second' deliverance would be that from the Babylonian
captivity. But on the return from that captivity, there was not a
collecting of the Jews from all the nations here specified. When the
Jews were led back to Judea under Nehemiah, there is no record of their
having been collected from 'Egypt,' or from 'Cush,' or from 'the islands
of the sea.' It is evident, therefore, I think, that by the former
deliverance to which the prophet here alludes - the deliverance which
was to precede that designated here as the "second" - he refers to the
return from the captivity of Babylon; and by the 'second,' to some still
more future recovery that should take place under the administration of
the Messiah. This is further confirmed from the fact that the whole
scope of the prophecy points to that future period.

To recover - Hebrew, 'To possess,' or, to obtain possession of - לקנות
lı̂qenôth. This word properly means to obtain possession of by purchasing
or buying anything. But it is also applied to any possession obtained of
an object by power, labor, skill, or by delivering from bondage or
captivity, and is thus synonymous with "redeem" or "deliver." Thus it is
applied to the deliverance of the people from Egypt; [Deu
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006); [Exo
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#016); [Psa
74:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#002). It means here, that Yahweh would
redeem, rescue, recover his people; but it does not specify the "mode"
in which it would be done. Any mode - either by collecting and rescuing
them from the regions into which they were scattered into one place, or
by a "spiritual" turning to him, wherever they might be, would meet the
force of this word. If in the lands where they were scattered, and where
they had wandered away from the true God, they were converted, and
should become again his people, the event would correspond with all that
is meant by the word here.

They would "then" be purchased, possessed, or recovered to himself, by
being delivered from their spiritual oppression. It is not necessary,
therefore, to resort to the interpretation that they should, in the
'second' deliverance, be restored literally to the land of Canaan. Any
argument for that doctrine from this passage must be drawn from the word
here used - 'recover' - and that "that" idea is not necessarily involved
in this word is abundantly manifest from its familiar use in the Old
Testament. All that that word implies, is, that they should "be
possessed" by God as his people; an idea which is fully met by the
supposition that the scattered Jews everywhere will be converted to the
Messiah, and thus become his true people. For this use of the word, see
[Gen 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#010); [Gen
47:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#022); [Gen
49:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#030); [Gen
50:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#013); [Jos
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032); [Sa2
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#003); [Lev
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#024); [Neh
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#008). In no place does it necessarily
imply the idea of "collecting or restoring" a scattered people to their
Own land.

The remnant of his people - That is, the remnant of the Jews, still
called his people. In all the predictions respecting the calamities that
should ever come upon them, the idea is "always" held out that the
nation would not be wholly extinguished; but that, however great the
national judgments, a remnant would still survive. This was particularly
true in regard to the fearful judgments which Moses denounced on the
nation if they should be disobedient, and which have been so strikingly
fulfilled; Deut. 28. As the result of those judgments, Moses does not
say that Yahweh would annihilate the nation, or extinguish their name,
but that the would be 'left few in number,' [Deu
28:62](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#062); that Yahweh would scatter them
among all people, from the one end of the earth even to the other, [Deu
28:64](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#064); and that among these nations
they should find no ease, neither should the sole of their foot have
rest.

In like manner it was predicted that they should be scattered
everywhere. 'I will scatter them also among the pagan, whom neither they
nor their fathers have known. I will deliver them to be removed into all
the kingdoms of the earth for their hurt, to be a reproach, a proverb, a
taunt, and a curse, in all places whither I will drive them;' [Jer
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#016); [Jer
24:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#009). 'I will execute judgments in
thee, and the whole remnant of thee will I scatter into all the winds;'
[Eze 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#010). 'I will also scatter them
among the nations, among the pagan, and disperse them in the countries;'
[Eze 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#015), 'I will sift the house of
Israel among the nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall
not the least grain fall upon the earth. They shall be wanderers among
the nations;' [Amo 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#009). 'I will make a
full end of the nations whither I have driven thee, but I will not make
a full end of thee, but correct thee in measure; yet will I not leave
thee wholly unpunished;' [Jer 46:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#028).

From all these, and from numerous other passages in the Old Testament,
it is evident that it was designed that the Jewish nation should never
be wholly destroyed; that though they were scattered among the nations,
they should still be a distinct people; that while other nations would
wholly cease to exist, yet that a "remnant" of the Jewish people, with
the national peculiarities and customs, would still survive. How
entirely this has been fulfilled, the remarkable history of the Jewish
people everywhere testifies. Their present condition on the earth, as a
people scattered in all nations, yet surviving; without a king and a
temple, yet preserving their national prejudices and peculiarities, is a
most striking fulfillment of the prophecy; see Keith's "Evidence of the
Fulfillment of Prophecy," pp. 64-82.

From Assyria - The name Assyria is commonly applied to that region of
country which lies between Media, Mesopotamia, Armenia, and Babylon, and
which is now called Kurdistan. The boundaries of the kingdom have often
varied, and, as a kingdom or separate nation, it has long since ceased
to exist. The name "Assyria" in Scripture is given,

\(1\) To ancient Assyria, lying east of the Tigris, and between Armenia,
Susiana, and Media - the region comprising mostly the modern kingdoms
and the pashalic of Mosul.

\(2\) Most generally the name Assyria means the "kingdom of Assyria,"
including Babylonia and Mesopotamia, and extending to the Euphrates;
[Isa 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#020); [Isa
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007).

\(3\) After the overthrow of the Assyrian empire, the name continued to
be applied to those countries which were formerly held under its
dominion - including Babylonia [Kg2
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#029); [Jer
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#018), Persia [Ezr
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#022), and Syria. - "Robinson; Calmet."

It is in this place applied to that extensive region, and means that the
Jews scattered there - of whom there have always been many - shall be
brought under the dominion of the Messiah. If the Nestorian Christians
in the mountains of Kurdistan are the descendants of the lost ten tribes
(see the note at [Isa 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012)), then the
reference here is, doubtless, to them. There are, however, other Jews
there, as there always has been; "see" Dr. Grant's work on 'The
Nestorians, or, the Lost Ten tribes,' New York, 1841.

And from Egypt - The well-known country in Africa, watered by the Nile.
In all ages, there have been many Jews there. Its vicinity to Palestine;
its remarkable fertility, and the advantages which it offered to them,
attracted many Jews there; and at some periods they have composed no
inconsiderable part of the population. It was in this country that the
translation of the Hebrew Scriptures into the Greek language, called the
Septuagint, was made, for the use of the numerous Jews residing there.
At present they are numerous there, though the exact number is unknown:
During the reign of Bonaparte, an estimate was made, for his
information, of the number of Jews in the world, and, in that estimate,
1,000,000 was assigned to the Turkish empire - probably about a third
part of all on the earth. A large portion of this number is in Egypt.

And from Pathros - This was one of the three ancient divisions of Egypt.
It was the same as Upper Egypt, or the southern part of Egypt, the
"Coptic" portion of that country. The inhabitants of that country are
called "Pathrusini." To that place many of the Jews retired in the
calamities of the nation, notwithstanding the remonstrances of Isaiah;
[Jer 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#001), [Jer
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#015). For this act God severely
threatened them; see [Jer 44:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#026).

And from Cush - The Chaldee reads this, 'And from Judea.' The Syriac,
'And from Ethiopia.' This country denotes, properly, the regions settled
by the descendants of Cush, the oldest son of Ham; [Gen
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#008). Commentators have differed very
much about the region understood in the Scriptures by the name Cush.
Bochart supposes that by it the southern parts of Arabia are always
meant. Gesenius supposes, that by Cush is always meant a region in
Africa. Michaelis supposes that by Cush the southern part of Arabia and
the African Ethiopia were both intended. In the Scriptures, however, it
is evident that the name is given to different regions.

\(1\) It means what may be called the "Oriental Cush," including the
region of the ancient Susiana, and bounded on the south by the Persian
Gulf, and on the west and southwest by the Tigris, which separates it
from the Arabian Irak. This province has the name Chusastan, or
Chusistan, and was, probably, the ancient "Cush" mentioned in [Zep
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#010) : From beyond the rivers of
Ethiopia, (Hebrew, Cush), my suppliants, even the daughter of my
dispersed, shall bring mine offering.' The principal rivers there were
the Ulai, the Kur, the Chobar, and the Choaspes. The same place is
referred to in [Kg2 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024), where the
king of Assyria is said to have 'brought men from Babylon, and from
"Cuthah," and from Ava,' where the word "Cuthah" evidently refers to
Cush, the Armenian mode of pronouncing Cush by exchanging the letters
"Shin" for "Tav," as they always do in pronouncing "Ashur," calling it
"Athur, etc.;" see the Chaldee Paraphrase, and the Syriac version,
"passim."

\(2\) "Cush," as employed by the Hebrews, "usually" denoted the southern
parts of Arabia, and was situated chiefly along the coast of the Red
Sea, since there are several passages of Scripture where the name "Cush"
occurs which can be applied to no other country, and least of all to the
African Cush or Ethiopia; see [Num
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#001), where the woman whom Moses
married is called an 'Ethiopian,' (Hebrew, 'Cushite'). It can be
scarcely supposed that she came from the distant regions of Ethiopia in
Africa, but it is evident that she came from some part of Arabia. Also
[Hab 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#007), says:

I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction;

And the curtains of the land of Midian did tremble.

From which it is evident, that "Cushan" and "Midian" were countries
adjacent; that is, in the southern part of Arabia; compare [Ch2
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#016); [Ch2
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#009).

\(3\) The word "Cush" is applied to Ethiopia, or the country south of
Egypt, now called Abyssinia. This country comprehended not only Ethiopia
above Syene and the cataracts, but likewise Thebais, or Upper Egypt;
compare [Jer 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023); [Dan
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#003); [Eze
30:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#004); [Isa
44:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#014); see the notes at [Isa
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001). To which of these regions the
prophet here refers, it is not easy to determine. As the other countries
mentioned here, however, are chiefly in the East, it is most natural to
suppose that he refers to "the Oriental Cush" mentioned under the first
division. The general idea of the prophet is plain, that the scattered
Jews should be gathered back to God.

And from Elam - This was the name of a country originally possessed by
the Persians, and so called from the son of Shem of the same name; [Gen
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001). It was the southern part of
Persia, situated on the Persian Gulf, and included, probably, the whole
of the region now called Susiana or Chusistan. The city Susa or Shushan
was in it; [Dan 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002).

And from Shinar - This was a part of Babylonia, and is supposed to be
the plain lying between the Tigris and the Euphrates; [Gen
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010); [Gen
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#002); [Dan
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#002); [Zac
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#011). It was the region elsewhere
called Mesopotamia. The Septuagint renders it, 'And from Babylon;' and
it is remarkable that Luke [Act 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009),
where he has reference, probably, to the place, speaks of 'the dwellers
in Mesopotamia' as among those who heard 'the wonderful works of God' in
their own language. It was in this plain that the tower of Babel was
commenced; Gen. 10.

And from Hamath - See the note at [Isa
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#009). "And from the islands of the
sea." This expression probably denotes the islands situated in the
Mediterranean, a part of which were known to the Hebrews. But, as
geography was imperfectly known, the phrase came to denote the regions
lying west of the land of Canaan; the unknown countries which were
situated in that sea, or west of it, and thus included the countries
lying around the Mediterranean. The word translated, 'islands' here
(איים 'ı̂yı̂ym) means properly "habitable dry land," in opposition to
water; [Isa 42:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#013) : 'I will make the
rivers "dry land;"' where to translate it "islands" would make nonsense.
Hence, it means also land adjacent to water, either washed by it, or
surrounded by it, that is, a maritime country, coast, or island. Thus it
means "coast" when applied to Ashdod [Isa
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#006); to Tyre [Isa
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#002), [Isa
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#006); to Peloponnesus or Greece
(called Chittim, [Eze 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#006)). It means
an "island" when applied to Caphtor or Crete [Jer
47:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#004); [Amo
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007). The word was commonly used by the
Hebrews to denote distant regions beyond the sea, whether coasts or
islands, and especially the maritime countries of the West, to them
imperfectly known through the voyages of the Pheonicians; see the note
at [Isa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001); compare [Isa
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#015); [Isa
40:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#015); [Isa
42:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#004), [Isa
42:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#010), [Isa
42:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#012); [Isa
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#005).

[Isaiah 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 11:12</span></span>

And he shall set up an ensign - See [Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010). The Messiah shall stand in view
of the nations, as a standard is erected by a military leader. An ensign
or standard was usually lifted up on the mountains or on some elevated
place (compare [Isa 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#003)); and the
meaning here is, that the Messiah would be the conspicuous object around
which the nations would rally.

And shall assemble - This word, אסף 'âsaph, properly means, to gather,
collect, to assemble together, as fruits are collected for preservation
[Exo 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#010); to collect a people
together [Num 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#016); to gather or
collect gold; [Kg2 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#004). It may also
mean to gather or collect anything for destruction [Jer
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#013); and hence, to take out of the
way, to kill, destroy; [Sa1 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#006).
Here, it is evidently synonymous with the word 'recover' in [Isa
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011). It cannot be proved that it
means that God will "literally" re-assemble all the scattered Jews, for
the "collecting them," or regathering them to himself "as his people,"
though they may be still scattered among the nations, is all that the
words necessarily imply. Thus when the word is used, as it is
repeatedly, to denote the death of the patriarchs, where it is said they
were 'gathered to their fathers,' it does not mean that they were buried
in the same grave, or the same vicinity, but that they were united to
them in death; they partook of the same lot; they all alike went down to
the dead; [Gen 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#008); [Gen
35:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#029); [Gen
49:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#029); [Num
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#024); [Deu
32:50](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#050).

The outcasts of Israel - The name 'Israel,' applied at first to all the
descendants of Jacob, came at length to denote the 'kingdom of Israel,'
or of the 'ten tribes,' or of 'Ephraim,' as the tribes which revolted
under Jeroboam were called. In this sense it is used in the Scriptures
after the time of Jeroboam, and thus it acquired a technical
signification, distinguishing it from Judah.

The dispersed of Judah - 'Judah,' also, though often used in a general
sense to denote the Jews as such, without reference to the distinction
in tribes, is also used technically to denote the kingdom of Judah, as
distinguished from the kingdom of Israel. The tribe of Judah was much
larger than Benjamin, and the name of the latter was lost in the former.
A considerable part of the ten tribes returned again to their own land,
with those of the tribes of Judah and Benjamin; a portion remained still
in the countries of the East, and were intermingled with the other Jews
who remained there. All distinctions of the tribes were gradually
abolished, and there is no reason to think that the 'ten tribes,' here
referred to by the name 'Israel,' have now anywhere a distinct and
separate existence; see this point fully proved in a review of Dr.
Grant's work on '" The Nestorians, or, the Lost Ten tribes,"' in the
"Bib. Rep." for October 1841, and January 1842, by Prof. Robinson. The
literal meaning here then would be, that he would gather the remains of
those scattered people, whether pertaining to 'Israel' or 'Judah,' from
the regions where they were dispersed.

It does not necessarily mean that they would be regathered in their
distinctive capacity as 'Israel' and 'Judah,' or that the distinction
would be still preserved, but that the people of God would be gathered
together, and that all sources of alienation and discord would cease.
The meaning, probably, is, that under the Messiah all the remains of
that scattered people, in all parts of the earth, whether originally
pertaining to 'Israel' or 'Judah,' should be collected into one
spiritual kingdom, constituting one happy and harmonious people. To the
fulfillment of this, it is not necessary to be supposed that they would
be literally gathered into one place, or that they would be restored to
their own land, or that they would be preserved as a distinct and
separate community. The leading idea is, that the Messiah would set up a
glorious kingdom in which all causes of alienation and discord would
cease.

From the four corners of the earth - Chaldee, 'From the four winds of
the earth.' The Septuagint renders it, 'From the four wings (πτερύγων
pterugōn) of the earth.' It means, that they should be collected to God
from each of the four parts of the earth - the east, the west, the
north, and the south. The Hebrew word rendered here 'corners,' means
properly "wings." It is applied, however, to the corner, or border of a
thing, as a skirt, or mantle [Sa1
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#005), [Sa1
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#011); [Deu
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#001); and hence, to the boundaries, or
corners of the earth, because the earth seems to have been represented
as a quadrangular plain; [Eze 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#002).

[Isaiah 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 11:13</span></span>

The envy also - The word "envy" here, is used in the sense of "hatred,"
or the hatred which arose from the "ambition" of Ephraim, and from the
"prosperity" of Judah. Ephraim here, is the name for the kingdom of
Israel, or the ten tribes. The reasons of their envy and enmity toward
Judah, all arising from their ambition, were the following:

\(1\) This tribe, in connection with those which were allied to it,
constituted a very large and flourishing part of the Jewish nation. They
were, therefore, envious of any other tribe that claimed any
superiority, and particularly jealous of Judah.

\(2\) they occupied a central and commanding position in Judea, and
naturally claimed the pre-eminence over the tribes on the north.

\(3\) they had been formerly highly favored by the abode of the ark and
the tabernacle among them, and, on that account, claimed to be the
natural "head" of the nation; [Jos
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001), [Jos
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#008), [Jos
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#010); [Jdg
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#031); [Jdg
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#019); [Sa1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#003), [Sa1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#024).

\(4\) when Saul was king, though he was of the tribe of Benjamin [Sa1
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#002), they submitted peaceably to his
reign, because the Benjaminites were in alliance with them, and adjacent
to them. But when Saul died, and the kingdom passed into the hands of
David, of the tribe of Judah, their natural rival, thus exalting that
powerful tribe, they became dissatisfied and restless. David kept the
nation united; but on his death, they threw off the yoke of his
successor, and became a separate kingdom. From this time, their
animosities and strifes became an importer and painful part of the
history of the Jewish nation, until the kingdom of Ephraim was removed.
The language here is evidently figurative, and means, that in the time
here referred to under the messiah, the causes of animosity, before
existing, would cease; that contentions between those who are, by
nature, brethren, and who ought to evince the spirit of brethren, would
come to an end; and that those animosities and strike would be succeeded
by a state of amity and peace. When the scattered Jews shall be
regathered to God under the Messiah, all the contentions among them
shall cease, and they shall be united under one king and prince. All the
causes of contention which had so long existed, and which had produced
such disastrous results, would come to an end. The strifes and
contentions of these two kingdoms, once belonging to the same nation,
and descended from the same ancestors - the painful and protracted
"family broil" - was the object that most prominently attracted the
attention, then, of the prophets of God. The most happy idea of future
blessedness which was presented to the mind of the prophet, was that
period when all this should cease, and when, under the Messiah, all
should be harmony and love.

And the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off - That is, Judah shall be
safe; the people of God shall be delivered from their enemies -
referring to the future period under the Messiah, when the church should
be universally prosperous.

Judah shall not vex Ephraim - Shall not oppress, disturb, or oppose.
There shall be peace between them. The church prospers only when
contentions and strifes cease; when Christians lay aside their
animosities, and love as brethren, and are "united" in the great work of
spreading the gospel around the world. That time will yet come. When
that time comes, the kingdom of the Son of God will be established.
"Until" that time, it will be in vain that the effort is made to bring
the world to the knowledge of the truth; or if not wholly in vain, the
efforts of Christians who seek the conversion of the world will be
retarded, embarrassed, and greatly enfeebled. How devoutly, therefore,
should every friend of the Redeemer pray, that all causes of strife may
cease, and that his people may be united, as the heart of one man, in
the effort to bring the whole world to the knowledge of the truth.

[Isaiah 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 11:14</span></span>

But they shall fly - The design of this verse is, to show the rapid and
certain spiritual conquests which would result from the conversion of
the scattered Jewish people. The Jews understood this literally, as
referring to the conquests over their enemies. But if the exposition
which has been given of this chapter thus far is correct, the passage is
to be interpreted as a figurative description of the triumph of the
people of God under the Messiah. The "time" to which it refers, is that
which shall succeed the conversion of the scattered Jews. The "effect"
of the gospel is represented under an image which, to Jews, would be
most striking - that of conquest over the neighboring nations with whom
they had been continually at war. Philistia, Edom, Moab, and Ammon, had
been always the enemies of Judea; and to the Jews, no figurative
representation could be more striking than that, "after" the union of
Judah and Ephraim, they should proceed in rapid and certain conquest to
subdue their ancient and formidable enemies. The meaning of the phrase
'they shall fly,' is, they shall hasten with a rapid motion, like a
bird. They shall do it quickly, without delay, as an eagle hastens to
its prey. It indicates their "suddenly" engaging in this, and the
celerity and certainty of their movements. As the united powers of Judah
and Ephraim would naturally make a sudden descent on Philistia, so the
Jews, united under the Messiah, would go to the rapid and certain
conversion of those who had been the enemies of the cross.

Upon the shoulders - בכתף bekâthêph. There has been a great variety in
the interpretation of this passage; and it is evident that our
translation does not express a very clear idea. The Septuagint renders
it, 'And they shall fly in the ships of foreigners, and they shall
plunder the sea.' The Chaldee, 'And they shall be joined with one
shoulder, that is, they shall be "united" shoulder to shoulder, that
they may smite the Philistines who are in the west.' The Syriac, 'But
they shall "plow" the Philistines;' that is, they shall subdue them, and
cultivate their land. The word rendered, 'shoulder,' means, properly,
"the shoulder," as of a man or beast [Isa
46:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#007); [Isa
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#022); [Num
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#009); [Job
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#022); [Eze
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#004); the undersetters or shoulders to
support the lavers [Kg1 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#030); a corner
or side of a building [Exo 38:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#014); and
is applied to "the side" of anything, as the side of a building, the
border of a country, a city, or sea ([Kg1
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#008); [Kg1
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#039); [Num
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#011); [Jos
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#008), [Jos
15:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#010), ...) Here it seems to mean,
not that the Jews would be borne "upon" the shoulder of the Philistines,
but that they would make a sudden and rapid descent "upon their
borders:" they would invade their territory, and carry their conquest
'toward the west.' The construction is, therefore, 'they shall make a
rapid descent on the borders of the Philistines,' or, in other words,
the spiritual conquest over the enemies of the church of God shall be
certain and rapid.

The Philistines - Philistia was situated on the southwestern side of the
land of Canaan. The Philistines were therefore adjacent to the Jews, and
were often involved in war with them. They were among the most constant
and formidable enemies which the Jews had.

Toward the west - This does not mean that they should be borne on the
shoulders of the Philistines to the west; but that they should make a
sudden and rapid descent on the Philistines, who "were" west of them. It
stands opposed to the nations immediately mentioned as lying "east" of
the land of Judea.

They shall spoil - They shall plunder; or, they shall take them, and
their towns and property, as the spoil of war. That is, they shall
vanquish them, and make them subject to them. According to the
interpretation which has been pursued in this chapter, it means, that
the enemies of God shall be subdued, and brought to the knowledge of the
truth, in a rapid and decisive manner. The language is that which is
drawn from the idea of conquest; the idea is that of a rapid and
far-spreading conversion among the nations, to the gospel.

Them of the east - Hebrew, 'The sons of the east; that is, the nations
east of Judea.

They shall lay their hand - Hebrew, 'Edom and Moab shall be the laying
on of their hand;' that is, they shall lay their hand on those nations
for conquest and spoil; they shall subdue them.

Edom - Idumea; the country settled by the descendants of Esau - a
country that was south of Judea, and extended from the Dead Sea to the
Elanitic gulf of the Red Sea. They were an independent people until the
time of David, and were reduced to subjection by him, but they afterward
revolted and became again independent. They were often engaged in wars
with the Jews, and their conquest was an object that was deemed by the
Jews to be very desirable (see the notes at Isa. 34.)

And Moab - The country of the Moabites was east of the river Jordan, on
both sides of the river Arnon, and adjoining the Dead Sea. Their capital
was on the river Arnon. They also were often involved in wars with the
Jews (compare [Deu 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#003); see the notes
at [Isa 15:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001); [Isa
16:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001).)

And the children of Ammon - The Ammonites, the descendants of Ammon, a
son of Lot. Their country lay southeast of Judea [Deu
2:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#019). Their territory extended from
the river Arnon north to the river Jabbok, and from the Jordan far into
Arabia. It was directly north of Moab, They were often engaged, in
alliance with the Moabites, in waging war against the Jews.

Shall obey them - Hebrew, 'Shall be their obedience.' All these
descriptions are similar. They are not to be interpreted literally, but
are designed to denote the rapid triumphs of the truth of God after the
conversion of the Jews; and the sense is, that the conquests of the
gospel will be as sudden, as great, and as striking over its enemies, as
would have been the complete subjugation of Philistia, Moab, Ammon, and
Edom, to the victorious army of the Jews.

[Isaiah 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 11:15</span></span>

And the Lord - The prophet goes on with the description of the effect
which shall follow the return of the scattered Jews to God. The language
is figurative, and is here drawn from that which was the great
storehouse of all the imagery of the Jews - the deliverance of their
fathers from the bondage of Egypt. The general sense is, that all the
embarrassments which would tend to impede them would be removed; and
that God would make their return as easy and as safe, as would have been
the journey of their fathers to the land of Canaan, if the 'Egyptian
Sea' had been removed entirely, and if the 'river,' with its 'seven
streams,' by nature so formidable a barrier, had been dried up, and a
path had been made to occupy its former place. Figuratively, the passage
means, that all the obstructions to the peace and safety of the people
of God would be removed, and that their way would be easy and safe.

The tongue - The Hebrews applied the word 'tongue' to anything that
resembled a tongue - to a bar of gold [Jos
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#021), [Jos
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#024); to a flame of fire (note, [Isa
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#024); compare [Act
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#003)); to a bay of the sea, or a gulf,
from its shape [Jos 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#005); [Jos
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#019). So we speak of a tongue of
land. When it is said that the Lord would 'utterly destroy' it, it is
equivalent to saying that it would be entirely dried up; that is, so as
to present no obstruction.

Of the Egyptian Sea - Some interpreters, among whom is Vitringa, have
supposed that by the tongue of the Egyptian Sea mentioned here, is meant
the river Nile, which flows into the Mediterranean, here called, as they
suppose, the Egyptian Sea. Vitringa observes that the Nile, before it
flows into the Mediterranean, is divided into two streams or rivers,
which form the Delta or the triangular territory lying between these two
rivers, and bounded on the north by the Mediterranean. The eastern
branch of the Nile being the largest, he supposes is called the tongue
or "bay" of the Egyptian Sea. But to this interpretation there are
obvious objections:

\(1\) It is not known that the Mediterranean is elsewhere called the
Egyptian Sea.

\(2\) This whole description pertains to the departure of the children
of Israel from Egypt The imagery is all drawn from that. But, in their
departure, the Nile constituted no obstruction. Their place of
residence, in Goshen, was east of the Nile. All the obstruction that
they met with, from any sea or river, was from the Red Sea.

\(3\) The Red Sea is divided, at its northern extremity, into two bays,
or forks, which may be called the "tongues" of the sea, and across one
of which the Israelites passed in going from Egypt. Of these branches,
the western one was called the Heroopolite branch, and the eastern, the
Elanitic branch. It was across the western branch that they passed. When
it is said that Yahweh would 'destroy' this, it means that he would dry
it up so that it would be no obstruction; in other words, he would take
the most formidable obstructions to the progress of his people out of
the way.

And with his mighty wind - With a strong and powerful wind. Michaelis
supposes that by this is meant a tempest. But there is, more probably, a
reference to a strong and steady hot wind, such as blows over burning
deserts, and such as would have a tendency to dry up even mighty waters.
The illustration is, probably, derived from the fact that a strong east
wind was employed to make a way through the Red Sea [Exo
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021). If the allusion here be rather
to a mighty wind or a tempest, than to one that is hot, and that tends
to evaporate the waters even of the rivers, then it means that the wind
would be so mighty as to part the waters, and make a path through the
river, as was done in the Red Sea and at the Jordan. The "idea" is, that
God would remove the obstructions to the rapid and complete deliverance
and conversion of people.

Shall he shake his hand - This is to indicate that the mighty wind will
be sent from God, and that it is designed to effect this passage through
the rivers. The shaking of the band, in the Scripture, is usually an
indication of anger, or of strong and settled purpose (see [Isa
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#032); [Isa
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#002); [Zac
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#009)).

Over the river - Many have understood this as referring to the Nile; but
two considerations show that the Euphrates is rather intended:

\(1\) The term 'the river' (הנהר hanâhâr) is usually applied to the
Euphrates, called the river, by way of eminence; and when the term is
used without any qualification, that river is commonly intended (see the
notes at [Isa 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#020); [Isa
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007); compare [Gen
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#021); [Gen
36:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#037); [Kg1
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#021); [Ezr
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#010), [Ezr
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#016); [Ezr
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#003)).

\(2\) the effect of this smiting of the river is said to be [Isa
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#016) that there would be a highway
for the people "from Assyria," which could be caused only by removing
the obstruction which is produced by the Euphrates lying between Judea
and some parts of Assyria.

And shall smite it - That is to dry it up, or to make it pasable.

In the seven streams - The word 'streams' here (נחלים nechâlı̂ym) denotes
streams of much less dimensions than a river. It is applied to a
"valley" with a brook running through it [Gen
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#019); and then to any small brook or
stream, or rivulet [Gen 32:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#024); [Psa
74:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#015). Here it denotes brooks or
streams that would be fordable. When it is said that the river should be
smitten 'in the seven streams,' the Hebrew does not mean that it was
"already" divided into seven streams, and that God would smite "them,"
but it means, that God would smite it "into" seven streams or rivulets;
that is, into "many" such rivulets (for the number seven is often used
to denote a large indefinite number, Note, [Isa
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001)); and the expression denotes, that
though the river presented an obstruction, in its natural size, which
they could not overcome, yet God would make new channels for it, and
scatter it into innumerable rivulets or small streams, so that they
could pass ever it dry-shod.

A remarkable illustration of this occurs in Herodotus (i. 189): 'Cyrus,
in his march to Babylon, arrived at the river Gyndes, which, rising in
the mountains of Matiene, and passing through the country of the
Darneans, loses itself in the Tigris; and this, after flowing by Opis,
is finally discharged into the Red Sea. While Cyrus was endeavoring to
pass this river, which could not be perfomed without boats, one of the
white consecrated horses boldly entering the stream, in his attempts to
cross it, was borne away by the rapidity of the current, and totally
lost. Cyrus, exasperated by the accident, made a vow that he would
render this stream so very insignificant, that women should hereafter be
able to cross it without so much as wetting their feet. He accordingly
suspended his designs on Babylon, and divided his forces into two parts;
he then marked out with a line on each side of the river, one hundred
and eighty trenches; these were dug according to his orders, and so
great a number of people were employed that he accomplished his purpose;
but he thus wasted the whole of that summer' (see also Seneca, "De Ira."
iii. 21).

Go over dry-shod - Hebrew, 'In shoes, or sandals.' The waters in the
innumerable rivulets to which the great river should be reduced, would
be so shallow, that they could even pass them in their sandals without
wetting their feet - a strong figurative expression, denoting that the
obstruction would be completely removed. 'The prophet, under these
metaphors, intends nothing else than that there would be no impediment
to God when he wished to deliver his people from captivity.' - (Calvin.)

[Isaiah 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 11:16</span></span>

And there shall be an highway - All obstructions shall be removed, and
they shall be permitted to return without hinderance (compare the note
at [Isa 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#008)).

For the remnant of his people from Assyria - See note at [Isa
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011).

Like as it was to Israel... - That is, God will remove all obstructions
as he did at the Red Sea; he will subdue all their enemies; he will
provide for their needs; and he will interpose by the manifest marks of
his presence and protection, as their God and their friend. The general
view of the chapter is, therefore, that it, refers to the triumph of the
Messiah's kingdom; that it is not yet fully accomplished; and that the
time is coming when the scattered Jews shall be regathered to God - not
returned to their own land, but brought again under his dominion under
the administration of the Messiah; and that this event shall be attended
with a sudden removal of the obstructions to the gospel, and to its
rapid spread everywhere among the nations. Comparing this with the
present state of the Jews, we may remark, in regard to this prospect:

\(1\) That they are now, and will continue to be, scattered in all
nations. They have been driven to all parts of the earth - wanderers
without a home - yet continuing their customs, rites, and special
opinions; and continuing to live, notwithstanding all the efforts of the
nations to crush and destroy them.

\(2\) They speak nearly all the languages of the world. They are
acquainted with all the customs, prejudices, and opinions of the nations
of the earth. They would, therefore, be under no necessity of engaging
in the laborious work of learning language - which now occupies so much
of the time, and consumes so much of the strength of the modern
missionary.

\(3\) The law of God is thus in all nations. It is in every synagogue;
and it has been well said, that the law there is like extinguished
candles, and that all that is needful to illuminate the world, is to
light those candles. Let the Jew everywhere be brought to see the true
meaning of his law; let the light of evangelical truth shine into his
synagogue, and the world would be at once illuminated. The truth would
go with the rapidity of the sunbeams from place to place, until the
whole earth would be enlightened with the knowledge of the Redeemer.

\(4\) The Jews, when converted, make the best missionaries. There is a
freshness in their views of the Messiah when they are converted, which
Gentile converts seldom feel. The apostles were all Jews; and the zeal
of Paul shows what converted Jews will do when they become engaged in
making known the true Messiah. If it has been a characteristic of their
nation that they would 'compass sea and land to make one proselyte,'
what will their more than three million accomplish when they become
converted to the true faith of the Redeemer? We have every reason,
therefore, to expect that God intends to make great use yet of the Jews,
whom he has preserved scattered everywhere - though they be but a
'remnant' - in converting the world to his Son. And we should most
fervently pray, that they may be imbued with love to their long-rejected
Messiah, and that they may everywhere become the missionaries of the
cross.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 12](isa012)

</div>
