<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa055)  [Next](isa057) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 56](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 56:0</span></span>

This chapter, to [Isa 56:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#009), is
evidently a continuation of the same general subject which is discussed
in the previous chapters, and is closely connected with the great truths
communicated in [Isa 52:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013), and
[Isa 53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001), respecting the work of
the Messiah. The general design of the prophet seems to be to state the
happy results which would follow his coming. In Isa. 54, he states that
that work would render the establishment and perpetuity of the church
certain. In [Isa 55:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001), he states
that it would lay the foundation for the offer of the gospel to all
people, and that it should certainly be successful on the earth and
finally triumph, and produce great and important changes. In this
chapter [Isa 56:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#001) the same idea is
presented in another form, that no one would be excluded from the offer
of salvation, and that strangers and foreigners would become connected,
with equal privileges, with the people of God. At [Isa
56:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#009), a new subject is introduced -
the invasion of the land of Judea by foreign armies and the consequent
punishment of the wicked and idolatrous part of the nation. This subject
is continued in the following chapter. The following analysis will
present a view of the design and scope of this.

I. The kingdom of God was near. The great work of man's redemption, to
which the prophet referred, would not be long delayed, and those who
were expecting the coming of the Messiah should be holy [Isa
56:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#001).

II\. The blessedness of those who should be admitted to the privileges
connected with the kingdom of God, and the coming of the Messiah.

1\. Who they would be.

\(1\) The man who kept the Sabbath [Isa
56:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#002).

\(2\) The stranger and foreigner [Isa
56:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#003).

\(3\) The eunuch [Isa 56:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#003).

2\. The privileges of thus being admitted to the favor and friendship of
God.

\(1\) They should be brought to his holy mountain.

\(2\) They should be made joyful in the house of prayer.

\(3\) Their offerings should be accepted.

\(4\) These favors should be extended to all people [Isa
56:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007).

III\. A prophecy respecting the invasion of the land on account of the
crimes of the nation.

1\. The invasion is represented under the image of wild beasts coming to
devour [Isa 56:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#009).

2\. The cause of this.

\(1\) The indolence and unfaithfulness of the watchmen.

\(2\) Their selfishness, avarice, and covetousness.

\(3\) Their revelry and intemperance [Isa
56:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010).

[Isaiah 56:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 56:1</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord - That is, in view of the fact that the kingdom of
God was to come at no distant period. Yahweh states what was necessary
to prepare themselves for it, and what was the character which he
demanded of those who were disposed to embrace its offers, and who would
be admitted to its privileges.

Keep ye judgment - Margin, 'Equity.' Break off your sins, and be holy. A
somewhat similar declaration was made by John the Baptist when he
announced the coming of the Messiah: 'Repent ye, for the kingdom of
heaven is at hand' [Mat 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002). The
general idea is, that it was not only appropriate that the prospect of
his coming and his near approach should lead them to a holy life, but it
was necessary in order that they might escape his indignation.

My salvation is near to come - It is to be borne in mind that this was
regarded as addressed to the Jews in exile in Babylon, and there is
probably a primary reference in the words to the deliverance which they
were about to experience from their long and painful captivity. But at
the same time the language is appropriate to the coming of the kingdom
of God under the Messiah, and the whole scope of the passage requires us
to understand it of that event. Language similar to this occurs
frequently in the New Testament, where the sacred writers seem to have
had this passage in their eye (see [Mat
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002); [Luk
21:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#031); [Rom
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#011); compare [Isa
62:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#001)). It is to be regarded,
therefore, as having a reference to the future coming of the Messiah -
perhaps as designed to describe the series of deliverances which were to
close the painful bondage in Babylon, and to bring the people of God to
perfect freedom, and to the full fruition of his favor. Though the
actual coming of the Messiah at the time of the exile was at a period
comparatively remote, yet the commencement of the great work of their
deliverance was near at hand. They were soon to be rescued, and this
rescue was to be but the first in the train of deliverances that would
result in the entire redemption of the people of God, and was to be the
public pledge that all that he had promised of the redemption of the
world should be certainly effected.

To be revealed - To be made known; to be publicly manifested.

[Isaiah 56:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 56:2</span></span>

Blessed is the man - Hebrew, 'The blessings of the man' (see [Psa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)). The sense is, 'happy is the
man.' The word here rendered 'man' (אנושׁ 'ĕnôsh) usually denotes a man
in humble life or in a subordinate rank, in contradistinction from אישׁ
'ı̂ysh, a man in elevated rank. As the object of the prophet here is
particularly to say, that the 'stranger' and the 'eunuch' would be
admitted to these privileges, it is possible that he designedly used a
word denoting one in bumble life. The particular blessing to which he
refers is specified in [Isa 56:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007).

That doeth this - That is, this which the prophet soon specifies -
keeping the Sabbath, and abstaining from evil.

And the son of man - Another form of expression denoting man.

That layeth hold on it - Hebrew, 'Binds himself fast to it;' or seizes
upon it with strength. That is, he adheres firmly to the purpose, as a
man seizes upon a thing with an intention not to let it go.

That keepeth the Sabbath from polluting it - Who sacredly observes the
day of holy rest which God has appointed. The Sabbath was one of the
special rites of the Jewish religion, and one of the most important of
their institutions. Its observance entered essentially into the idea of
their worship, and was designed to be the standing memorial or sign
between God and the Jewish nation [Exo
31:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#013). At home, in their own
nation, it kept up the constant sense of religion; abroad, when they
traveled among strangers, it would serve to remind all of the special
nature of their institutions, and be the public evidence that they were
the worshippers of Yahweh. Hence, as this served to distinguish them
from other people, it comes to be used here to signify the observance of
the rites which pertained to the public worship of God; and evidently
includes whatever was to be perpetual and unchanging in the public
worship of the Creator. It is remarkable that the prophet does not
pronounce a blessing on him who came to bloody altars with sacrifices,
or him who burned incense, or him who conformed to the unique rites of
the Jewish religion. These rites were to pass away, and the obligation
to observe them was to cease; and in this indirect manner the sacred
writer has given an intimation that there would be blessings on those
who did not observe those rites, and that the period would arrive when
the divine favor and mercy would descend on people in a different
channel. In regard to the importance of the Sabbath, see the note at the
close of [Isa 58:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001).

And keepeth his hand ... - That is, is an upright, holy, honest man. He
not only worships God and keeps the Sabbath, but he is upright in the
discharge of all the duties which he owes to his fellow-men. These two
specifications are evidently designed to include all the influences of
religion - the proper service and worship of God, and an upright and
holy life. Never in fact are they separated, and the religion of the
Bible was designed to secure the one as much as the other.

[Isaiah 56:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 56:3</span></span>

Neither let the son of the stranger - The foreigner who shall become a
proselyte to the true religion.

That hath joined himself - That has embraced the true faith, and become
a worshipper of the true God. It is evidently implied here that there
would be such proselytes, and that the true religion would be extended
so as to include and embrace them. The idea is, that they should be
admitted to the same privileges with those who had been long recognized
as the people of God.

The Lord hath utterly separated - Let him not esteem himself to be an
outcast, or cut off from the privileges of the people of God. This
language is used with reference to the opinion which prevailed among the
Jews, that the Gentiles were excluded from the privileges of the people
of God, and it is designed to intimate that hereafter all such barriers
would be broken down. They who entered the church as proselytes from the
pagan world, were not to come in with any sense of inferiority in regard
to their rights among his people; but they were to feel that all the
barriers which had heretofore existed were now broken down, and that all
people were on a level. There is to be no assumption of superiority of
one nation or rank over another; there is to be no sense of inferiority
of one class in reference to another.

Neither let the eunuch say - This class of men was usually set over the
harems of the East [Est 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#003), [Est
2:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#014); [Est
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#005); and they were employed also as
high officers at court [Est 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#010), [Est
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#012), [Est
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#015); [Dan
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003); [Act
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#027). The word is sometimes used to
denote a minister of court; a court officer in general [Gen
37:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#006); [Gen
39:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#001). The Targum often renders the
word by רבא rabbâ', "a prince."

Behold, I am a dry tree - A dry tree is an emblem of that which is
barren, useless, unfruitful. By the law of Moses such persons could not
be enrolled or numbered in the congregation of the Lord [Deu
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#002). The sense here is, that they
should not hereafter be subjected to the religious and civil
disabilities to which they had been. These external barriers to the full
privileges among the people of God, would be removed. All classes and
ranks would be admitted to the same privileges; all would be on the same
level (see [Isa 56:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#005)).

[Isaiah 56:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 56:4</span></span>

For thus saith the Lord unto the eunuchs - Even the eunuchs, who have
hitherto been excluded from the privileges of the people of God, and who
have been regarded as a separated and degraded people, shall be admitted
to the same privileges as others.

That keep my sabbaths - The word is used here in the plural, though the
weekly Sabbath is probably particularly intended. It may be, however,
that the word is used to represent religious observances in general (see
the notes at [Isa 56:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#002)).

And choose the things that please me - Who will be willing to sacrifice
their own pleasure and preferences to those things which I choose, and
in which I delight.

And take hold of my covenant - Hold fast, or steadily maintain my
covenant. On the meaning of the word 'covenant,' see the notes at [Isa
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#018); [Isa
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#006); [Isa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008); [Isa
54:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#010).

[Isaiah 56:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 56:5</span></span>

Will I give in mine house - That is, they shalt be admitted to all the
privileges of entering my house of prayer, and of being regarded as my
true worshippers, and this shall be to them a more invaluable privilege
than would be any earthly advantages. The word 'house' here refers
undoubtedly to the temple, regarded as emblematic of the place of public
worship in all ages.

And within my walls - The walls of the city where God dwelt, referring
primarily to the walls of Jerusalem. They should be permitted to dwell
with God, and be admitted to all the privileges of others. All, of all
classes and conditions, under the reign of the Messiah, should be
regarded as on a level, and entitled to equal advantages. There should
be no religious disabilities arising from caste, age, country, color, or
rank of life. Those who had any physical defect should not on that
account be excluded from his favor, or be regarded as not entitled to
his offers of mercy. The lame, therefore, the halt, the blind; the man
of color, the african, the red man of the woods; the Hindu and the
Islander; all are to be regarded as alike invited to participate in the
favor of God, and none are to be excluded from the 'house' erected to
his praise, and from within the 'walls' of the holy city where he
dwells.

A place - Hebrew, יד yâd - 'A hand.' The word is, however, used to
denote 'a place' [Deu 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#013); [Num
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#017); [Jos
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#010). It is sometimes used in the
sense of 'monument,' or 'trophy' [Sa1
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#012); [Sa2
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#018), as if a monument were a
handpointing out or showing anything. The word here denotes, however, a
place, and means that the excluded foreigner and the eunuch should be
admitted to a place in the temple of God; that is, should be admitted to
the favor of God, and be permitted to dwell with him.

And a name - As it was regarded among the Hebrews as one of the highest
honors to have a numerous posterity, the idea here is, that they should
be admitted to the highest possible honor - the honor of being regarded
as the children of God, and treated as his friends.

And I will give them an everlasting name - Their memory shall not
perish. They shall be admitted to eternal and unchangeable honors - the
everlasting honor of being treated as the friends of God.

[Isaiah 56:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 56:6</span></span>

Also the sons of the stranger - (see the note at [Isa
56:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#003)). The conditions on which they
should be admitted to the same privileges are specified, and are the
following:

1\. They were to 'join themselves to the Lord' (see the note at [Isa
56:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#003)).

2\. This should be with a purpose to 'serve him.' Their aim and design
should be to keep his commandments and to do his will.

3\. They were to 'love the name of the Lord;' that is, to love Yahweh
himself, for the 'name' of the Lord is often used as denoting the Lord
himself.

4\. They were to keep his sabbaths (see the notes at [Isa
56:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#004)).

5\. They were to take hold of his covenant (see the notes at [Isa
56:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#004)).

On these conditions the sons of the foreigner were to be admitted to all
the privileges of the children of God, and to be united with all who
love and serve him.

[Isaiah 56:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 56:7</span></span>

Even them will I bring to my holy mountain - (See the notes at [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)). That is, they should be admitted
to the fellowship and privileges of his people.

And make them joyful - In the participation of the privileges of the
true religion, and in the service of God, they shall be made happy.

In my house of prayer - In the temple - here called the house of prayer.
The language here is all derived from the worship of the Jews, though
the meaning evidently is, that under the new dispensation, all nations
would be admitted to the privileges of his people, and that the
appropriate services of religion which they would offer would be
acceptable to God.

Their burnt-offerings - That is, their worship shall be as acceptable as
that of the ancient people of God. This evidently contemplates the
future times of the Messiah, and the sense is, that in those times, the
Gentiles would be admitted to the same privileges of the people of God,
as the Jewish nation had been. It is true that proselytes were admitted
to the privileges of religion among the Jews, and were permitted to
offer burnt-offerings and sacrifices, nor can there be a doubt that they
were then acceptable to God. But it is also true that there was a
conviction that they were admitted as proselytes, and that there would
be a superiority felt by the native-born Jews over the foreigners who
were admitted to their society. Under the Jewish religion this
distinction was inevitable, and it would involve, in spite of every
effort to the contrary, much of the feeling of caste - a sense of
superiority on the one hand, and of inferiority on the other; a
conviction on the one part that they were the descendants of Abraham,
and the inheritors of the ancient and venerable promises, and on the
other that they had come in as foreigners, and had been admitted by
special favor to these privileges. But all this was to be abolished
under the Messiah. No one was to claim superiority on account of any
supposed advantage from birth, or nation, or country; no one, however
humble he might feel in respect to God and to his own deserts, was to
admit into his bosom any sense of inferiority in regard to his origin,
his country, his complexion, his former character. All were to have the
same near access to God, and the offering of one was to be as acceptable
as that of another.

For mine house - This passage is quoted by the Saviour [Mat
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#013), to show the impropriety of
employing the temple as a place of traffic and exchange. In that passage
he simply quotes the declaration that it should be 'a house of prayer.'
There are two ideas in the passage as used by Isaiah; first, that the
temple should be regarded as a house of prayer; and, secondly, that the
privileges of that house should be extended to all people. The main
design of the temple was that God might be there invoked, and the
inestimable privilege of calling on him was to be extended to all the
nations of the earth.

[Isaiah 56:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 56:8</span></span>

The Lord God - This verse is a continuation of the promise made in the
previous verses, that those of other nations would be united to the
ancient people of God. The sense is, that Yahweh would not only gather
back to their country those who were scattered abroad in other lands,
but would also call to the same privileges multitudes of those who were
now aliens and strangers.

Which gathereth the outcasts of Israel - Who will collect again and
restore to their own country those of the Jews who were scattered abroad
- the exiles who were in distant lands.

Yet will I gather others to him - To Israel; that is, to the Jews (see
[Joh 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)).

Besides those - Margin, 'To his gathered.' To those who are collected
from their exile and restored to their own country, I will add many
others of other nations. This completes the promise referred to in this
and the previous chapters. The next verse introduces a new subject, and
here a division should have been made in the chapters. The great truth
is here fully expressed, that under the Messiah the pagan world would be
admitted to the privileges of the people of God. The formidable and
long-existing barriers between the nations would be broken down. No one
nation would be permitted to come before God claiming any special
privileges; none should regard themselves as in any sense inferior to
any other portion of the world on account of their birth, their rank,
their privileges by nature. Under this economy we are permitted to live
- happy now in the assurance that though we were once regarded as
strangers and foreigners, yet we are 'now fellow-citizens with the
saints and of the household of God' [Eph
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019).

The whole world lies on a level before God in regard to its origin - for
God 'has made of one blood all the nations of mankind to dwell on the
face of all the earth' [Act 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#026). The
whole race is on a level in regard to moral character - for all have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God. And the whole race is on a
level in regard to redemption - for the same Saviour died for all; the
same heaven is offered to all; and the same eternal and most blessed God
is ready to admit all to his favor, and to confer on all everlasting
life. What thanks do 'we owe to the God of grace for the blessings of
the eternal gospel; and how anxious should we be that the offers of
salvation should in fact be made known to all people! The wide world may
be saved, and there is not one of the human race so degraded in rank, or
color, or ignorance, that he may not be admitted to the same heaven with
Abraham and the prophets, and whose prayers and praises would not be as
acceptable to God as those of the most magnificent monarch who ever wore
a crown.

[Isaiah 56:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 56:9</span></span>

All ye beasts of the field - This evidently commences a new subject, and
refers to some invasion of the land of Judea. In the previous chapter,
the prophet had comforted the people by the assurance of the coming of
the Messiah, and by the fact that they should be enlarged by the
accession of the Gentiles. He proceeds here to a more disagreeable part
of the subject. The design is, to reprove particularly the sins of the
rulers of the people, and to assure them that such conduct would incur
the vengeance of heaven. The sins reproved are indolence and inattention
to duty [Isa 56:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010); a spirit of
self-indulgence and of slumber, avarice and selfishness, and luxury and
intemperance. The vengeance here referred to, Lowth supposes to be the
invasion of the land by the Chaldeans, and perhaps by the Romans.
Grotius supposes that it refers to the Egyptians, and to bands of
robbers from the Chaldeans, Syrians, Moabites, and Ammonites. Vitringa
strangely enough refers it to the barbarous nations which broke in upon
the Christian church to lay it waste and destroy it during the decline
of the Roman empire, particularly the Huns, Saracens, Turks, Turcomans,
Tartars, etc. But the connection seems to demand that it should be
understood of some events, not far distant from the time of the prophet,
which would be a proper punishment of the crimes then existing.
According to this interpretation, the reference here, I suppose, is to
the invasion of the land by the Chaldeans. They would come as wild
beasts, to spread terror and devastation before them. And so great were
the national crimes, that the prophet calls on them to come and devour
all before them. The comparison of invaders to wild beasts is not
uncommon in the Scriptures. Thus [Jer
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#009) -

Mine heritage is unto me as a speckled bird,

The birds round about are against her;

Come ye, assemble all the beasts of the field,

Come to devour.

So [Jer 50:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#017) -

Israel is a scattered sheep;

The lions have driven him away;

First the king of Assyria hath devoured him,

And last this Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, hath broken his bones.

See also [Isa 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#011).

[Isaiah 56:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 56:10</span></span>

His watchmen - The prophet proceeds to specify the sins which had thus
induced God to send the desolating armies of foreign nations. The first
is specified in this verse, the apathy, indifference, and
unfaithfulness, which prevailed among those who were appointed to guard
their interests and defend the cause of truth. The word rendered 'his
watchmen' (צפוּ tsophâv) is derived from צפה tsâphâh, "to look about; to
view from a distance; to see afar." It is applied appropriately to those
who were stationed on the walls of a city, or on a tower, in order that
they might see the approach of an enemy [Sa1
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#016); [Sa2
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#034); [Sa2
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#024). It is then applied to prophets,
who are as it were placed on an elevated post of observation, and who
are able to cast the eye far into future scenes, and to predict future
events ([Jer 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#017); [Eze
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017); the note at [Isa
21:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#006); [Isa
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#008); compare [Isa
62:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#006)). Here it refers undoubtedly to
the public teachers of the Jews who had failed to perceive the crimes
and dangers of the people; or who, if they had seen them, had neglected
to warn them of the prevalence of sin, and of the dangers to which they
were exposed.

Are blind - They have become willfully blind to the existence of
idolatry and vice, or they are so corrupt in sentiment and practice,
that they fail to notice the existence of the prevailing sins.

They are all ignorant - Hebrew, 'They do not know.' This may either mean
that they were not possessed of the proper qualifications for the office
of prophets, or that they were so immersed in sin themselves, and so
indolent, that they did not observe the existence of the national sins.
In either case, they were unfit for the station.

They are all dumb dogs - Dogs are appointed to guard a house or flock,
and to give notice of the approach of a robber by night [Job
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001). They are thus an emblem of a
prophet - appointed to announce danger. Generally in the Scriptures the
dog is mentioned as the symbol of uncleanness, of vileness, of apostasy,
of that which deserved the utmost contempt ([Deu
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#018); [Sa1
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#014); [Sa2
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#008); [Pro
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#011); [Phi
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#002); [Pe2
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#022); [Rev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008); [Rev
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#015); compare Virg. Georg. i. 470).
But here the dog is an emblem of vigilance. The phrase 'dumb dogs,' is
applicable to prophets who from any cause failed to warn the nation of
their guilt and danger.

They cannot bark - They cannot give warning of the danger which
threatens. The reason why they could not do this the prophet immediately
states. They loved to slumber - they delighted in indolence and repose.

Sleeping - Margin, 'Dreaming,' or 'Talking in their sleep.' The word
הזים hoziym, is from הזה hâzâh, "to dream, to talk in one's dreams." It
is kindred to חזה châzâh, "to see," and the primary idea seems to be
that of nocturnal visions. The Septuagint renders it, Ενυπνιαξόμενοι
κοίτην Enupniachomenoi koitēn - 'Sleeping in bed.' Aquila, φανταζόμενοι
phantazomenoi - 'Having visions,' or phantasms. The idea is that
probably of dreaming, or drowsing; a state of indolence and
unfaithfulness to their high trust. Perhaps also there is included the
idea of their being deluded by vain imaginations, and by false opinions,
instead of being under the influence of truth. For it is commonly the
case that false and unfaithful teachers of religion are not merely
inactive; they act under the influence of deluding and delusive views -
like people who are dreaming and who see nothing real. Such was probably
the case with the false prophets in the time of Isaiah.

Lying down - As dogs do who are indolent. They are inactive, unfaithful,
and delighting in ease.

Loving to slumber - Perhaps there was never a more graphic and striking
description of an indolent and unfaithful ministry than this. Alas, that
it should be too true of multitudes who bear the sacred office, and who
are appointed to warn their fellow-men of danger! How many come still
under the description of dumb dogs who cannot bark, and who love to
slumber!' Some are afraid of giving offence; some have no deep sense of
the importance of religious truth, and the actual danger of the ungodly;
some embrace false opinions - led on by day-dreams and fictions of the
imagination, as unreal, as vain, and as inconsistent, as are the
incoherent expressions which are uttered in sleep; some engage in
worldly projects, and fill up their time with the cares and plans of
this life; and some are invincibly indolent. Nothing will rouse them;
nothing induce them to forego the pleasures of sleep, and ease, and of
an inactive life. The friends of God are unrebuked when they err; and an
inactive and unfaithful ministry suffers the great enemy to come and
bear away the soul to death, as an unfaithful mastiff would suffer the
thief to approach the dwelling without warning the inmates. But the
mastiff is usually more faithful than an indolent ministry. To the deep
shame of man be it spoken, there are more ministers of religion who are
indolent, inactive, and unfaithful, than there are of the canine race.
Instinct prompts them to act the part which God intends; but alas, there
are men - men in the ministry - whom neither instinct, nor conscience,
nor reason, nor hope, nor fear, nor love, nor the command of God, nor
the apprehension of eternal judgment, will rouse to put forth unwearied
efforts to save souls from an eternal hell!

[Isaiah 56:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 56:11</span></span>

Yea, they are greedy dogs - Margin, 'Strong of appetite.' Literally,
'Strong of soul' (עזי־נפשׁ ‛azēy-nephesh. Jerome renders it, Canes
impudentissimi. So the Septuagint, Κύνες ἀναιδεῖς τῇ ψυχῇ Kunes anaideis
tē psuchē - 'Dogs impudent in soul.' They were greedy and insatiable in
that which the soul or the appetite demands. The idea here is, that the
prophets to whom reference is here made were sensual, and disposed to
gorge themselves; living only for carnal indulgence, insensible to the
rights of others, and never satisfied.

And they are shepherds that cannot understand - Who are ignorant of the
needs of the people, and who cannot be made to comprehend what is needed
by them (see [Isa 56:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010)).

They all look to their own way - That is, they are all selfish. The
ministers of religion are set apart not to promote their own interests
bug the welfare and salavation of others.

Every one for his gain - For his own private ends and emoluments.

From his quarter - Lowth, 'From the highest to the lowest.' So
Rosenmuller. Septuagint, Κατὰ τὸ ἑαυτοῦ Kata to heautou - 'Each one
according to his own purpose.' The Hebrew is literally, 'From his end,'
or extremity. [Gen 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#004) : 'From every
quarter' (מקצה mı̂qqâtseh) that is, from one end to the other; one and
all, the whole. This seems to be the idea here, that one and all were
given to selfishness, to covetousness, and to indulgence in luxury and
sensuality.

[Isaiah 56:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 56:12</span></span>

Come ye, say they - (compare the notes at [Isa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013)). That is, one says to another,
'I will fetch wine;' or as we would say, 'I will take another glass.'
The object is to describe a drinking-bout, or carousal, when the glass
is shoved around, and there is drinking to excess. The language denotes
the state of exhilaration and excitement when sitting at the table, and
already under the influence of wine. This is not designed to be
descriptive of the people at large, but of the 'watchmen,' or public
teachers of the nation, and it certainly shows a state of most
lamentable degeneracy and corruption. Unhappily, however, it has not
been confined to the times of Manasseh. There have been periods in the
history of the Christian church, and there are still portions of that
church, where the language used here with so much severity would be an
appropriate description even of the Christian ministry; scenes where the
professed heralds of salvation sit long at the wine, and join with the
frivolous, the worldly, and the profane, in 'shoving round' the
sparkling cup. No severer language is used in the prophets to describe
and denounce any class of sinners than is appropriated to such people;
at no time has the church more occasion to sit in the dust and to weep,
than when her ministers 'rise up early in the morning, that they may
follow strong drink; and continue until night, until wine inflame them
[Isa 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#011).

We will fill ourselves with strong drink - (See the notes at [Isa
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#011)).

And tomorrow ... - That is, indulgence of this kind was habitual. There
was an intention to continue it. It was not that they had been once
overtaken and had erred; but it was that they loved it, and meant to
drink deeper and deeper. So now the guilt of ministers is greatly
aggravated in the same way. It is not merely that they drink wine; it is
not even that they on a single occasion drink too much, and say and do
foolish and wicked things - liable as all are to this who indulge in
drinking wine at all, and certainly as ministers will do it who indulge
in the habit; it is that they mean to do it; they resolve not to abandon
it, but purpose to persevere in the habit 'tomorrow.' Hence, such people
refuse to join a Society of Temperance; hence, they oppose such
societies as ultra and fanatical; and hence, by not joining them, they
proclaim to the world, 'Come ye, and I will take another glass, and
tomorrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant.' It is this
settled purpose - this fixed resolution, stretching into future time,
and embracing coming years, that is so offensive to God. And there is
not on earth a condition of more public iniquity than when the ministers
of religion take this bold and open stand, and resolve that they will
not abandon intoxicating drinks, but will continue to drink 'tomorrow,'
and ever onward. Hopeless is the work of reformation when the ministers
of religion take this stand; and dark is the prospect for the church on
earth, when the messengers of salvation cannot be induced to stand
before the church of God as examples and advocates for temperance on the
most strict and uncompromising principles.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 57](isa057)

</div>
