<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa016)  [Next](isa018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 17:0</span></span>

The prophecy which comprises [Isa
17:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001), professes, by its title, to
be against Damascus only. But it relates to the kingdom of Samaria no
less than to Damascus. The reason is, that the kingdoms of Israel and
Damascus were confederated against the kingdom of Judah. The design of
the prophecy may have been to warn the kingdom of Israel of the
approaching destruction of the city of Damascus, and, by this means, to
keep them from forming an alliance with them against Judah. When it was
delivered is unknown. Lowth supposes that it was immediately after the
prophecies in the seventh and eighth chapters, in the reign of Ahaz, and
this supposition is not improbable, though it is not quite certain. He
also supposes that it was fulfilled when Damascus was taken captive by
Tiglath-pileser, and its inhabitants carried to Kir [Kg2
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#009), and when he overran, also, a
great part of the kingdom of Israel, and carried its inhabitants captive
to Assyria.

In regard to the "time" when it was uttered, there can be little doubt
that it was when the alliance existed between Damascus and the kingdom
of Ephraim, or Samaria, for on no oilier supposition can it be accounted
for, that the two kingdoms were united in the prophecy (see [Isa
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#003)). The scope or design of the
prophecy is indicated in the close [Isa
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#014) : 'This is the portion of them
that spoil us, and the lot of them that rob us;' and one design, at
least, was to give an assurance to the kingdom of Judah, that the
alliance between Damascus and Samaria was not to be dreaded, but that
the kingdom of Judah would be safe. No alliance formed against them
would be successful; no purpose to destroy them should be an abject of
dread.

The prophecy may be regarded as consisting of three parts.

I. The prediction of the divine judgment against Damascus [Isa
17:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001).

II\. The prediction respecting Ephraim, the ally of Damascus, and its
fulfillment [Isa 17:3-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#003).

III\. A prediction respecting the Assyrians, and the calamities that
should come upon them as a nation [Isa
17:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#012).

The kingdom of Syria, or Damascus, was overthrown in the fourth year of
the reign of Ahaz. It is clear, therefore, that the prophecy was
delivered before that time. And if so, its proper place, in the
collection of the prophecies of Isaiah: would have been immediately
after the ninth chapter. The reason why it is placed here, Lightfoot
supposes to be, that in the seventh and eighth chapters the special
design was to denounce judgment on the two kingdoms of Damascus and
Ephraim; but that the design here was to connect the prediction of those
judgments with the surrounding kingdoms, and to show how they would be
affected by it. The prophecy is, therefore, placed amidst those which
relate to foreign nations; or to kingdoms out of the land of Canaan.

Damascus was a celebrated city of Syria, and was long the capital of the
kingdom of Damascus. It was a city in the time of Abraham, for the
steward in his house, Eliezer, was said to be of Damascus [Gen
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#002). It is situated in a very fertile
plain at the foot of mount Anti-Libanus, and is surrounded by hills. It
is watered by a river which the ancients caned "Chrysorrhoas," as if it
flowed with gold. This river was divided into several canals, which were
conducted to various parts of the city. It rose in the mountains of
Anti-Libanus, and it is probable that the branches of that river were
anciently called Abana and Pharpar [Kg2
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#012). This river is now called the
Bar-raday, and the unique beauty and fertility of Damascus is owing
wholly to it. It rises in the adjacent mountains of Anti-Libanus, and,
by numerous natural and artificial channels, is made to spread over the
plain on which the city stands. It waters the whole extent of the
gardens - an extent of country about nine miles in diameter, in the
midst of which the city is situated - and when this is done, the water
that is left flows off to the southeast through the plain, where, amid
the arid sands, it is soon absorbed or evaporated, and the river
disappears. The gardens are planted with all kinds of trees; mostly such
as produce fruit, among which the apricot holds the ascendancy.
Pomegranate, orange, lemon, and fig trees abound, and rising above these
are other trees of huge proportions, intermingled with the poplar and
sometimes the willow. Into every garden of the city water is carried,
and this river, thus divided, gives to Damascus the beauty for which it
has been so celebrated. The Persian geographers say, that the plain of
Damascus is one of the four paradises of the East, and it is now said
that there is not in all Syria a more delightful place.

From the time of Abraham until David, the Scripture says nothing of
Damascus. In his time it was subdued, and brought under his authority.
Toward the end of the reign of Solomon, the authority of the Jews was
cast off by Rezin, and Damascus became again independent. Jeroboam, king
of Israel, again conquered Damascus, and brought Syria into subjection
[Kg2 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025); but after his death the
Syrians again established their independence. Rezin became king of
Damascus, and entered into an alliance with Pekah, king of Israel, and,
unitedly, they invaded Judah, and made great havoc in its territories
(see the notes at Isa. 7; compare [Kg2
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#005)). Tiglath-pileser, however, king
of Assyria, came to the assistance of the king of Judah and took
Damascus, and destroyed it, and killed Rezin, and carried the Syrians
into captivity beyond the Euphrates. To this event, probably, Isaiah
refers in the prophecy before us. He, however, did not foretell its
utter and "perpetual" ruin as he did that of Babylon. Damascus again
recovered from its calamities. Holofernes again took it (Judith 2:27).
It is spoken of as flourishing in the time of Ezekiel [Eze
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#002). The Romans took it in the time,
and by the agency, of Pompey the Great, about sixty years before Christ.
It afterward fell into the hands of the Arabians. It was taken by the
Ottomans 1517 a.d.; and has since been in the possession of the Turks.
At present, it has a population of about 100,000. The name by which it
is now known is "El-Sham." It is a part of the pashalic of Damascus,
which extends to the southern extremity of the Dead Sea. Mehemet Ali of
Egypt obtained possession of it without resistance, in June 1832, and
since that time it has been under the jurisdiction of his son Ibrahim.
It is regarded by Mussulmans as a place of special sanctity. According
to them, Mecca has the first place, Jerusalem the next, and Damascus the
third.

The prophecy respecting Damascus occupies [Isa
17:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001). The general sense is, that
Damascus and its allies would be greatly enfeebled and almost destroyed.
Its fulfillment is to be referred to the invasion of Damascus by
Tiglath-pileser and the Assyrians. The remainder of the chapter [Isa
17:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#012) is a distinct prophecy (see
the notes at [Isa 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#012)).

[Isaiah 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 17:1</span></span>

The burden of Damascus - The oracle indicating calamity or destruction
to Damascus (see the note at [Isa
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#001)). "Damascus is taken away." That
is, it shall be destroyed. It was represented to the prophet in vision
as destroyed (see the note at [Isa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)).

And it shall be a ruinous heap - See [Isa
35:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#002). This took place under the kings
of Assyria, and particularly under Tiglath-pileser. This was in the
fourth year of Ahaz [Kg2 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#009).

[Isaiah 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 17:2</span></span>

The cities of Aroer - By "Aroer" here seems to be meant a tract or
region of country pertaining to Damascus, in which were situated several
cities. Grotius supposes that it was a tract of country in Syria which
is called by Ptolemy "Aueira" - Αὔειρα Aueira. Vitringa supposes that
one part of Damascus is meant by this, as Damascus was divided by the
river in the same manner that Babylon was. There were several cities of
the name of "Aroer." One was on the river Arnon in the land of Moab [Deu
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#036); [Deu
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#012); [Jos
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#003). Burckhardt found this city under
the name of Aroer. There was another city of this name further north,
over against Rabbath-Ammon [Jos 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#025).
There was a third city of this name in the tribe of Judah [Sa1
30:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#028). Of the city of Araayr which
Burckhardt visited, nothing is now remarkable but its entire desolation.
Gesenius supposes ("Commentary in loc.") that the phrase 'the cities of
Aroer' means the cities round about Aroer, and that were connected with
it, similar to the phrase 'daughters of a city.' This city he supposes
was near the river Arnon, within the limits of Moab, and that the
prediction here was fufilled by Tiglath-pileser, when he carried away
the inhabitants of Galilee, Gilead, and other places mentioned in [Kg2
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029). There can be no doubt that it
was under the jurisdiction of Damascus.

Are forsaken - Are desolate, and the inhabitants have fled.

They shall be for flocks ... - (See the note at [Isa
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#017).)

[Isaiah 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 17:3</span></span>

The fortress - The strong place of defense; the fortified place.

Shall cease - Shall come to an end; shall cease to be, for so the word
שׁבת shâbath is often used, [Gen 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#022);
[Isa 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#008); [Lam
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#015).

From Ephraim - The name given to the kingdom of Israel, or to the ten
tribes, because Ephraim was the largest of the ten, and was a leading
tribe in their councils (see the note at [Isa
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#002)). Ephraim, or the kingdom of
Samaria, is mentioned here in connection with Damascus or Syria, because
they were confederated together, and would be involved in the same
overthrow.

And the remnant of Syria - That which is left of the kingdom of Syria
after the capital Damascus shall be destroyed.

They shall be as the glory of the children of Israel - That is, as the
defenses, or the strongly fortified towns and fastnesses of the kingdom
of Israel shall pass away or be destroyed, so shall it be with the
kingdom of Damascus. As they are allied with each other, they shall fare
alike. The Chaldee reads this, 'And the dominion shall cease from
Ephraim, and the kingdom from Damascus.'

[Isaiah 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 17:4</span></span>

The glory of Jacob - "Jacob" is used here to denote the kingdom of
Israel, or Samaria. The word 'glory' here denotes dignity, power; that
on which they relied, and of which they boasted.

Shall be made thin - Shall be diminished, as a body wastes away by
disease, and becomes feeble. The prophet sets forth the calamities of
Ephraim by two figures; the first is that of a "body" that becomes
emaciated by sickness, the other that of the harvest when all the fruits
are gathered except a few in the upper branches [Isa
17:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#005).

And the fatness his flesh shall wax lean - He shall become feeble, as a
man does by wasting sickness. Chaldee, 'The riches of his glory shall be
removed.'

[Isaiah 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 17:5</span></span>

And it shall be ... - This is the other figure by which the prophet sets
forth the calamities that were coming upon Ephraim - an image designed
to denote the fact that the inhabitants and wealth of the land would be
collected and removed, as the farmer gathers his harvest, and leaves
only that which is inaccessible in the upper boughs of the tree, or the
gleanings in the field.

As when the harvest-man gathereth the corn - The wheat, the barley,
etc.; for so the word "corn" - now applied by us almost exclusively to
maizes means in the Scriptures. The sense in this passage is plain. As
the farmer cuts down and collects his grain and removes it from the
harvest field, so the enemies of Ephraim would come and remove the
people and their wealth to a distant land. This received a complete
fulfillment when the ten tribes were removed by the Assyrians to a
distant land. This was done by Tiglath-pileser [Kg2
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029), and by Shalmaneser [Kg2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006).

And reapeth the ears with his arm - As he collects the standing grain
with one arm so that he can cut it with the sickle in the other hand.
The word rendered 'reapeth' (קצר qâtsar) means here "to collect
together" as a reaper does the standing grain in his arm. The word
rendered 'ears' (שׁבלים shı̂bălı̂ym) means here rather the spires or
stalks of standing grain.

In the valley of Rephaim - The valley of Rephaim is mentioned in [Sa2
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#018), [Sa2
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#022); [Sa2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#013); [Ch1
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#015); [Ch1
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#009). The name means 'the Giants;' but
why it was given to it is now unknown. In passing from Bethlehem to
Jerusalem, it lies on the left, and descends gradually to the southwest,
until it contracts in that direction into a deeper and narrower valley,
called wady el-Werd, which unites further on with wady Ahmed, and finds
its way to the Mediterranean. The plain extends nearly to Jerusalem, and
is terminated by a slight rocky ridge forming the brow of the valley of
Hinnom (see Josephus, "Ant." vii. 4. 1; viii. 12. 4; also Robinson's
"Bib. Researches," vol. i. pp. 323, 324). It seem to have been
distinguished for its fertility, and is used here to denote a fertile
region in general.

[Isaiah 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 17:6</span></span>

Yet gleaning-grapes ... - They shall not all be removed, or destroyed. A
"few" shall be left, as a man who is gathering grapes or olives will
leave a few that are inaccessible on the topmost boughs, or the furthest
branches. Those would be usually the poorest, and so it may be implied
that those left in Israel would be among the poorer inhabitants of the
land.

Two or three - A very few - such as would be left in gathering grapes,
or in endeavoring to shake olives from a tree.

Four or five - A very few that would remain on the furthest branches,
and that could not be shaken off or reached.

[Isaiah 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 17:7</span></span>

At that day shall a man look to his Maker - Instead of confiding in
their strongly fortified places and armies, they shall look for aid and
protection to the God that made them, and who alone can help them.
National afflictions and judgments often have the effect to turn the
eyes of even a wicked and rebellious people to God. They feel their
danger; they are convinced of their guilt; they see that no one but God
can protect them; and for a time they are willing, even by humiliation
and fasting, to seek the divine protection.

His eyes shall have respect ... - He shall look up to, or regard.

The Holy One of Israel - The God of Israel; the true God. As the Syrians
were allied with the kingdom of Samaria or Ephraim, they were, of
course, acquainted with the true God, and in some sense acknowledged
him. In these times of impending calamity, they would be led to seek
him, and implore his aid and protection. There is no reason to believe,
however, that they would turn permanently to him, or become his true
worshippers.

[Isaiah 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 17:8</span></span>

And he shall not look to the altars - That is, the altars of the gods
which the Syrians worshipped, and the altars of the false gods which had
been erected in the land of Israel or Samaria by its wicked kings, and
particularly by Ahaz. Ahaz fancied an altar which he saw at Damascus
when on a visit to Tiglath-pileser, and ordered Urijah the priest to
construct one like it in Samaria, on which he subsequently offered
sacrifice [Kg2 16:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#010). It is well
known, also, that the kings of Israel and Judah often reared altars to
false gods in the high places and the groves of the land (see [Kg2
21:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#003)). The Ephraimites were
particularly guilty in this respect [Hos
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#011) : 'Because Ephraim hath made many
altars to sin, altars shall be unto him to sin.'

Which his fingers have made - Perhaps indicating that the idols which
they worshipped had been constructed with special art and skill (see
[Isa 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#008)).

Either the groves - The altars of idols were usually erected in groves,
and idols were worshipped there before temples were raised (see [Exo
34:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#013); [Deu
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#005); [Deu
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#003); [Jdg
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#007); [Kg1
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#023); [Kg1
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#019); [Ch2
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#003); compare the notes at [Isa
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#029)).

Or the images - Margin, 'Sun images' (חמנים chamānı̂ym). This word is
used to denote idols in general in [Lev
26:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#030); [Ch2
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#004). But it is supposed to denote
properly images erected to the sun, and to be derived from חמה chamāh,
"the sun." Thus the word is used in [Job
30:28](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#028); [Isa
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#023); [Isa
30:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#026); [Sol
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#010). The word, according to Gesenius,
is of Persian origin (Commentary in loc.) The sun was undoubtedly
worshipped by the ancient idolaters, and altars or images would be
erected to it (see the notes at [Job
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#026)).

[Isaiah 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 17:9</span></span>

His strong cities - The cities of the united kingdoms of Damascus and
Samaria.

Be as a forsaken bough - There has been much difficulty in the
interpretation of this passage. Lowth says, 'No one has ever been able
to make any tolerable sense of these words;' and proposes himself the
translation,

In that day shall his strongly fenced cities become

Like the desertion of the Hivites and the Amorites;

Following in this the translation of the Septuagint, but doing violence
to the Hebrew text. Rosenmuller translates it, 'As the remnant of a
grove when the thicket is cut down, and when few trees are left.' The
word rendered 'bough' (חרשׁ choresh) means, properly, a thicket, or
thick foliage, a wood that is entangled or intricate [Sa1
23:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#015), [Sa1
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#018); [Ch2
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#004); and probably this is the idea
here. The phrase may be rendered, 'as the leavings or residue of a
grove, copse, or entangled wood;' and the idea is, that as a "few" trees
might be left when the axeman cuts down the grove, so a few inferior and
smaller towns should be left in the desolation that would come upon
Damascus.

And an uppermost branch - [Isa 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#006).
As a few berries are left in the topmost branch of the olive, or the
vine, so shall I a few cities or people be left in the general
desolation.

Which they left - Which "are" left, or which the invaders would leave.

Because of the children of Israel - literally, 'from the face,' that is,
before the children of Israel. Lowth supposes that it refers to the
Amorites, who left their land before the Israelites, or gave up their
land for them. Vitringa renders it, 'On account of the children of
Israel;' and supposes that it means that a few cities were spared by the
purpose of God in the invasion by Tiglath-pileser, to be a residence of
the Israelites that should remain; or that, for some reason which is not
known, the Assyrians chose to spare a few towns, and not wholly to
destroy the country. The "general" idea is plain, that a few towns would
be left, and that it would be "before" the children of Israel, or in
their presence, or in order that they might continue to dwell in them.
Jerome interprets the whole as referring to the time when the land of
Judea was forsaken on the invasion of the Romans.

And there shall be desolation - The land shall be desolated, except the
few cities and towns that shall be left, like the gleaning of the olive
tree.

[Isaiah 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 17:10</span></span>

Because thou ... - Because the kingdom of Israel or Samaria had done it.

The God of thy salvation - The God in whom alone was salvation; or who
alone could protect thee (compare [Mic
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#007); [Hos
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#015)).

The rock of thy strength - God. A rock of strength is a strongly
fortified place; or a rock which an enemy could not successfully assail.
High rocks were selected as a place of refuge from an invading foe (see
the notes at [Isa 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010), [Isa
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021)). In allusion to this, God is
often called "a Rock," and a strong tower [Deu
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004), [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015), [Deu
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#018), [Deu
32:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030), [Deu
32:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#037); [Sa1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#002); [Sa2
22:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#002), [Sa2
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#032); [Psa
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#031), [Psa
18:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#046); [Psa
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#014); [Psa
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001); [Psa
30:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001).

Shalt thou plant pleasant plants - Plants that are suited to produce
pleasure or delight; that is, you shall cultivate your fields, and set
them out with choice vines and plants in hope of a future harvest, but
you shall be disappointed.

And shall set it with strange slips - The word 'slips' means the
"cuttings" of the vine that are set in the ground to grow; or the shoot
or sucker that is taken off and "set out," or put in the earth to take
root and grow, as is often done by farmers and gardeners. The word
'strange' here means "foreign," those which are procured from a
distance, and which are, therefore, esteemed valuable; plants selected
with care. This does not mean, as Lowth supposes, strange and idolatrous
worship, and the vicious practices connected with it; but it means that,
though they should be at great pains and expense in cultivating their
land, yet the enemy would come in and make it desolate.

[Isaiah 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 17:11</span></span>

In the day ... - Thou shalt cultivate it assiduously and constantly.
Thou shalt be at special pains that it may be watered and pruned, in
order that it may produce abundantly.

And in the morning - With early care and attention - denoting the pains
that would be bestowed on the young plant.

The harvest shall be a heap - The margin reads this, 'the harvest shall
be removed in the day of inheritance, rendering it as if the word נד nêd
usually meaning a heap, were derived from נוד nûd, to shake, move,
wander; or, as if it were to be removed. Probably the translation in the
text is correct; and the sense is, 'When from the plant which was so
beautiful and valuable, and which you cherished with so much care, you
expected to obtain a rich harvest, you had only sorrow and inexpressible
disappointment.' The figure used here is supposed by Rosenmuller to be
that of hendiadys (ἕν διὰ δυοῖν hen dia duoin)by which the phrases
'shall be an heap,' and 'desperate sorrow,' are to be taken together,
meaning 'the heap of the harvest shall be inexpressible sorrow.'

In the day of grief - The word rendered 'grief' here (נחלה nachălâh)
means, properly, "inheritance, heirship, possession," and should have
been so rendered here. It means that in the day when they "hoped" to
possess the result of their planting, or in the time of the usual
harvest, they would obtain only grief and disappointment.

And desperate sorrow - The word rendered 'desperate' (אנשׁ 'ânash),
denotes that which is "weak, mortal, incurable" [Job
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#006); [Jer
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#016); [Jer
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#012), [Jer
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#015). The sense here is, that there
would be grievous disappointment, and that there would be no remedy for
it; and the idea of the whole is, that calamities were coming upon the
nation which would blast all their hopes, and destroy all their
prospects. The prophecy was fulfilled in the invasion by
Tiglath-pileser, and the army of the Assyrians.

The twelfth verse commences a new prophecy, which has no connection with
that which precedes it; and which in itself gives no certain indication
of the time when it was uttered, or of the people to which it relates.
It is a broken and detached piece, and is evidently the description of
some army rushing to conquest, and confident of success, but which was
to be overtaken with sudden calamity. The entire description is so
applicable to the invasion of the land of Judah by the army of
Sennacherib, and his overthrow by the angel of Yahweh, that by the
common consent of interpreters it has been regarded as referring to it
(see the notes at Isa. 10). But when it was spoken, or why it was placed
here, is unknown. It may be added that many commentators, and, among the
rest, Gesenius, have supposed that the following chapter is a part of
this prophecy. The general sense of the prophecy is, that numerous
hostile nations would overrun Palestine, but that Yahweh would destroy
them all.

[Isaiah 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 17:12</span></span>

Wo to the multitude ... - The word 'woe' (הוי hôy) may be either an
interjection simply directing the attention to them, or it may be a word
indicating approaching calamity and judgment (see the note at [Isa
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#006)). Gesenius supposes that it is
rather the language of compassion, on account of the evil which they
threatened to bring upon the people of God, like [Kg1
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#030), 'Ah! wo, my brother!'

The multitude of many people - Or, the tumult of many nations - a
description of the noise attending an invading army made up of many
nations mingled together, such as was that of Sennacherib.

Which make a noise ... - This is a beautiful description of a vast army,
and of the shouting, the tumult, the din, which attends its march. The
same comparison occurs in [Jer 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#023);
[Psa 65:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#007) (see [Eze
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#002); [Rev
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#015); [Rev
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#002); [Rev
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#006)).

And to the rushing of nations - The rushing of mighty armies to
conquest.

[Isaiah 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 17:13</span></span>

God shall rebuke them - The word 'God' is not here in the original, but
is evidently to be supplied. The word 'rebuke' means that he would
disarrange their plans, prevent their success, and defeat their
purposes. It shows the great power of God, that he can thus by a
"rebuke" - a word - arrest mighty nations, and discomfit thom when they
are tumultuously hastening onward in the confidence of victory. This
discomfiture refers, doubtless, to the overthrow of Sennacherib and his
army by the pestilence ([Kg2 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035);
see the notes at [Isa 37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036)).

And they shall flee far off - The whole army of Sennacherib was not
destroyed, but a part with himself returned to Assyria [Kg2
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#036).

And shall be chased as the chaff ... - Denoting the case with which God
would do it, and the certain and entire discomfiture of the army. The
figure is one that is very striking in describing an army that is
routed, and that flees in disorder (compare [Job
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#018); [Psa
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004); [Psa
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#005); [Isa
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#005); [Hos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#003)).

And like a rolling thing - Margin, 'Thistle-down.' It means, literally,
anything that "rolls" (גלגל galgal, from גלל gâlal, to roll). It is
applied to chaff, stubble, or anything that is driven about by a
whirlwind [Psa 83:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#014).

[Isaiah 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 17:14</span></span>

At evening-tide trouble - In the time of evening - that is, in the
night.

Before the morning he is not - That is, he is destroyed. This is
strikingly descriptive of the destruction of the army of Sennacherib on
that fatal night when the angel of the Lord killed 185,000 men (see the
note at [Isa 37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036)).

This is the portion of them that spoil us - Of those who would plunder
us. This is a "general" declaration in regard to the enemies of the
Jewish people. This is the lot, the end, the destiny of all who attempt
to destroy them. That is, the people of God shall be safe whoever rises
up against them; and whatever may be the number, or the power of their
foes, they shall be overthrown.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 18](isa018)

</div>
