<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa001)  [Next](isa003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 2:0</span></span>

Analysis of Isaiah 2, Isaiah 3, and Isaiah 4

The prophecy in this and the two following chapters, constitutes one
continued discourse. At what time it was delivered is not known, and
cannot be ascertained by the prophecy itself. Dr. Lowth supposes it was
in the time of Jotham, or Uzziah, and this opinion is probably correct,
for it is to be presumed that in collecting the prophecies, those would
be placed first which were first delivered. Besides, the prophecy
relates to a time of prosperity, when the fruits of commerce abounded,
and did much to corrupt the people (see [Isa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#007), [Isa
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#016), [Isa
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#020); [Isa
3:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#018)), and this accords best with
the time of Uzziah, or the time of Jotham. Some have referred it to the
return from Babylon, others to the times of the Messiah. The description
in [Isa 2:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002), and [Isa
4:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005), cannot easily be referred to
any other times than those of the Messiah.

The main scope of the prophecy is, to denounce the crimes which
prevailed in the time when it was delivered; to threaten certain
punishment for these crimes; and to assure the nation that there would
be happier times when those crimes should have received their
appropriate punishment, and when the nation should be reformed. The
prophecy has relation solely to the kingdom of Judah, [Isa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001). The prophet opens the prophecy
[Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002) by a brief but striking
statement of the happy period when the Messiah should come, and the
happy influence of his advent, [Isa
2:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002). It would seem, in looking at
the entire prophecy, as if he had been contemplating the sins of the
nation which then abounded, until his heart was sickened, and he
involuntarily cast his mind forward to brighter and happier days when
these things should cease, and the Messiah should reign in his glory.
See Introduction, Section 7. The future times of the Messiah he
exhibits, by showing [Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002) that the
benefits of the true religion would be extended to all people, and would
be so conspicuous as to attract their attention, as if the temple, the
place of the worship of the true God, should be made conspicuous in the
sight of all nations. It would excite a deep interest, and a spirit of
earnest inquiry everywhere [Isa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003),
and the effect of his reign would be to put an end to wars, and to
introduce ultimately universal peace [Isa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004). In view of that, the prophet [Isa
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#005) exhorts all the people to turn
from their sins, and to walk in the light of Jehovah. This leads him to
a statement of the crimes which he would seem to have been
contemplating, and the punishment which must follow from their
prevalence. The statement of the crimes and their punishment is somewhat
intermingled, but they may be exhibited so as to be contemplated
separately and distinctly.

Crimes

Forsaking Jehovah;

Patronage of soothsayers;

Alliance with strangers [Isa 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#006);

Accumulation of treasures;

Preparation of war-chariots [Isa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#007);

Universal and debasing idolatry [Isa
2:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#008).

Punishments

God would so judge them as to produce universal consternation [Isa
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#010).

He would humble their pride, and bring them low [Isa
2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011).

He would smite and destroy all their wealth, and the sources of national
corruption and depravity [Isa 2:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#013).

He would entirely destroy the idols [Isa
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#013).

He would produce universal terror and alarm [Isa
2:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#019).

In view of these heavy judgments, the prophet calls on the people [Isa
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#022) to cease to trust in men, since
all were mortal, and unworthy of their confidence.

In Isa. 3, the description of the punishment of the nation is continued
[Isa 3:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001), intermingled with the
account of their sins.

There would be calamity, the removal of the means of support, and the
removal of the men in whom the nation had reposed confidence [Isa
3:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001).

There would be oppression, and a violation of, and disregard of all the
proper laws of social life [Isa 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#005).

There would be a state of anarchy and calamity, so that no one would be
willing to be a leader, or undertake to remove the difficulties of the
nation, or hold an office of trust [Isa
3:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#006).

Jerusalem would be ruined [Isa 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#008).

The cause of this was pride and hypocrisy [Isa
3:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#008).

The prophet states the principles of the divine administration - that it
should be well with the righteous, but ill with the wicked [Isa
3:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#012).

The rulers of the nation were corrupt and oppressive [Isa
3:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#012).

The chapter closes [Isa 3:16-26](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#016) with a
graphic description of the gaiety, pride, and folly of the female part
of the Jewish community, and with the assurance that they would be
involved in the calamities which were coming upon the nation.

[Isa 4:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001) is a continuation of the
same prophecy. It contains the following parts:

1\. A statement of the general calamity of the nation, indicated by the
fact that the "men" would be destroyed, and that the women would apply
to the few that remained that they might be called by their name, and
their reproach be taken away [Isa 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001).

2\. At that future time there would be a looking to the Messiah; a
feeling that God only could interpose and save them; and a high estimate
placed on the 'Branch of Jehovah' - the Messiah, to whom alone they
could look for deliverance [Isa 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002).

3\. The people would turn to God, and there would be a reformation from
their national sins [Isa 4:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#003). The
judgments of Yahweh would be effectual to the removal of the special
crimes which the prophet had denounced, and the nation would become
holy.

God would, in that future time, become the protector of his people, and
the symbols of his presence and protection would be manifest everywhere
in the midst of them [Isa 4:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005).

It is evident, therefore, that this prophecy was uttered when the nation
was proud, haughty, and hypocritical; when they had been successfully
engaged in commerce, and when the means of luxury abounded; when the
national pride and vanity were manifested in dress, and luxury, and in
the oppressive acts of the rulers; when general disorder and anarchy
prevailed, and when a part of the nation at least was idolatrous. The
entire prophecy may be regarded as a condemnation of these sins, and a
solemn declaration that "for" these sins, wherever they prevail, the
judgments of God will be poured out on a people. The prophecy, also,
contemplates happier and purer times, and contains the assurance that
the "series" of judgments which God would bring on a guilty people would
"ultimately" have the effect to purify them, and that all these crimes
and calamities would be succeeded by the pure and peaceful reign of the
Messiah. It is in accordance with the manner of Isaiah, when he surveys
existing crimes; when he sees the degradation of his countrymen, and is
deeply distressed; when he portrays the judgments that must "certainly"
come upon them; and when, as if sickened with the contemplation of their
crimes and calamities, his mind seeks repose in the contemplation of the
purer and happier period when the Messiah should reign, and peace,
prosperity, and purity should prevail.

[Isaiah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 2:1</span></span>

The word - This indicates that this is the commencement of a new
prophecy. It has no immediate connection with the preceding. It was
delivered doubtless at a different time, and with reference to a
different class of events. In the previous chapter the term "vision" is
used [Isa 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001), but the meaning is
substantially the same. The term "word" דבר dâbâr, denotes a "command, a
promise, a doctrine, an oracle, a revelation, a message, a thing," etc.
It means here, that Isaiah foresaw certain "future events" or "things"
that would happen in regard to Judah and Jerusalem.

Judah ... - see the notes at [Isa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001).

[Isaiah 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 2:2</span></span>

In the last days - הימים באחרית be'achărı̂yth hāyâmı̂ym. In the "after"
days; in the "futurity" of days; that is, in the time to come. This is
an expression that often occurs in the Old Testament. It does not of
itself refer to any "particular" period, and especially not, as our
translation would seem to indicate, to the end of the world. The
expression properly denotes "only future time" in general. But the
prophets were accustomed to concentrate all their hopes on the coming of
the Messiah. They saw his advent as giving character, and sublimity, and
happiness to all coming times. Hence, the expression came to denote, by
way of eminence, the times of the Messiah, and is frequently used in the
New Testament, as well as the Old, to designate those times; see [Act
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#017); compare [Joe
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028); [Heb
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002); [Pe1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#005), [Pe1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#020); [Jo1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018); [Gen
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001); [Mic
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001); [Deu
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#030); [Jer
48:47](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#047); [Dan
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#028).

The expressions which follow are figurative, and cannot well be
interpreted as relating to any other events than the times of the
Messiah. They refer to that future period, then remote, which would
constitute the "last" dispensation of things in this world - the "last"
time - the period, however long it might be, in which the affairs of the
world would be closed. The patriarchal times had passed away; the
dispensation under the Mosaic economy would pass away; the times of the
Messiah would be the "last" times, or the last dispensation, under which
the affairs of the world would be consummated. Thus the phrase is
evidently used in the New Testament, as denoting the "last" time, though
without implying that that time would be short. It might be longer than
"all" the previous periods put together, but it would be the "last"
economy, and under that economy, or "in" that time, the world would be
destroyed, Christ would come to judgment, the dead would be raised, and
the affairs of the world would be wound up. The apostles, by the use of
this phrase, never intimate that the time would be short, or that the
day of judgment was near, but only that "in" that time the great events
of the world's history would be consummated and closed; compare [Th2
2:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001). This prophecy occurs in Micah
[Mic 4:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001) with scarcely any
variation. It is not known whether Isaiah made use of Micah, or Micah of
Isaiah, or both of an older and well-known prophecy. Hengstenberg
("Chris." i., pp. 289, 290) supposes that Isaiah copied from Micah, and
suggests the following reasons:

1\. The prediction of Isaiah is disconnected with what goes before, and
yet begins with the copulative ו (v), "and." In Micah, on the contrary,
it is connected with what precedes and follows.

2\. In the discourses of the prophets, the promise usually follows the
threatening. This order is observed by Micah; in Isaiah, on the
contrary, the promise contained in the passage precedes the threatening,
and another promise follows. Many of the older theologians supposed that
the passages were communicated alike by the Holy Spirit to both writers.
But there is no improbability in supposing that Isaiah may have availed
himself of language used by Micah in describing the same event.

The mountain of the Lord's house - The temple was built on mount Moriah,
which was hence called the mountain of the Lord's house. The temple, or
the mountain on which it was reared, would be the object which would
express the public worship of the true God. And hence, to say that that
should be elevated higher than all other hills, or mountains, means,
that the worship of the true God would become an object so conspicuous
as to be seen by all nations; and so conspicuous that all nations would
forsake other objects and places of worship, being attracted by the
glory of the worship of the true God.

Shall be established - Shall be fixed, rendered permanent.

In the top of the mountains - To be in the top of the mountains, would
be to be "conspicuous," or seen from afar. In other words, the true
religion would be made known to all people.

Shall flow unto it - This is a figurative expression, denoting that they
would be converted to the true religion. It indicates that they would
come in multitudes, like the flowing of a mighty river. The idea of the
"flowing" of the nations, or of the movement of many people toward an
object like a broad stream, is one that is very grand and sublime;
compare [Psa 65:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#007). This cannot be
understood of any period previous to the establishment of the gospel. At
no time of the Jewish history did any events occur that would be a
complete fulfillment of this prophecy. The expressions evidently refer
to that period elsewhere often predicted by this prophet [Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010); [Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001), [Isa
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#006); [Isa
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#022); [Isa
54:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#003); [Isa
60:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#003), [Isa
60:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#005), [Isa
60:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#010); [Isa
62:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#002); [Isa
66:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#012), [Isa
66:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#019), when "the Gentiles" would be
brought to the knowledge of the true religion. In [Isa
66:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#012), there occurs a passage
remarkably similar, and which may serve to explain this:

'Behold I will extend peace to her (to Zion) as a river;

And the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream.'

Under the Messiah, through the preaching of the apostles and by the
spread of the gospel, this prophecy was to receive its full
accomplishment.

[Isaiah 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 2:3</span></span>

And many people shall go - This denotes a prevalent "desire" to turn to
the true God, and embrace the true religion. It is remarkable that it
speaks of an inclination among them to "seek" God, as if they were
satisfied of the folly and danger of their ways, and felt the necessity
of obtaining a better religion. In many cases this has occurred. Thus,
in modern times, the people of the Sandwich Islands threw away their
gods and remained without any religion, as if waiting for the message of
life. Thus, too, the pagan not unfreguently come from a considerable
distance at missionary stations to be instructed, and to receive the
Bible and tracts. Perhaps this is to be extensively the mode in which
Christianity is to be spread. God, who has all power over human hearts,
may excite the pagan to anxious inquiry; may show them the folly of
their religion; and may lead them to this "preparation" to embrace the
gospel, and this disposition to "go" and seek it. He has access to all
people. By a secret influence on the understanding, the heart, and the
conscience of the pagan, he can convince them of the folly of idolatry
and its vices. He can soften down their prejudices in favor of their
long-established systems; can break down the barriers between them and
Christians; and can dispose them to receive with joy the messengers of
salvation. He can raise up, among the pagan themselves, reformers, who
shall show them the folly of their systems. It cannot be doubted that
the universal triumph of the gospel will be preceded by some such
remarkable preparation among the nations; by a secret, silent, but most
mighty influence from God on the pagan generally, that shall loosen
their hold on idolatry, and dispose them to welcome the gospel. And the
probability that this state of things exists already, and will more and
more, should be an inducement to Christians to make more vigorous
efforts to send every where the light of life.

He will teach us of his ways - He will make us acquainted with his will,
and with the doctrines of the true religion.

For out of Zion - These are the words of the "prophet," not of the
people. The prophet declares that the law would go from Zion; that is,
Zion would be the center from which it would be spread abroad; see the
note at [Isa 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008). Zion is put here for
Jerusalem, and means that the message of mercy to mankind would be
spread "from" Jerusalem. Hence, the Messiah commanded his disciples to
tarry 'in Jerusalem until they should be endued with power from on
high.' [Luk 24:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#049). Hence, also, he
said that repentance and remission of sins should 'be preached among all
nations, beginning at Jerusalem' - perhaps referring to this very
passage in Isaiah; [Luk 24:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047).

The law - This is put here for the doctrines of the true religion in
general. The law or will of God, under the reign of the Messiah, would
proceed from Zion.

The word of the Lord - The message of his mercy to mankind; that which
he has "spoken" respecting the salvation of men. The truth which is here
taught is, "that Zion or the church is the source of religious truth,
and the center of religious influence in the world." This is true in the
following respects:

\(1\) Zion was the source of religious truth to the ancient world.
Knowledge was gained by travel; and it is capable of about as clear
demonstration as any fact of ancient history, that no inconsiderable
part of the knowledge pertaining to God in ancient Greece was obtained
by contact with the sages of distant lands, and that the truths held in
Zion or Jerusalem thus radiated from land to land, and mind to mind.

\(2\) The church is now the center of religious truth to the world
around it.

\(a\) The world by its philosophy never originates a system of religion
which it is desirable to retain, and which conveys any just view of God
or the way of salvation.

\(b\) The most crude, unsettled, contradictory, and vague opinions on
religion prevail in this community called 'the world.'

\(c\) If "in" this community there are any opinions that are true and
valuable, they can in most instances be traced to "the church." They are
owing to the influence of the pulpit; or to an early training in the
Bible; or to early teaching in the Sabbath-school, or to the
instructions of a pious parent, or to the "general" influence which
Christianity exerts on the community.

\(3\) The church holds the power of "reformation" in her hands, every
cause of morals advancing or retarding as she enters into the work, or
as she withdraws from it.

\(4\) The pagan world is dependent on the church for the knowledge of
the true religion. There are "no" systems of truth that start up on a
pagan soil. There is no elastic energy in a pagan mind. There is no
recuperative power to bring it back to God. There is no "advance" made
toward the truth in any pagan community. There is no well-spring of life
to purify the soul. The effect of time is only to deepen the darkness,
and to drive them farther from God. They only worship mere shapeless
blocks; they bow down before worse looking idols; they enter less
elegant and more polluted temples. The idols of the pagan are not
constructed with half the skill and taste evinced two thousand years
ago; nor are their temples built with such exquisite art. No idol of the
pagan world now can compare with the statue of Minerva at Athens; no
temple can be likened to the Parthenon; no sentiment of paganism in
China, India, or Africa, can be compared with the views of the sages of
Greece. The pagan world is becoming worse and worse, and if ever brought
to better views, it must be by a "foreign" influence; and that influence
will not go forth from philosophy or science, but "from the church." If
light is ever to spread, it is to go forth from Zion; and the world is
dependent on "the church" for any just knowledge of God and of the way
to life, The 'law is to go forth from Zion;' and the question whether
the million of the human family are to be taught the way to heaven, is
just a question whether the church can be roused to diffuse abroad the
light which has arisen on her.

[Isaiah 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 2:4</span></span>

And he shall judge - Or he shall exercise the office of a judge, or
umpire. This "literally" refers to the God of Jacob [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003), though it is clear that the
meaning is, that he will do it by the Messiah, or under his reign. One
office of a judge is to decide controversies; to put an end to
litigations, and thus to promote peace. The connection shows that this
is the meaning here. Nations that are contending shall be brought to
peace by the influence of the reign of the Messiah, and shall beat their
swords into plowshares. In other words, the influence of the reign of
the Messiah shall put a period to wars, and reduce contending nations to
peace.

And shall rebuke - Shall "reprove" them for their contentions and
strifes.

Lowth: 'Shall work conviction in many peoples.'

Noyes: 'He shall be a judge of the nations,

And an umpire of many kingdoms.'

He shall show them the evil of war; and by reproving them for those
wicked passions which cause wars, shall promote universal peace. This
the gospel everywhere does; and the tendency of it, if obeyed, would be
to produce universal peace. In accordance with predictions like these,
the Messiah is called the Prince of Peace [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006); and it is said that of his peace
there shall be no end; [Isa 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#007).

And they shall beat ... - They shall change the arts of war to those of
peace; or they shall abandon the pursuits of war for the mild and useful
arts of husbandry; compare [Psa 46:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#009);
[Hos 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#020). A similar prophecy is found
in [Zac 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#010). The following extracts
may serve to illustrate this passage: 'The Syrian plow, which was
probably used in all the regions around, is a very simple frame, and
commonly so light, that a man of moderate strength might carry it in one
hand. Volney states that in Syria it is often nothing else than the
branch of a tree, cut below a bifurcation, and used without wheels. The
plowshare is a piece of iron, broad but not large, which tips the end of
the shaft. So much does it resemble the short sword used by the ancient
warriors, that it may, with very little trouble, be converted into that
deadly weapon; and when the work of destruction is over, reduced again
to its former shape, and applied to the purposes of agriculture.'

Their spears - Spears were much used in war. They were made of wood,
with a sharpened piece of iron or other metal attached to the end. The
pruning-hook, made for cutting the limbs of vines or trees, is, in like
manner, a long piece of wood with a crooked knife attached to it. Hence,
it was easy to convert the one into the other.

Pruning-hooks - Hooks or long knives for trimming vines. The word here,
however, means anything employed in "reaping or mowing," a sickle, or a
scythe, or any instrument to "cut with," as well as a pruning-hook.
These figures, as images of peace, are often used by the prophets. Micah
[Mic 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#004) has added to this description
of peace in Isaiah, the following:

But they shall sit

Every man under his vine,

And under his fig-tree;

And none shall make them afraid:

For the mouth of Jehovah hath spoken it.

Joel [Joe 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#010) has reversed the
figure, and applied it to war prevailing over peace:

Beat your plowshares into swords;

And your pruning-hooks into spears.

The same emblems to represent peace, which are used here by Isaiah, also
occur in pagan poets. Thus Martial; Epigr. xiv. 34:

Falx ex ense.

Pax me certa ducis placidos conflavit in usus,

Agricolae nunc sum, militis ante fui.

So Virgil; Georg. 1,507:

Squalent abductis arva colonis,

Et curvae rigidum falces conflantur in ensem.

So also Ovid; Fast. 1,699:

Sarcula cessabunt, versique in pila ligones.

Nation shall not lift up ... - This is a remarkable prediction of
universal peace under the gospel. The prediction is positive, that the
time will come when it shall prevail. But it has not yet been fully
accomplished. We may remark, however, in relation to this:

\(1\) That the tendency of the gospel is to promote the arts, and to
produce the spirit of peace.

\(2\) It will dispose the nations to do right, and thus to avoid the
occasions of war.

\(3\) It will fill the mind with horror at the scenes of cruelty and
blood that war produces.

\(4\) It will diffuse honor around the arts of peace, and teach the
nations to prize the endearments of home and country, and the sweet
scenes of domestic life.

\(5\) Just so far as it has influence over princes and rulers, it will
teach them to lay aside the passions of ambition and revenge, and the
love of conquest and 'glory,' and indispose them to war.

\(6\) The tendency of things now is toward peace. The laws of nations
have been established under the gospel. Difficulties can even now be
adjusted by negotiation, and without a resort to arms.

\(7\) Wars are far less barbarous than they were formerly. The gospel
has produced humanity, mildness, and some degree of justice even in war.
It has put an end to the unmerciful treatment of prisoners; has
prevented their being sold as slaves; has taught even belligerents not
to murder women and children.

\(8\) Nothing remains to be done to make peace universal but to send the
gospel abroad through every land. When that is done, the nations will be
disposed to peace; and the prophet, therefore, has predicted the
universal prevalence of peace "only" when all nations shall be brought
under the influence of the gospel.

[Isaiah 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 2:5</span></span>

O house of Jacob - This is a direct address, or exhortation, of the
prophet to the Jews. It is made in view of the fact that God had
gracious purposes toward them. He intended to distinguish them by making
them the source of blessings to all nations. As this was to be their
high destiny, he exhorts them to devote themselves to him, and to live
to his honor. The word "house" here means the "family, or nation." The
phrase is applied to the Jews because their tribes were descended from
the twelve sons of Jacob.

Let us walk - Let us "live." The word "walk" is often used to denote
human life or conduct; compare [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003); [Rom
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004); [Rom
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001); [Co1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007); [Gal
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016), ...

In the light of the Lord - The sense of this is: Let us obey the
commandments of Yahweh; or, as the Chaldee expresses it, 'Let us walk in
the doctrine of the law of the Lord.' The idea may be thus expressed:
'Let us not walk in the darkness and error of sin and idolatry, but in
the light or instruction which God sheds upon us by his law. He teaches
us what we should do, and let us obey him.' "Light" is often, in the
Scriptures, thus put for instruction, or teaching; compare the note at
[Mat 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#016); note at [Joh
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004); also, note at [Eph
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008).

[Isaiah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 2:6</span></span>

Therefore - The prophet proceeds in this and the following verses, to
state the reasons of their calamities, and of the judgments that had
come upon them. Those judgments he traces to the crimes which he
enumerates - crimes growing chiefly out of great commercial prosperity,
producing pride, luxury, and idolatry.

Thou hast forsaken - The address is changed from the exhortation to the
house of Jacob [Isa 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#005) to God, as is
frequently the case in the writings of Isaiah. It indicates a state
where the mind is full of the subject, and where it expresses itself in
a rapid and hurried manner.

Hast forsaken - Hast withdrawn thy protection, and given them over to
the calamities and judgments which had come upon them.

They be replenished - Hebrew, They are "full." That is, these things
abound.

From the East - Margin, "More than the East." The meaning of the
expression it is not easy to determine. The word translated "East," קדם
qedem denotes also "antiquity," or that which is "of old," as well as
the East. Hence, the Septuagint renders it, 'their land is, as of old,
filled.' The Chaldee, 'their land is filled with idols as at the
beginning.' Either idea will suit the passage; though our translation
more nearly accords with the Hebrew than the others. The "East," that
is, Arabia, Persia, Chaldea, etc., was the country where astrology,
soothsaying, and divination particularly abounded; see [Dan
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002); [Deu
18:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#009).

And are soothsayers - Our word "soothsayers" means "foretellers,
prognosticators," persons who pretend to predict future events "without
inspiration," differing in this from true prophets. What the Hebrew word
means, it is not so easy to determine. The word עננים ‛onenı̂ym may be
derived from ענן ‛ânân, "a cloud" - and then would denote those who
augur from the appearance of the clouds, a species of divination from
certain changes observed in the sky; compare [Lev
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#026) : 'Neither shall ye - observe
times.' [Kg2 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#006). This species of
divination was expressly forbidden; see [Deu
18:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#010) : 'There shall not be found
among you anyone that useth divination, or an observer of times, or an
enchanter,' etc. Or the word may be derived from עין ‛ayin, "an eye,"
and then it will denote those who fascinate, enchant, or bewitch by the
eye. It is probable that the word includes "augury, necromancy, and
witchcraft," in general - all which were expressly forbidden by the law
of Moses; [Deu 18:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#010).

Like the Philistines - The Philistines occupied the land in the
southwest part of Palestine. The Septuagint uses the word "foreigners"
here, as they do generally, instead of the Philistines.

And they please themselves - The word used here - שׂפק s'âphaq - means
literally "to clap the hands" in token of joy. It may also mean, "to
join the hands, to shake hands," and then it will signify that they
"joined hands" with foreigners; that is, they made compacts or entered
into alliances with them contrary to the law of Moses. The Septuagint
seems to understand it of unlawful marriages with the women of
surrounding nations - τέκνα πολλὰ ἀλλόφυλλα ἐγενήθη αὐτοῖς tekna polla
allophula egenēthē autois; compare [Neh
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#023). It means probably, in general,
that they entered into improper alliances, whether they were military,
matrimonial, or commercial, with the surrounding nations. The words
"children of strangers" may mean, with the descendants of the foreigners
with whom Moses forbade any alliances. The Jews were to be a separate
and special people, and, in order to this, it was necessary to forbid
all such foreign alliances; [Exo
23:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#031); [Exo
34:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#012); [Psa
106:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#003), [Psa
106:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#005); [Ezr
9:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001),

[Isaiah 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 2:7</span></span>

Their land also is full of silver and gold - This "gold" was brought
chiefly from Ophir. Solomon imported vast quantities of silver and gold
from foreign places; [Ch2 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#018); [Ch2
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#010); [Ch1
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#004); compare [Job
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#016); [Kg1
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#021), [Kg1
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#027); [Ch2
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#020). 'And the king made silver to be
in Jerusalem as stones.' 'It was nothing accounted of in the days of
Solomon.' From these expressions we see the force of the language of
Isaiah - 'their land is full,' etc. This accumulation of silver and gold
was expressly forbidden by the law of Moses; [Deu
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#017) : 'Neither shall he (the king of
Israel) greatly multiply to himself silver and gold.' The reason of this
prohibition was, that it tended to produce luxury, effeminacy,
profligacy, the neglect of religion, and vice. It is on this account
that it is brought by the prophet as an "accusation" against them that
their land was thus filled.

Treasures - Wealth of all kinds; but chiefly silver, gold, precious
stones, garments, etc.; compare the note at [Mat
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#019).

Their land also is full of horses - This was also forbidden in the law
of Moses; [Deu 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016) : 'But he shall
not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the people to return to Egypt,
to the end that he should multiply horses.' This law, however, was
grossly violated by Solomon; [Kg1
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#026) : 'And Solomon gathered together
chariots and horsemen; he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and
twelve thousand horsemen.' It is not quite clear "why" the use of horses
was forbidden to the Jews. Perhaps several reasons might have concurred:

\(1\) Egypt was distinguished for producing fine horses, and the
Egyptians used them much in war [Deu
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016); and one design of God was to
make the Jews distinguished in all respects from the Egyptians, and to
keep them from commerce with them.

\(2\) Horses were chiefly used "in war," and the tendency of keeping
them would be to produce the love of war and conquest.

\(3\) The tendency of keeping them would be to lead them to put "trust"
in them rather than in God for protection. This is hinted at in [Psa
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007) : 'Some trust in chariots, and
some in horses; but we will remember the name of Yahweh our God.'

\(4\) "Horses" were regarded as consecrated "to the sun;" see "Univ.
Hist. Anc. P.," vol. x., 177. Ed. 1780. They were sacrificed in various
nations to the sun, their swiftness being supposed to render them an
appropriate offering to that luminary. There is no evidence, however,
that they were used for sacrifice among the Hebrews. They were probably
employed to draw the chariots in the solemn processions in the worship
of the sun. The ancient Persians, who were sun-worshippers, dedicated
white horses and chariots to the sun, and it is supposed that other
nations derived the practice from them. The sun was supposed to be drawn
daily in a chariot by four wondrous coursers, and the fate of Phaeton,
who undertook to guide that chariot and to control those coursers, is
known to all. The use of horses, therefore, among the Hebrews in the
time of Ahaz, when Isaiah lived, was connected with idolatry, and it was
mainly on this account that the prophet rebuked their use with so much
severity; [Kg2 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#011). It may be added,
that in a country like Judea, abounding in hills and mountains, cavalry
could not be well employed even in war. On the plains of Egypt it could
be employed to advantage; or in predatory excursions, as among the
Arabs, horses could be used with great success and effect, and Egypt and
Arabia therefore abounded with them. Indeed, these may be regarded as
the native countries of the horse. As it was the design of God to
separate, as much as possible, the Jews from the surrounding nations,
the use of horses was forbidden.

Chariots - "Chariots" were chiefly used in war, though they were
sometimes used for pleasure. Of those intended for war there were two
kinds; one for the generals and princes to ride in, the other to break
the enemy's ranks. These last were commonly armed with hooks or scythes.
They were much used by the ancients; [Jos
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#004); [Jdg
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#019). The Philistines, in their war
against Saul, had 30,000 chariots, and 6000 horsemen; [Sa1
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#005). There is no evidence, however,
that the Jews used chariots for war. Solomon had many of them [Kg1
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#026), but they do not appear to have
been used in any military expedition, but to have been kept for display
and pleasure. Judea was a mountainous country, and chariots would have
been of little or no use in war.

[Isaiah 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 2:8</span></span>

Their land also is full of idols - compare [Hos
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#004); [Hos
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#001). Vitringa supposes that Isaiah
here refers to idols that were kept in private houses, as Uzziah and
Jotham were worshippers of the true God, and in their reign idolatry was
not publicly practiced. It is certain, however, that though Uzziah
himself did right, and was disposed to worship the true God, yet he did
not effectually remove idolatry from the land. The high places were not
removed, and the people still sacrificed and burned incense on them;
[Kg2 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#004). It was customary with the
pagan to keep in their houses "Penates or household gods" - small
images, which they regarded as "protectors," and to which they paid
homage: compare [Gen 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#019); [Jdg
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#005); [Sa1
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#013); [Hos
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004). 'This is a true and literal
description of India. The traveler cannot proceed a "mile" through an
inhabited country without seeing idols, and vestiges of idolatry in
every direction. See their vessles, their implements of husbandry, their
houses, their furniture, their ornaments, their sacred trees, their
"domestic" and public temples; and they all declare that the land is
full of idols.' - "Roberts."

The work of their own hands ... - Idols. It is often brought as proof of
their great folly and degradation that they paid homage to what "they"
had themselves made. See this severely satirized in [Isa
40:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018); [Isa
41:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#006); [Isa
44:9-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#009).

[Isaiah 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 2:9</span></span>

And the mean man - That is, the man in humble life, the poor, the low in
rank - for this is all that the Hebrew word here - אדם 'âdâm - implies.
The distinction between the two words here used - אדם 'âdâm as denoting
a man of humble rank, and אישׁ 'ı̂ysh as denoting one of elevated rank -
is one that constantly occurs in the Scriptures. Our word "mean" conveys
an idea of moral baseness and degradation, which is not implied in the
Hebrew.

Boweth down - That is, before idols. Some commentators, however, have
understood this of bowing down in "affliction," but the other is
probably the true interpretation.

And the great man - The men in elevated rank in life. The expressions
together mean the same as "all ranks of people." It was a common or
universal thing. No rank was exempt from the prevailing idolatry.

Therefore forgive them not - The Hebrew is "future" - להם ואל־תשׂא
ve'al-tis'â' lâhem. Thou wilt not "bear" for them; that is, thou wilt
not bear away their sins (by an atonement), or 'thou wilt not forgive
them;' - but agreeable to a common Hebrew construction, it has the force
of the imperative. It involves a "threatening" of the prophet, in the
form of an address to God 'So great is their sin, that thou, Lord, wilt
not pardon them.' The prophet then proceeds, in the following verses, to
denounce the certainty and severity of the judgment that was coming upon
them.

[Isaiah 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 2:10</span></span>

Enter into the rock - That is, into the "holes or caverns" in the rocks,
as a place of refuge and safety; compare [Isa
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#019), and [Rev
6:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#015). In times of invasion by an
enemy, it was natural to flee to the fastnesses or to the caverns of
rocks for refuge. This expression is highly figurative and poetic. The
prophet warns them to flee from danger. The sense is, that such were
their crimes that they would certainly be punished; and he advises them
to flee to a place of safety.

And hide thee in the dust - In [Isa
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#019), this is 'caves of the dust.' It
is parallel to the former, and probably has a similar meaning. But "may"
there not be reference here to the mode prevailing in the East of
avoiding the monsoon or poisonous heated wind that passes over the
desert? Travelers there, in order to be safe, are obliged to throw
themselves down, and to place their mouths close to the earth until it
has passed.

For fear of the Lord - Hebrew 'From the face of the terror of the Lord.'
That is, the punishment which God will inflict will sweep over the land,
producing fear and terror.

And for the glory ... - That is, the honor or splendor which will attend
him when he comes forth to inflict judgment on the people; [Isa
2:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#019).

[Isaiah 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 2:11</span></span>

The lofty looks - Hebrew 'The eyes of pride,' that is, the proud eyes or
looks. Pride commonly evinces itself in a lofty carriage and
supercilious aspect; [Psa 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#027).

Shall be humbled - By the calamities that shall sweep over the land.
This does not mean that he shall be brought "to be" humble, or to have a
humble heart, but that that on which he so much prided himself would be
taken away.

The Lord alone ... - God will so deal with them as to vindicate his
honor; to turn the attention entirely on himself, and to secure the
reverence of all the people. So terrible shall be his judgments, and so
"manifestly" shall they come from "him," that they shall look away from
everything else to "him" alone.

In that day - In the day of which the prophet speaks, when God would
punish them for their sins, Reference is probably made to the captivity
at Babylon. It may be remarked, that one design of punishment is to lead
people to regard and honor God. He will humble the pride of people, and
so pass before them in his judgments, that they shall be compelled to
"acknowledge" him as their just Sovereign and Judge.

[Isaiah 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 2:12</span></span>

The day ... - This expression evidently denotes that the Lord would
inflict severe punishment upon every one that was lofty. Such a severe
infliction is called "the day of the Lord of hosts," because it would be
a time when "he" would particularly manifest himself, and when "he"
would be recognized as the inflicter of that punishment. "His" coming
forth in this manner would give "character" to that time, and would be
the prominent "event." The punishment of the wicked is thus freguently
called "the day of the Lord;" [Isa
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#006), [Isa
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#009) : 'Behold the day of the Lord
cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger,' etc.; [Jer
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#010) : 'The day of the Lord God of
hosts, a day of vengeance.' [Eze 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#003);
[Zep 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#007), [Zep
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#014); [Joe
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#031); see also in the New Testament,
[Th1 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#002); [Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010).

Every one that is proud and lofty - Or, rather, every "thing" that is
high and lofty. The phrase is not restricted to "persons," though it
embraces them. But though the language here is general, the reference is
doubtless, mainly, to the princes, magistrates, and nobility of the
nation; and is designed not only to designate them as men of rank and
power, but as men who were haughty in their demeanour and feelings. At
the same time, there is included in the language, as the subsequent
verses show, all on which the nation prided itself.

[Isaiah 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 2:13</span></span>

And upon all the cedars of Lebanon - This is a beautiful specimen of the
poetic manner of writing, so common among the Hebrews, where spiritual
and moral subjects are represented by grand or beautiful imagery taken
from objects of nature. Mount Lebanon bounded Palestine on the north. It
was formerly much celebrated for its large and lofty cedars. These
cedars were from thirty-five to forty feet in girth, and very high. They
were magnificent trees, and were valuable for ceiling: statues, or
roofs, that required durable, and beautiful timber. The roof of the
temple of Diana of Ephesus, according to Pliny, was of cedar, and no
small part of the temple of Solomon was of this wood. A few lofty trees
of this description are still remaining on Mount Lebanon. 'After three
hours of laborious traveling,' says D'Arvieux, 'we arrived at the famous
cedars about eleven o'clock. We counted twenty-three of them. The
circumference of these trees is thirty-six feet. The bark of the cedar
resembles that of the pine; the leaves and cone also bear considerable
resemblance. The stem is upright, the wood is hard, and has the
reputation of being incorruptible. The leaves are long, narrow, rough,
very green, ranged in tufts along the branches; they shoot in spring,
and fall in the beginning of winter. Its flowers and fruit resemble
those of the pine. From the full grown trees, a fluid trickles
naturally, and without incision; this is clear, transparent, whitish,
and after a time dries and hardens; it is supposed to possess great
virtues. The place where these great trees are stationed, is in a plain
of nearly a league in circumference, on the summit of a mount which is
environed on almost all sides by other mounts, so high that their
summits are always covered with snow. This plain is level, the air is
pure, the heavens always serene.'

Maundrell found only sixteen cedars of large growth, and a natural
plantation of smaller ones, which were very numerous. One of the largest
was twelve yards six inches in girth, and thirty-seven yards in the
spread of its boughs. At six yards from the ground, it was divided into
five limbs, each equal to a great tree. Dr. Richardson visited them in
1818, and found a small clump of large, tall, and beautiful trees, which
he pronounces the most picturesque productions of the vegetable world
that he had ever seen. In this clump are two generations of trees; the
oldest are large and massy, rearing their heads to an enormous height,
and spreading their branches to a great extent. He measured one, not the
largest in the clump, and found it thirty-two feet in circumference.
Seven of these trees appeared to be very old, the rest younger, though,
for want of space, their branches are not so spreading.

Bush's "Illustrations of Scripture." 'The celebrated cedar-grove of
Lebanon,' says Dr. Robinson, 'is at least two days journey from Beirut,
near the northern, and perhaps the highest summit of the mountain. It
has been often and sufficiently described by travelers for the last
three centuries; but they all differ as to the number of the oldest
trees, inasmuch as in counting, some have included more and some less of
the younger ones. At present, the number of trees appears to be on the
increase, and amounts in all to several hundred. This grove was long
held to be the only remnant of the ancient cedars of Lebanon. But
Seetzen, in 1805, discovered two other groves of greater extent; and the
American Missionaries, in traveling through the mountains, have also
found many cedars in other places. The trees are of all sizes, old and
young; but none so ancient and venerable as those usually visited.'
"Bib. Researches," iii., 440; 441. The cedar, so large, lofty, and
grand, is used in the Scriptures to represent kings, princes, and
nobles: compare [Eze 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#003); [Dan
4:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#020); [Zac
11:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001); [Isa
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#008). Here it means the princes and
nobles of the land of Israel. The Chaldee renders it, 'upon all the
strong and mighty kings of the people.'

And upon all the oaks of Bashan - "Bashan" was east of the river Jordan,
in the limits of the half tribe of Manasseh. It was bounded on the north
and east by Gilead, south by the river Jabbok, and west by the Jordan.
It was celebrated for pasturage, and for producing fine cattle; [Num
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#033); [Num
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#033); [Psa
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012); [Eze
39:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#018); [Amo
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001); [Mic
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#014). Its lofty oaks are also
particularly celebrated; [Eze 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#006);
[Amo 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#009); [Zac
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#002). The sense here is not different
from the former member of the sentence - denoting the princes and nobles
of the land.

[Isaiah 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 2:14</span></span>

And upon all the high mountains - Judea abounded in lofty mountains,
which added much to the grandeur of its natural scenery. Lowth supposes
that by mountains and hills are meant here, 'kingdoms, republics,
states, cities;' but there are probably no parallel places where they
have this meaning. The meaning is probably this: high mountains and
hills would not only be objects of beauty or grandeur, but also places
of defense, and protection. In the caverns and fastnesses of such hills,
it would be easy for the people to find refuge when the land was
invaded. The meaning of the prophet then is, that the day of God's
vengeance should be upon the places of refuge and strength; the strongly
fortified places, or places of sure retreat in cases of invasion;
compare the notes at [Isa 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#019).

Hills that are lifted up - That is, high, elevated hills.

[Isaiah 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 2:15</span></span>

Every high tower - Towers, or fortresses, were erected for defense and
protection. They were made on the walls of cities, for places of
observation (compare the note at [Isa
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#005)), or in places of strength, to be
a refuge for an army, and to be a point from which they might sally out
to attack their enemies. They were "high" to afford a defense against
being scaled by an enemy, and also that from the top they might look
abroad for observation; and also to annoy an enemy from the top, when
the foe approached the walls of a city.

Every fenced wall - הומה בצוּרה betsûrâh hômâh. The word "fenced,"
בצוּרה betsûrâh, is from בצר bâtsar, to make inaccessible, and hence, to
fortify. It denotes a wall that is inaccessible, or strongly fortified.
Cities were commonly surrounded by high and strong walls to defend them
from enemies. The sense is, God would overturn all their strong places
of refuge and defense.

[Isaiah 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 2:16</span></span>

And upon all the ships of Tarshish - Ships of Tarshish are often
mentioned in the Old Testament, but the meaning of the expression is not
quite obvious; see [Kg1 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#022); [Ch2
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#021); [Ch2
20:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#036); [Psa
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#007), ... It is evident that
"Tarshish" was some distant land from which was imported silver, iron,
lead, tin, etc. It is now generally agreed that "Tartessus" in Spain is
referred to by the Tarshish of Scripture. Bruce, however, supposes that
it was in Africa, south of Abyssinia; see the note at [Isa
60:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#009). That it was in the "west" is
evident from [Gen 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#004); compare [Psa
72:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#010). In [Eze
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#013), it is mentioned as an important
place of trade; in [Jer 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#009), it is
said that silver was procured there; and in [Eze
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#012), it is said that iron, lead,
silver, and tin, were imported from it. In [Ch2
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#021), it is said that the ships of
Tarshish returned every three years, bringing gold and silver, ivory,
apes and peacocks. These are productions chiefly of India, but they
might have been obtained in trade during the voyage. In [Isa
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001); [Isa
60:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#009), the phrase, 'ships of Tarshish,'
seems to denote ships that were bound on long voyages, and it is
probable that they came to denote a particular kind of ships adapted to
long voyages, in the same way as the word "Indiaman" does with us. The
precise situation of "Tarshish" is not necessary to be known in order to
understand the passage here. The phrase, 'ships of Tarshish,' denotes
clearly ships employed in foreign trade, and in introducing articles of
commerce, and particularly of luxury. The meaning is, that God would
embarrass, and destroy this commerce; that his judgments would be on
their articles of luxury, The Septuagint renders it, 'and upon every
ship of the sea, and upon every beautiful appearance of ships.' The
Targum, 'and upon those who dwell in the isles of the sea, and upon
those who dwell in beautiful palaces.'

And upon all pleasant pictures - Margin, 'pictures of desire;' that is,
such as it should be esteemed desirable to possess, and gaze upon;
pictures of value or beauty. Tatum, 'costly palaces.' The word rendered
'pictures,' שׂכיות s'ekı̂yôth, denotes properly "sights," or objects to
be looked at; and does not designate "paintings" particularly, but
everything that was designed for ornament or luxury. Whether the art of
painting was much known among the Hebrews, it is not now possible to
determine. To a certain extent, it may be presumed to have been
practiced; but the meaning of this place is, that the divine judgment
should rest on all that was designed for mere ornament and luxury; and,
from the description in the previous verses, there can be no doubt that
such ornaments would abound.

[Isaiah 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 2:17</span></span>

And the loftiness ... - see the note at [Isa
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011). The repetition of this makes it
strongly emphatic.

[Isaiah 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 2:18</span></span>

And the idols - Note, [Isa 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#008).

Abolish - Hebrew, 'Cause to pass away or disappear.' He shall entirely
cause their worship to cease. This prediction was most remarkably
fulfilled. Before the captivity at Babylon, the Jews were exceedingly
prone to idolatry. It is a remarkable fact that no such propensity was
ever evinced "after" that. In their own land they were entirely free
from it; and scattered as they have been into all lands, they have in
every age since kept clear from idolatry. Not an instance, probably, has
been known of their relapsing into this sin; and no temptation, or
torture, has been sufficient to induce them to bow down and worship an
idol. This is one of the few instances that have occurred where
affliction and punishment have "completely" answered their design.

[Isaiah 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 2:19</span></span>

And they shall go - That is, the worshippers of idols.

Into the holes of the rocks - Judea was a mountainous country, and the
mountains abounded with caves that offered a safe retreat for those who
were in danger. Many of those caverns were very spacious. At En-gedi, in
particular, a cave is mentioned where David with six hundred men hid
himself from Saul in the "sides" of it; 1 Sam. 24. Sometimes caves or
dens were artificially constructed for refuge or defense in danger; [Jdg
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#002); [Sa1
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#006). Thus, 'because of the
Midianites, the children of Israel made them the dens which are in the
mountains, and caves, and strong holds.' [Jdg
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#002). To these they fled in times of
hostile invasion. 'When the men of Israel saw that they were in a strait
(for the people were distressed), then the people did hide themselves in
caves, and in thickets, and in rocks, and in high places, and in pits;'
[Sa1 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#006); compare [Jer
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#009). Mahomet speaks of a tribe of
Arabians, the tribe of Thamud, who 'hewed houses out of the mountains to
secure themselves;' Koran, ch. xv. and xxvi. Grots or rooms hewed out of
rocks for various purposes are often mentioned by travelers in Oriental
regions: see Maundrell, p. 118, and Burckhardt's "Travels in Syria," and
particularly Laborde's "Journey to Arabia Petrea." Such caves are often
mentioned by Josephus as affording places of refuge for banditti and
robbers; "Ant.," B. xiv. ch. 15, and "Jewish Wars," B. i. ch. 16. To
enter into the caves and dens, therefore, as places of refuge, was a
very natural image to denote consternation. The meaning here is, that
the worshippers of idols should be so alarmed as to seek for a place of
security and refuge; compare [Isa
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#010).

When he ariseth - This is an expression often used in the Scriptures to
denote the commencement of doing anything. It is here derived, perhaps,
from the image of one who has been in repose - as of a lion or warrior,
rousing up suddenly, and putting forth mighty efforts.

To shake terribly the earth - An image denoting the presence of God, for
judgment or punishment. One of the magnificent images which the sacred
writers often use to denote the presence of the Lord is, that the earth
shakes and trembles; the mountains bow and are convulsed; [Sa2
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#008) : 'Then the earth shook and
trembled; the foundations of heaven moved, because he was wroth;' See
also [Isa 2:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#009); [Jdg
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#004); [Hab
3:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#006) : 'The mountains saw thee and
trembled;' [Heb 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#026) : 'Whose voice
then shook the earth.' The image here denotes that he would come forth
in such wrath that the very earth should tremble, as if alarmed his
presence. The mind cannot conceive more sublime images than are thus
used by the sacred writers.

[Isaiah 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 2:20</span></span>

In that day - That is, in the time when God would come forth to inflict
punishment. Probably the day to which the prophet refers here was the
time of the captivity at Babylon.

A man shall cast ... - That is, "all" who have idols, or who have been
trusting in them. Valuable as they may be - made of gold and silver; and
much as he may "now" rely on them or worship them, yet he shall then see
their vanity, and shall cast them into dark, obscure places, or holes,
where are moles and bats.

To the moles - פרות לחפר lachepor pērôth. Probably this should be read
as a single word, and it is usually interpreted "moles." Jerome
interprets it as mice or moles, from חפר châphar, "to dig." The word is
formed by doubling the radical letters to give "intensity." Similar
instances of words being divided in the Hebrew, which are nevertheless
to be read as one, occur in [Ch2 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#006);
[Jer 46:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#020); [Lam
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#003); [Eze
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#006). The mole is a well-known animal,
with exceedingly small eyes, that burrows under ground, lives in the
dark, and subsists on roots. The bat lives in o d ruins, and behind the
bark of trees, and flies only in the night. They "resemble" each other,
and are used here in connection, because "both" dwell amidst ruins and
in obscure places; both are regarded as animals of the lowest order;
both are of the same genus, and both are almost blind. The sense is,
therefore, that the idols which had before been so highly venerated,
would now be despised, and cast into obscure places, and amidst ruins,
as worthless; see Bochart's "Hieroz.," P. i., Lib. iii., p. 1032. Ed.
1663.

And to the bats - 'The East may be termed the country of bats; they hang
by hundreds and thousands in caves, ruins, and under the roofs of large
buildings. To enter such places, especially after rain, is "most"
offensive. I have lived in rooms where it was sickening to remain, on
account of the smell produced by those creatures, and whence it was
almost impossible to expel them. What from the appearance of the
creature, its sunken diminutive eye, its short legs (with which it
cannot walk), its leather-like wings, its half-hairy, oily skin, its
offensive ordure ever and anon dropping on the ground, its time for food
and sport, darkness, makes it one of the most disgusting creatures to
the people of the East. No wonder, then, that its name is used by the
Hindoos (as by the prophet) for an epithet of contempt. When a house
ceases to please the inhabitants, on account of being haunted, they say,
Give it to the "bats." "Alas! alas! my wife and children are dead; my
houses, my buildings, are all given to the bats." People ask, when
passing a tenantless house, "Why is this habitation given to the bats?"'
- "Roberts." The meaning is, that the man would throw his idols into
such places as the bats occupy - he would so see their vanity, and so
despise them, as to throw them into old ruins and dark places.

[Isaiah 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 2:21</span></span>

To go - That is, that he may go.

Clefts of the rocks - see the note at [Isa
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#019).

Into the tops ... - The tops of such rocks were not easily accessible,
and were, therefore, deemed places of safety. We may remark here, how
vain were the refuges to which they would resort - as if they were safe
from "God," when they had fled to the places in which they sought safety
from "man." The image here is, however, one that is very sublime. The
earth shaking; the consternation and alarm of the people; their
renouncing confidence in all to which they had trusted; their rapid
flight; and their appearing on the high projecting cliffs, are all
sublime and terrible images. They denote the severity of God's justice,
and the image is a faint representation of the consternation of people
when Christ shall come to judge the earth; [Rev
6:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#015).

[Isaiah 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 2:22</span></span>

Cease ye from man - That is, cease to confide in or trust in him. The
prophet had just said [Isa 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011), [Isa
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#017) that the proud and lofty people
would be brought low; that is, the kings, princes, and nobles would be
humbled. They in whom the people had been accustomed to confide should
show their insufficiency to afford protection. And he calls on the
people to cease to put their reliance on any of the devices and refuges
of men, implying that trust should be placed in the Lord only; see [Psa
146:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#003); [Jer
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005).

Whose breath is in his nostrils - That is, who is weak and short-lived,
and who has no control over his life. All his power exists only while he
breathes, and his breath is in his nostrils. It may soon cease, and we
should not confide in so frail and fragile a thing as the breath of man;
see [Psa 146:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#003) :

Put not your trust in princes,

Nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help.

His breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth;

In that very day his thoughts perish.

Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help,

Whose hope is in the Lord his God.

The Chaldee has translated this verse, 'Be not subject to man when he is
terrible, whose breath is in his nostrils; because today he lives, and
tomorrow he is not, and shall be reputed as nothing.' It is remarkable
that this verse is omitted by the Septuagint, as Vitringa supposes,
because it might seem to exhort people not to put confidence in their
rulers.

For wherein ... - That is, he is unable to afford the assistance which
is needed. When God shall come to judge people, what can man do, who is
weak, and frail, and mortal? Refuge should be sought in God. The
exhortation of the prophet here had respect to a particular time, but it
may be applied in general to teach us not to confide in weak, frail, and
dying man. For life and health, for food and raiment, for home and
friends, and especially for salvation, we are dependent on God. He alone
can save the sinner; and though we should treat people with all due
respect, yet we should remember that God alone can save us from the
great day of wrath.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 3](isa003)

</div>
