<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa039)  [Next](isa041) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 40:0</span></span>

General Introduction to Isaiah 40-66

It is admitted, on all hands, that the second part of Isaiah, comprising
the prophecies which commence at the fortieth chapter, and which
continue to the end of the book, is to be regarded as the most sublime,
and to us the most important part of the Old Testament. In the previous
portions of his prophecies there was much that was local and temporary.
Indeed all, or nearly all, that occurs from Isa. 1 to [Isa
39:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#001) had direct and immediate
reference to the times in which the prophet lived, or was suggested by
the events which occurred in those times. Not unfrequently, indeed,
there were prophecies respecting the Messiah's coming Isa. 2; [Isa
4:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001); 7; 9; 11; [Isa
35:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001), but the primary reference was
to events that were then occurring, or which were soon to occur, and
which were local in their character. And though the mind of the prophet
is carried forward by the laws of prophetic suggestion (see the
Introduction, Section 7, III. (3), and he describes the times of the
Messiah, yet the immediate and primary reference of those prophecies is
to Judea, or to the kingdoms and countries in the vicinity of Judea,
with which the Jews were in various ways connected.

In this portion of the prophecy, however, there is little that is local
and temporary. It is occupied with a prophetic statement of events which
were to occur long after the time of the prophet; and which would be of
interest not only to the Jewish nation, but to the whole human family.
It is a beautiful and glowing description of occurrences, in which
people of the present and of all subsequent times will have as deep an
interest as they who have lived at any former period. Indeed it is not
improbable that as the world advances in age, the interest in this
portion of Isaiah will increase; and that as the gospel is carried
around the globe, the beauty and accuracy of these descriptions will be
more clearly seen and highly appreciated; and that nations will yet
derive their highest consolations, and see the clearest proof of the
inspiration of the Sacred Volume, from the entire correspondence between
this portion of Isaiah and the events which are yet to gladden the
world. There is no portion of the Old Testament where there is so
graphic and clear a description of the times of the Messiah. None of the
other prophets linger so long, and with such apparent delight, on the
promised coming of the Prince of Peace; or his character and work; on
the nature of his instructions, and the manner of his reception; on the
trials of his life, and the painful circumstances of his death; on the
dignity of his nature, and on his lowly and humble character; on the
prevalence of his religion, and on its transforming and happy effects;
on the consolations which he would furnish, and on the fact that his
religion would bear light and joy around the world.

Lowth supposes that this prophecy was uttered in the latter part of the
reign of Hezekiah. A more probable supposition is that of Hengstenberg,
that it was uttered in the time of Manasseh. I have endeavored to show
(Introduction, Section 2) that Isaiah lived some time during the reign
of Manasseh. According to this supposition, there was probably an
interval of some twelve or fourteen years between the close of the
predictions in the first part, and those which occupy this portion of
the book. Manasseh was a cruel prince; and his reign was cruel (see the
Introduction, Section 3). It was a time of the prevalence of idolatry
and sin. In this state of things, it is probable that Isaiah, who was
then of great age, withdrew almost entirely from the public functions of
the prophetic work, and sought personal consolation, and endeavored to
furnish comfort for the pious portion of the nation, in the
contemplation of the future.

In this period, I suppose, this portion of the prophecy was conceived
and penned. Isaiah, in the close of the previous part of the prophecies
[Isa 39:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#007), had distinctly announced
that the nation would be carried to Babylon. He saw that the crimes of
the monarch and of the nation were such as would certainly hasten this
result. He had retired from the public functions of the prophetic
office, and given himself up to the contemplation of happier and purer
times. He, therefore, devoted himself to the task of furnishing
consolation for the pious portion of the nation, and especially of
recording prophetic descriptions which would comfort the Jews when they
should be held in long captivity in Babylon. We have seen (the notes at
Isa. 13; 14) that Isaiah had before this laid the foundations for these
consolations by the assurance that Babylon and its mighty power would be
entirely destroyed, and, of course, that the Jewish people could not be
held always in bondage there.

In this part of the prophecy Isa. 40-66 his object is to give more full
and specific consolations. He therefore places himself, in vision (see
the Introduction, Section 7, I. (4), in the midst of the future scenes
which he describes, and stares distinctly and fully the grounds of
consolation. These topics of consolation would arise from two sources -
both of which he presents at great length and with great beauty. The
first is, that the nation would be delivered from its long and painful
captivity. This was the primary thing to be done, and this was needful
in order to furnish to them consolation. He places himself in that
future time. He sees his own nation borne to a distant land, according
to his own predictions; sees them sighing in their hard bondage; and
sees the city and the temple where they once worshipped the God of their
fathers laid in ruins, and all their pleasant things laid waste [Isa
64:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#011), and the people dispirited and
sad in their long and painful captivity.

He predicts the close of that captivity, and speaks of it as present to
his view. He consoles the people by the assurance that it was coming to
an end; names the monarch - Cyrus - by whom their oppressors were to be
punished, and by whom they were to be restored to their own land; and
describes, in the most beautiful and glowing imagery, their certain
return. The second source of consolation is that which relates to the
coming of a far more important deliverer than Cyrus, and to a far more
important redemption than that from the captivity at Babylon. By the
laws of prophetic suggestion, and in accordance with the usual manner of
Isaiah, his mind is carried forward to much more momentous events. The
descriptions of the prophet insensibly change from the immediate subject
under contemplation to the far more important events connected with the
coming and work of the Messiah. This was the common rule by which the
mind of Isaiah acted; and it is no wonder, therefore, that an event so
strikingly resembling the deliverance of man from the bondage of sin by
the Messiah as was the deliverance from the captivity of Babylon, should
have been suggested by that, and that his thoughts should pass rapidly
from one to the other, and the one be forgotten in the other.

The eye of the prophet, therefore, glances rapidly from the object more
immediately in view in the future, to the object more remote; and he
regards the return from the Babylonian captivity as introductory to a
far more important deliverance. In the contemplation of that more
distant event, therefore, he becomes wholly absorbed; and from this he
derives his main topics of consolation. He sees the author of redemption
in various scenes - now as a sufferer, humble, poor, and persecuted; and
now the more distant glories of the Messiah's kingdom rise to view. He
sees him raised up from the dead; his empire extend and spread among the
Gentiles; kings and princes from all lands coming to lay their offerings
at his feet; the distant tribes of men come bending before him, and his
religion of peace and joy diffusing its blessings around the world. In
the contemplation of these future glories, he desires to furnish
consolation for his afflicted countrymen in Babylon, and at the same
time a demonstration of the truth of the oracles of God, and of the
certain prevalence of the true religion, which should impart happiness
and peace in all future times.

The character of the period when this portion of the prophecy was
delivered, and the circumstances under which it was uttered, as well as
the object which the prophet had in view, may account for some
remarkable features in it which cannot fail to strike the attentive
reader -

1\. The name of the prophet does not occur. It may have been designed
that the consolation should be furnished rather by the nature of the
truth, than by the name or authority of the man. When addressing
monarchs, and when denouncing the vices and crimes of the age, his name
is mentioned (compare Isa. 7 and Isa. 38); the authority under which he
acted is stated; and he utters his warnings in the name of Yahweh. Here
he presents simple truth, in a case where it is to be presumed that his
propbetic authority and character were already sufficiently established.

2\. There is less of fire and impetuosity, less of severity and
abruptness of manner, in this than in the former prophecies. Isaiah was
now an old man, and his style, and manner of thinking and of utterance
would be naturally mellowed by age. His object, also, was not reproof so
much as consolation; it was not, as formerly, to denounce judgment, but
to speak of comfort. It was not to rebuke kings and nobles for their
crimes, and to rouse the nation to a sense of its danger; it was to
mitigate the woes of those in bondage, and to furnish topics of support
to those who were groaning in captivity far from the temple of their
God, and from the sepulchres of their fathers. The language of the
second part is more gentle and flowing; more tender and mild. There is
exquisite beauty and finish, and occasionally there are bursts of the
highest sublimity; but there is not the compression of thought, and the
struggling as it were for utterance, which there often is in the former
part. There, the prophetic impulse is like waters pent up between
projecting rocks and hills, it struggles and bursts forth impetuously
and irresistibly; in this portion of the prophecy, it is like the placid
stream - the full-flowing, majestic river - calm, pure, deep, and
sublime. There are, indeed, characteristics of the same style, and of
the same author, but it is in different circumstances, and with a
different object in view. Homer in the Odyssey has been compared to the
sun when setting with full orb, but with diminished brightness; in the
Iliad to the sun in his meridian. Isaiah, in this part of his
prophecies, resembles the sun shining with steady and pure effulgence
without a cloud; in the former part, he resembles the sun when it bursts
through clouds in the darkened heavens - the light struggling through
the openings in the sky, and amidst the thunders that roll and echo
along the hills and vales.

3\. The portion which follows Isa. 40-66 is a single prophecy,
apparently uttered at one time, and having one great dcsign. The former
part consists of a number of independent and separate predictions, some
of them very brief, and having no immediate connection with each other.
Here, all is connected, and the same design is kept steadily and
constantly in view: His beautiful descriptions roll on, to use one of
his own images, 'like a river,' or the 'waves of the sea.'

4\. Almost everything which occurs in the prophecy relates to that which
was to be fulfilled long after the time of Isaiah. Occasionally there is
a slight allusion to the prevalence of idolatry in his own time, but
there is no express mention of the events which were then occurring. He
does not mention his own circumstances; he does not allude to the name
of the monarch who lived when he wrote. He seems to have forgotten the
present, and to live and act in the scenes of the distant future. He,
therefore, speaks as if he were among the exiled Jews in Babylon when
their long captivity was about to come to an end; he exhorts, rebukes,
administers, comforts, as if they were present, and as if he were
directly addressing them. He speaks of the life, sufferings, and death
of the Messiah also, as events which he saw, and seeks personal
consolation and support amidst the prevailing crimes and calamities of
his own times, in the contemplation of future scenes.

It will be seen, from what has been said, and from the examination of
the prophecy itself, that it possesses a decidedly evangelical
character. Indeed, this is so clear and apparent, that many have
maintained that the primary reference is to the Messiah, and that it had
no relation to the return from the captivity at Babylon. Such was the
opinion of the learned Vitringa. Even Grotius, of whom it has been said,
that while Cocceius found 'Christ everywhere, he found him nowhere,'
admits that the prophecy has an obvious reference to the Messiah. His
words are, 'Cum antem omnia Dei beneficia umbram in se contineant eorum
quae Christus praestitit, turn praecipue ista omnia quae deinceps ab
Esaia praenunciabuntur, verbis saepissime a Deo sic directis, ut
simplicius limpidiusque in res Christi, quam in illas, quas primo
significare Esaias volnit, convenirent.' Indeed, it is impossible to
read this portion of the prophecy without believing that it had
reference to the Messiah, and that it was designed to furnish
consolation from the contemplation of his glorious reign. That there was
a primary reference to the return from the captivity at Babylon, I shall
endeavor to show as we advance in the interpretation of the prophecy.
But it will also be seen that though the prophet begins with that, he
ends usually with a contemplation of the Redeemer; that these events
seem to have lain so near each other in the beautiful field of prophetic
vision, that the one naturally suggested the other; and that the
description passes from the former object to the latter, so that the
contemplation of the person and work of the Messiah, and of the triumphs
of his gospel, become the absorbing theme of his glowing language (see
the Introduction, Section 7).

Analysis of Chapter 40

I. The subject of the whole prophecy Isa. 40-66 is introduced in [Isa
40:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001). The general design is, to
comfort the afflicted and oppressed people of God. They are contemplated
as in Babylon, and as near the close of the exile. Jerusalem is regarded
as in ruins (compare [Isa 44:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#026);
[Isa 51:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#003); [Isa
52:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#009); [Isa
58:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#012)); the land is waste and desolate
[Isa 63:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#018); the city and the temple
are destroyed [Isa 64:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#010). Their
captivity is about to end, and the people about to be restored to their
own land [Isa 44:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#028); [Isa
58:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#012); [Isa
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#010); [Isa
65:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#009). In this situation, the prophet
is directed to address words of consolation to the oppressed and
long-captive Jews, and to assure them that their calamities are about to
close. Jerusalem - now in ruins - was to be assured that the end of her
desolation was near, for that an ample punishment had been taken for all
her sins.

II\. The prophet next represents the deliverance under an image taken
from the march of earthly kings [Isa
40:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003). The voice of a herald is heard
in the wilderness making proclamation, that every obstacle should be
removed, that Yahweh might return to Zion conducting his people. As he
had conducted them from the land of Egypt, so he was about to conduct
them from Babylon, and to appear again in Jerusalem and in the temple.
Between Babylon and Jerusalem there was an immense tract of country
which was a pathless desert. Through this land the people would
naturally be conducted; and the voice of the herald is heard demanding
that a highway should be made - in the manner of a herald who preceded
an army, and who required valleys to he filled, and roads to be
constructed, over which the monarch and his army might pass with ease
and safety. It is to be observed that the main thing here is not that
the people should return, and a way be made for them, but that Yahweh
was about to return to Jerusalem, and that the pathway should he made
for him. He was to be their leader and guide, and this was the principal
source of comfort in their return. In this, the Holy Spirit, who
directed and inspired the prophet, purposely suggests language that
would be applicable to a far more important even, when the herald of the
Messiah should announce his coming. The main thing which the voice was
to cry is represented in [Isa 40:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006).
That was, that Yahweh was faithful to his promises, and that his
predictions would be certainly fulfilled. Everything else would fade
away - the grass would wither, the flower would fail, and the people
would die - but the word of Yahweh would be unfailing, and this would be
manifest alike in the release of the people from Babylon, and in the
coming of the Messiah.

III\. The messenger that brought these glad tidings to Jerusalem, is
exhorted to announce the happy news to the remaining cities of Judah -
to go to an eminence - to lift up the voice - and to proclaim that their
God had come [Isa 40:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#009).

IV\. In [Isa 40:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#010), the assurance
is given that he would come 'with a strong hand' - almighty and able to
save; he would come as a tender and gentle shepherd, regarding
especially the weak and feeble of his people - language alike applicable
to God, who should conduct the people from exile to their own land, and
to the Messiah; though more strikingly and completely fulfilled in the
latter.

V. The mention of the omnipotence of Yahweh, who was about to conduct
his people to their own land, leads the prophet into a most sublime
description of his power, majesty, and glory, the object of which seems
to be to induce them to put entire confidence in him [Isa
40:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012). God measures the waters in
the hollow of his hand; he metes out the heavens with a span; he
measures the dust of the earth, and weighs the mountains [Isa
40:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012). None has counseled, or can
counsel him; his understanding is superior to that of all creatures [Isa
40:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#013). The nations before him are
as a drop of a bucket, and as the small dust of the balance, and as
nothing [Isa 40:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#015), [Isa
40:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#017). All the vast forests of
Lebanon, and all the beasts that roam there, would not be sufficient to
constitute a burnt-offering that should be a proper expression of his
majesty and glory [Isa 40:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#010).

VI\. From this statement of the majesty and glory of God, the prophet
shows the absurdity of attempting to form an image or likeness of God,
and the certainty that all who trusted in idols should be destroyed, as
the stubble is swept away by the whirlwind [Isa
40:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018).

VII\. It follows also, if God is so great and glorious, that the people
should put confidence in him. They should believe that he was able to
save them; they should wait on him who alone could renew their strength
[Isa 40:26-31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026). The entire scope and
design of the chapter, therefore, is, to induce them to put their
reliance in God, who was about to come to vindicate his people, and who
would assuredly accomplish all his predictions and promises. The
argument is a most beautiful one; and the language is unsurpassed in
sublimity.

[Isaiah 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 40:1</span></span>

Comfort ye, comfort ye my people - This is the exordium, or the general
subject of this and the following chapters. The commencement is abrupt,
as often happens in Isaiah and the other prophets. The scene where this
vision is laid is in Babylon; the time near the close of the captivity.
The topic, or main subject of the consolation, is stated in the
following verse - that that captivity was about to end, and that
brighter and happier days were to succeed their calamities and their
exile. The exhortation to 'comfort' the people is to be understood as a
command of God to those in Babylon whose office or duty it would be to
address them - that is, to the ministers of religion, or to the
prophets. The Targum of Jonathan thus renders it: 'Ye prophets, prophesy
consolations concerning my people.' The Septuagint renders it, 'Comfort
ye, comfort ye my people, saith God. O priests, speak to the heart of
Jerusalem; comfort her.' The design of Isaiah is doubtless to furnish
that which should be to them a source of consolation when amidst the
deep distress of their long captivity; to furnish an assurance that the
captivity was about to end, and that brighter and happier times were to
ensue.

The exhortation or command is repeated, to give intensity or emphasis to
it, in the usual manner in Hebrew, where emphasis is denoted by the
repetition of a word. The word rendered 'comfort' (from נחם nâcham)
means properly to draw the breath forcibly, to sigh, pant, groan; then
to lament, or grieve [Psa 90:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#013); [Jer
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#006); then to comfort or console
one's-self [Gen 38:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#012). then to take
vengeance (compare the note at [Isa
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024)). All the forms of the word, and
all the significations, indicate deep emotion, and the obtaining of
relief either by repenting, or by taking vengeance, or by administering
the proper topics of consolation. Here the topic of consolation is, that
their calamities were about to come to an end, in accordance with the
unchanging promises of a faithful God [Isa
40:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#008), and is thus in accordance with
what is said in [Heb 6:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#017).

My people - The people of God. He regarded those in Babylon as his
people; and he designed also to adduce such topics of consolation as
would be adapted to comfort all his people in all ages.

Saith your God - The God of those whom he addressed - the God of the
prophets or ministers of religion whose office was to comfort the
people. We may remark here, that it is an important part of the
ministerial office to administer consolation to the people of God in
affiction; to exhibit to them his promises; to urge the topics of
religion which are adapted to sustain them; and especially to uphold and
cheer them with the assurance that their trials will soon come to an
end, and will all terminate in complete deliverance from sorrow and
calamity in heaven.

[Isaiah 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 40:2</span></span>

Speak ye comfortably - Hebrew, על־לב ‛al-lēb as in the margin, 'To the
heart.' The heart is the seat of the affections. It is there that sorrow
and joy are felt. We are oppressed there with grief, and we speak
familiarly of being pained at the heart and of being of a glad or merry
heart. To speak 'to the heart,' is to speak in such a way as to remove
the troubles of the heart; to furnish consolation, and joy. It means
that they were not merely to urge such topics as should convince the
understanding, but such also as should be adopted to minister
consolation to the heart. So the word is used in [Gen
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#003) : 'And his soul clave unto Dinah
- and he loved the damsel, and spake kindly (Hebrew, to the heart) of
the damsel;' [Gen 50:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#021) : 'And he
comforted them, and spoke kindly unto them' (Hebrew, to their hearts);
see also [Ch2 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#006).

To Jerusalem - The direction is not merely to speak to the people in
Babylon, but also to comfort Jerusalem itself lying in ruins. The
general direction is, therefore, that the entire series of topics of
consolation should be adduced - the people were to return from their
bondage, and Jerusalem was to be rebuilt, and the worship of God to be
restored.

And cry unto her - In the manner of a crier; or one making public and
loud proclamation (compare [Isa 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003),
[Isa 40:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#009)). Jerusalem is here
personified. She is addressed as in ruins, and as about to be rebuilt,
and as capable of consolation from this promise.

That her warfare is accomplished - Septuagint, 'That her humiliation
(ταπείνωσις tapeinōsis) is accomplished.' The Hebrew word (צבא tsâbâ',
'warfare') properly means an army or host (compare the note at [Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009)), and is usually applied to an
army going forth to war, or marshalled for battle [Sa2
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#016); [Sa2
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#007). It is then used to denote an
appointed time of service; the discharge of a duty similar to an
enlistment, and is applied to the services of the Levites in the
tabernacle [Num 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#028) : 'All that enter
in to perform the service (Hebrew, to war the warfare), to do the work
in the tabernacle of the congregation.' Compare [Num
8:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#024). Hence, it is applied to human
life contemplated as a warfare, or enlistment, involving hard service
and calamity; an enlistment from which there is to be a discharge by
death.

Is there not a set time (Hebrew, a warfare) to man upon earth?

Are not his days as the days of an hireling?

[Job 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001)

But if a man die - shall he indeed live again?

All the days of my appointed time (Hebrew, my warfare) will I wait,

Till my change come.

[Job 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#014)

Compare [Dan 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001). The word then means
hard service, such as soldiers endure; an appointed time which they are
to serve; an enlistment involving hardships, toil, privation, danger,
calamity. In this sense it is applied hero to Jerusalem - to the trials,
calamities, desolations to which she was subjected for her sins, and
which were to endure a definite and fixed time - like the enlistment of
an army. That time was now coming to an end, and to be succeeded by a
release, or discharge. Vitringa, who supposes that this refers primarily
and solely to the times of the Messiah, regards this as meaning that the
definite time of the legal economy, a time of toil, and of vexatious and
troublesome ceremonies, was about to end by the coming of the Messiah.
But the more correct interpretation is, probably, that which supposes
that there was a primary reference to the long and painful captivity of
the Jews, in Babylon.

That her iniquity - The iniquity or sin here referred to, is that long
series of acts of rebellion, corruption, and idolatry, with which the
Jewish people had been chargeable, and which had rendered their
captivity necessary. As a nation, that sin was now expiated, or removed
by their protracted punishment in Babylon. It was a sufficient
expression of the divine displeasure at the national offences, and God
was satisfied (נרצה nı̂retsâh) with it, and could consistently restore
them to their land, and to their former privileges. The whole language
here has respect to national, and not to individual offences.

Is pardoned - Vulgate, Dimissa est iniquitas illius. Septuagint, Λέλυται
αὐτῆς ἡ ἁμαρτία Lelutai autēs hē hamartia - 'Her sin is loosed,'
dissolved, remitted. The word 'pardon' does not quite express the
meaning of the word in the original (נרצה nı̂retsâh). The word רצה râtsâh
properly means to delight in any person or thing; to take pleasure in;
then to receive graciously or favorably; to delight in sacrifices and
offerings [Job 33:26](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#026); [Psa
51:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#018); [Eze
20:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#040); and, in the Hiphil conjugation,
satisfy, or pay to off, that is, to cause to be satisfied, or pleased;
and then in Hophal, to be satisfied, to be paid off, to be pleased or
satisfied with an expiation, or with an atonement for sins, so as to
delight in the person who makes it. Here it means not strictly to
pardon, but it means that they had endured the national punishment which
God saw to be necessary; they had served out the long and painful
enlistment which he had appointed, and now he was satisfied, and took
delight in restoring them to their own land. It does not refer to the
pardon of people in consequence of the atonement made by the Lord Jesus;
but it may be used as an illustration of that, when God is satisfied
with that atonement; and when he has pleasure or delight in setting the
soul free from the bondage of sin, and admitting the sinner to his favor
- as he had delight here in restoring his people to their own land.

For she hath received - Jerusalem had now been desolate for almost
seventy years, on the supposition that this relates to the period near
the close of the exile, and that was regarded as an ample or full
expression of what she ought to suffer for her national offences.

Of the Lord's hand - From the hand, or by the agency of Yahweh. Whoever
were the instruments, her sufferings were to be regarded as his
appointment.

Double for all her sins - The word rendered 'double' (כפלים kipelayim)
is the dual form from כפל kepel, 'a doubling,' and occurs in [Job
41:13](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#013) :

Who will rip up the covering of his armor?

Against the doubling of his nostrils who will advance?

Good

And in [Job 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#006) :

And that he would unfold to them the secrets of wisdom.

That they are double to that which is;

That is, there are double-folds to God's wisdom, or the wisdom of of God
is complicated, inexplicabIe (Gesenius). The word in Job means
'conduplications, folds, complications, mazes, intricacies' (Good). Here
the word has doubtless its usual and proper meaning, and denotes double,
twice as much; and the expression may denote that God had inflicted on
them double that which had been usually inflicted on rebellious nations,
or on the nation, before for its sins. Or the word may be used to denote
abundance, and the prophet may design to teach that they had been amply,
or abundantly punished for their crimes. 'That is,' says Grotius, 'as
much as God judged to be sufficient.' 'Double, here,' says Calvin, 'is
to be received for large and abundant.' Some have supposed (see
Rosenmuller, who approves of this interpretation) that the word 'sins
here means the punishment of sins, and that the word 'double' refers to
the mercies or favors which they were about to receive, or which God had
purposed to confer on them. So Lowth understands it; and renders the
word לקחה lâqechâh 'shall receive' (in the future):

That she shall receive at the hand of Yahweh

(Blessings) double to the punishment of all her sins.

But though it was true that their favors on their return, in the hope of
the Messiah, and in their renovated privileges, would be far more
numerous than their sufferings had been, yet this does not so well suit
the connection, where the prophet is giving a reason why they should be
released from their bondage, and restored to the privileges of their own
land. That reason manifestly is, that they had suffered what was
regarded by Yahweh as an ample expression of his displeasure for their
national offences. It does not refer to individual sinners; nor to any
power which they have to make atonement for their sins; nor does it
refer to the atonement made by the Messiah. But it may be remarked, by
the way, that in the sufferings of the Redeemer there has been ample
satisfaction for the sins of his people. The Chaldee interpreter
understands this as Rosenmuller does, that the word 'double' refers to,
the mercies which they had received: 'Because she has received a cup of
consolation from the presence of the Lord, as if (כאלוּ ke'ilû) she had
been smitten twofold for all her sins.'

[Isaiah 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 40:3</span></span>

The voice of him that crieth - Lowth and Noyes render this, 'A voice
crieth,' and annex the phrase 'in the wilderness' to the latter part of
the sentence:

A voice crieth, 'In the wilderness prepare ye the way of Yahweh.'

The Hebrew (קורא קול qôl qôrē') will bear this construction, though the
Vulgate and the Septuagint render it as in our common version. The sense
is not essentially different, though the parallelism seems to require
the translation proposed by Lowth. The design is to state the source of
consolation referred to in the previous verses. The time of the exile at
Babylon was about to be completed. Yahweh was about to conduct his
people again to their own country through the pathless wilderness, as he
had formerly conducted them from Egypt to the land of promise. The
prophet, therefore, represents himself as hearing the voice of a herald,
or a forerunner in the pathless waste, giving direction that a way
should be made for the return of the people. The whole scene is
represented as a march, or return of Yahweh at the head of his people to
the land of Judea. The idea is taken from the practice of Eastern
monarchs, who whenever they entered on a journey or an expedition,
especially through a barren and unfrequented or inhospitable country,
sent harbingers or heralds before them to prepare the way.

To do this, it was necessary for them to provide supplies, and make
bridges, or find fording places over the streams; to level hills, and
construct causeways over valleys, or fill them up; and to make a way
through the forest which might lie in their intended line of march. This
was necessary, because these contemplated expeditions often involved the
necessity of marching through countries where there were no public
highways that would afford facilities for the passage of an army. Thus
Arrian (Hist. liv. 30) says of Alexander, 'He now proceeded to the River
Indus, the army' that is, ἡ στρατιά hē stratia, a part of the army, or
an army sufficient for the purpose, 'going before, which made a way for
him, for otherwise there would have been no mode of passing through that
region.' 'When a great prince in the East,' says Paxton, 'sets out on a
journey, it is usual to send a party of men before him to clear the way.

The state of those countries in every age, where roads are almost
unknown, and, from want of cultivation, in many places overgrown with
brambles and other thorny plants, which renders traveling, especially
with a large retinue, incommodious, requires this precaution. The
Emperor of Hindoostan, in his progress through his dominions, as
described in the narrative of Sir Thomas Roe's embassy to the court of
Delhi, was preceded by a very great company, sent before him to cut up
the trees and bushes, to level and snmoth the road, and prepare their
place of encampment. We shall be able, perhaps, to form a more clear and
precise idea from the account which Diodorus gives of the marches of
Semiramis, the celebrated Queen of Babylon, into Media and, Persia. "In
her march to Ecbatana," says the historian, "she came to the Zarcean
mountain, which, extending many furlongs, and being full of craggy
precipices and deep hollows, could not be passed without taking a great
compass. Being therefore desirous of leaving an everlasting memorial of
herself, as well as of shortening the way, she ordered the precipices to
be digged down, and the hollows to be filled up; and at a great expense
she made a shorter and more expeditious road; which to this day is
called from her the road of Semiramis. Afterward she went into Persia,
and all the other countries of Asia subjected to her dominion, and
wherever she went, she ordered the mountains and precipices to be
leveled, raised causeways in the plain country, and, at a great expense,
made the ways passable."

The writer of the apocryphal Book of Baruch, refers to the same subject
by the same images: 'For God hath appointed that every high hill, and
banks of long continuance, should be cast down, and valleys filled up,
to make even the ground, that Israel may go safely in the glory of God'
[Isa 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#007). It is evident that the
primary reference of this passage was to the exiles in Babylon, and to
their return from their long captivity, to the land of their father. The
imagery, the circumstances, the design of the prophecy, all seem to
demand such an interpretation. At the same time it is as clear, I
apprehend, that the prophet was inspired to use language, of design,
which should appropriately express a more important event, the coming of
the forerunner of the Messiah, and the work which he should perform as
preparatory to his advent. There was such a striking similarity in the
two events, that they could be grouped together in the same part of the
prophetic vision or picture the mind would naturally, by the laws of
prophetic suggestion (Introduction, Section 7, III. (3), glance from one
to the other, and the same language would appropriately and accurately
express both. Both could be described as the coming of Yahweh to bless
and save his people; both occurred after a long state of desolation and
bondage - the one a bondage in Babylon, the other in sin and national
declension. The pathless desert was literally to be passed through in
the one instance; in the other, the condition of the Jews was that which
was not unaptly likened to a desert - a condition in regard to real
piety not unlike the state of a vast desert in comparison with fruitful
fields. 'It was,' says Lowth, 'in this desert country, destitute at that
time of all religious cultivation, in true piety and works unfruitful,
that John was sent to prepare the way of the Lord by preaching
repentance.

That this passage has a reference to John as the forerunner of the
Messiah, is evident from [Mat 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#003),
where it is applied to him, and introduced by this remark: 'For this is
he that was spoken of by the prophet Esaias, saying, The voice,' etc.
(see also [Joh 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#023)) The events were
so similar, in their main features, that the same language would
describe both. John was nurtured in the desert, and passed his early
life there, until he entered on his public work [Luk
1:80](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#080). He began to preach in a
mountainous country, lying east of Jerusalem, and sparsely inhabited,
and which was usually spoken of as a desert or wilderness [Mat
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001); and it was here that his voice
was heard announcing the coming of the Messiah, and that he pointed him
to his own followers [Joh 1:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#028).

In the wilderness - Babylon was separated from Judea by an immense tract
of country, which was one continued desert. A large part of Arabia,
called Arabia Deserts, was situated in this region. To pass in a direct
line, therefore, from Babylon to Jerusalem, it was necessary to go
through this desolate country. It was here that the prophet speaks of
hearing a voice commanding the hills to be leveled, and the valleys
filled up, that there might be a convenient highway for the people to
return (compare the notes at [Isa
35:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#008)).

Prepare ye the way - This was in the form of the usual proclamation of a
monarch commanding the people to make a way for him to pass. Applied to
the return of the exile Jews, it means that the command of God had gone
forth that all obstacles should be removed. Applied to John, it means
that the people were to prepare for the reception of the Messiah; that
they were to remove all in their opinions and conduct which would tend
to hinder his cordial reception, or which would prevent his success
among them.

Of the Lord - Of Yahweh. Yahweh was the leader of his people, and was
about to conduct them to their own land. The march therefore, was
regarded as that of Yahweh, as a monarch or king, at the head of his
people, conducting them to their own country; and to prepare the way of
Yahweh was, therefore, to prepare for his march at the head of his
people. Applied to the Messiah, it means that God was about to come to
his people to redeem them. This language naturally and obviously
implies, that he whose way was thus to be prepared was Yahweh, the true
God. So it was undoubtedly in regard to him who was to be the leader of
the exile Jews to their own land, since none but Yahweh could thus
conduct them. And if it be admitted that the language has also a
reference to the Messiah, then it demonstrates that he was appropriately
called Yahweh. That John the Immerser had such a view of him, is
apparent from what is said of him.

Thus, [Joh 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015), he says of him that,
'he was before' him which was not true unless he had an existence
previous to his birth; he calls him, [Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018), 'the only begotten Son, which is
in the bosom of the Father;' and in [Joh
1:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#034), he calls him 'the Son of God'
(compare [Joh 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030), [Joh
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#033), [Joh
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#036)). In [Joh
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#031), he says of him, 'he that cometh
from above is above all; he that cometh from heaven is above all.'
Though this is not one of the most direct and certain proof texts of the
divinity of the Messiah, yet it is one which may be applied to him when
that divinity is demonstrated from other places. It is not one that can
be used with absolute certainty in an argument on the subject, to
convince those who deny that divinity - since, even on the supposition
that it refers to the Messiah, it may be said plausibly, and with some
force, that it may mean that Yahweh was about to manifest himself by
means of the Messiah; yet it is a passage which those who are convinced
of the divinity of Christ from other source, will apply without
hesitation to him as descriptive of his rank, and confirmatory of his
divinity.

Make straight - Make a straight or direct road; one that should conduct
at once to their land. The Chaldee renders this verse, 'Prepare a way
before the people of Yahweh; make in the plain ways before the
congregation of our God.'

A highway - (See the note at [Isa
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#008)).

[Isaiah 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 40:4</span></span>

Every valley shall be exalted - That is, every valley, or low piece of
ground, shall be filled up so as to make a level highway, as was done in
order to facilitate the march of armies. This verse is evidently
designed to explain what is intended in [Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003), by preparing the way for Yahweh.
Applied to the return of the Jews from Babylon, it means simply that the
impassable valleys were to be filled up so as to make a level road for
their journey. If applied to the work of John, the forerunner of the
Messiah, it means that the nation was to be called on to put itself in a
state of preparation for his coming, and for the success of his labors
among them. Vitringa, and others, have endeavored to specify what
particular moral qualities in the nation are meant by the 'valley,' by
the 'mountain and hill,' and by the 'crooked' and 'rough places.' But
the illustrations are such as cannot be demonstrated to be referred to
by the prophet. The general sense is plain. The language, as we have
seen, is taken from the march of a monarch at the head of his army. The
general idea is, that all obstructions were to be removed, so that the
march would be without embarrassment. As applicable to the work of John
also, the language means in general, that whatever there was in the
opinions, habits, conduct, in the pride, self-confidence, and irreligion
of the nation that would prevent his cordial reception, was to be
removed.

Every mountain and hill - They shall be dug down so as to make the
journey easy. All obstructions were to be removed.

And the crooked - The word used here, (עקב ‛âqob) is usually rendered
'crooked;' but perhaps not by any good authority. The verb עקב ‛âqab
usually denotes to be behind; to come from behind; or, as Gesenius
supposes, to be elevated like a mound, arched like a hill or tumulus,
and is hence applied to the heel from the figure (see [Gen
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026); [Hos
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#004)). According to this, the word
would denote properly a hill, mound, or acclivity, which would put back
those who attempted to ascend.

Shall be made straight - Margin, 'A straight place.' The Hebrew word
(מישׁור mı̂yshôr) denotes properly "evenness," a level region, a plain.
The hilly places would be reduced to a level.

And the rough places - Those which are hard, bound up, stony, difficult
to pass. Such as abounded with rocks and precipices, and which presented
obstructions to a journey. Such places abounded in the region lying
between Palestine and Babylon.

Plain - Margin, 'A plain place.' A smooth, level plain.

[Isaiah 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 40:5</span></span>

And the glory of the Lord - The phrase here means evidently the majesty,
power, or honor of Yahweh. He would display his power, and show himself
to be a covenant-keeping God, by delivering his people from their
bondage, and reconducting them to their own land. This glory and
faithfulness would be shown in his delivering them from their captivity
in Babylon; and it would be still more illustriously shown in his
sending the Messiah to accomplish the deliverance of his people in later
days.

And all flesh - All human beings. The word 'flesh' is often used to
denote human nature, or mankind in general [Gen
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#012); [Psa
65:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#003); [Psa
145:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#021). The idea is, that the
deliverance of his people would be such a display of the divine
interposition, so that all nations would discern the evidences of his
power and glory. But there is a fullness and a richness in the language
which allows that it is not to be confined to that event. It is more
strikingly applicable to the advent of the Messiah - and to the fact
that through him the glory of Yahweh would be manifest to all nations.
Rosenmuller supposes that this should be translated,

And all flesh shall see together

That the mouth of Yahweh hath spoken it.

The Hebrew will bear this construction, but there is no necessity for
departing from the translation in the common version. The Septuagint
adds here the words 'salvation of God' so as to read it, 'and all flesh
shall see the salvation of God,' and this reading has been adopted in
[Luk 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#006); or it may be more probable
that Luke [Luk 3:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#004) has quoted from
different parts of Isaiah, and that he intended to quote that part, not
from the version of the Septuagint, but from [Isa
52:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#010). Lowth, on the authority of the
Septuagint, proposes to restore these words to the Hebrew text. But the
authority is insufficient. The Vulgate, the Chaldee, the Syriac, and the
Hebrew manuscripts concur in the reading of the present Hebrew text, and
the authority of the Septuagint is altogether insufficient to justify a
change.

For the mouth of the Lord - The strongest possible confirmation that it
would be fulfilled (see the note at [Isa
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#016)). The idea is, that God had
certainly promised their deliverance from bondage; and that his
interposition, in a manner which should attract the attention of all
nations, was certainly purposed by him. Few events have ever more
impressively manifested the glory of God than the redemption of his
people from Babylon; none has occurred, or will ever occur, that will
more impressively demonstrate his glory, wisdom, and faithfulness, than
the redemption of the world by the Messiah.

[Isaiah 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 40:6</span></span>

The voice said - Or rather 'a voice.' Isaiah represents himself here
again as hearing a voice. The word 'the' introduced in our translation,
mars the sense, inasmuch as it leads to the supposition that it was the
voice of the same person or crier referred to in [Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003). But it is different. That was
the voice of a crier or herald, proclaiming that a way was to be open in
the desert. This is introduced for a different purpose. It is to
proclaim distinctly that while everything else was fading and
transitory, the promise of God was firm and secure. Isaiah therefore,
represents himself as hearing a voice requiring the prophets (so the
Chaldee) to make a proclamation. An inquiry was at once made, What
should be the nature of the proclamation? The answer was, that all flesh
was grass, etc. He had [Isa 40:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003)
introduced a herald announcing that the way was to be prepared for their
return. He now introduces another voice with a distinct message to the
people, that God was faithful, and that his promises would not fail. A
voice, a command is heard, requiring those whose duty it was, to make
proclamation. The voice of God; the Spirit speaking to the prophets,
commanded them to cry.

And he said - Lowth and Noyes read this, 'And I said.' The Septuagint
and the Vulgate read it also in this manner, in the first person. Two
manuscripts examined by Kennicott also read it in the first person.
Houbigant, Hensler, and Doderlin adopt this reading. But the authority
is not sufficient to justify a change in the Hebrew text. The Syriac and
Chaldee read it as it is in the present Hebrew text, in the third
person. The sense is, that the person, or prophet to whom the command
came to make proclamation, made answer, 'What shall be the nature of my
proclamation?' It is equivalent to saying, 'It was answered;' or if
Isaiah is the person to whom the voice is represented as coming, it
means that he answered; and is, therefore, equivalent to the reading in
the Septuagint and Vulgate, and adopted by Lowth. This is the probable
supposition, that Isaiah represents himself as hearing the voice, and as
expressing a willingness to make proclamation, but as waiting to know
what he was to proclaim.

All flesh - This is the answer; or this is what he was to proclaim. The
general design or scope of the answer was, that he was to proclaim that
the promise of Yahweh was secure and firm [Isa
40:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#008), and that therefore God would
certainly come to deliver them. To make this more impressive by way of
contrast, he states that all people are weak and feeble like the grass
that is soon withered. The expression does not refer particularly to the
Jews in Babylon, or to any single nation or class of people, but to all
people, in all places, and at all times. All princes, nobles, and
monarchs; all armies and magistrates are like grass, and will soon pass
away. On the one hand, they would be unable to accomplish what was
needful to be done in the deliverance of the people; and on the other,
their oppressors had no power to continue their bondage, since they were
like grass, and must soon pass away. But Yahweh was ever-enduring, and
was able to fulfill all his purposes.

Is grass - It is as feeble, weak, and as easily consumed as the grass of
the field. A similar sentiment is found in [Psa
103:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#015) :

As for man, his days are as grass;

As a flower of the field so he flourisheth;

For the wind passeth over it, and it is gone,

And the place thereof shall know it no more.

See also [Jam 1:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#010). The passage in
Isaiah is evidently quoted by Peter, [Pe1
1:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#024) : 'All flesh is as grass, and
all the glory of man as the flower of grass. The grass withereth, and
the flower thereof falleth away: but the word of the Lord endureth
forever; and this is the word which by the gospel is preached unto you'
- a passage which proves that Isaiah had reference to the times of the
Messiah in the place before us.

And all the goodliness thereof - The word rendered 'goodliness' (חסד
chesed) denotes properly, kindness, love, goodwill, mercy, favor. Here
it is evidently used in the sense of elegance, comeliness, beauty. The
Septuagint renders it: δόξα doxa, and so does Peter [Pe1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#024). Applied to grass, or to herbs,
it denotes the flower, the beauty, the comeliness. Applied to man, it
means that which makes him comely and vigorous - health, energy, beauty,
talent, wisdom. His vigor is soon gone; his beauty fades; his wisdom
ceases; and he falls, like the flower, to the dust. The idea is, that
the plans of man must be temporary; that all that appears great in him
must be like the flower of the field; but that Yahweh endures, and his
plans reach from age to age, and will certainly be accomplished. This
important truth was to be proclaimed, that the people might be induced
not to trust in man, but put their confidence in the arm of God.

[Isaiah 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 40:7</span></span>

The grass withereth - Soon withers. Its beauty is soon gone.

The flower fadeth - Soon fades; or fades when the wind of Yahweh passes
over it. So is also with man. He loses his vigor, and dies at once when
Yahweh takes away his strength and beauty.

Because the spirit of the Lord bloweth upon it - This should be
rendered, undoubtedly, 'When the wind of Yahweh bloweth upon it.' The
word 'spirit' here does not suit the connection, and does not express
the idea of the prophet. The word רוח rûach means, properly, "breath" -
a breathing, or blowing; and is often used indeed to denote spirit,
soul, life. But it often means a breath of wind; a breeze; air in motion
[Job 41:8](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#008); [Jer
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#024); [Jer
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#006). It is applied to the cool breeze
which springs up in the evening ([Gen
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#008); compare [Sol
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#017); [Sol
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#006)). It sometimes means a strong and
violent wind [Gen 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001); [Isa
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#002); [Isa
41:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#016); and also a tempest, or
hurricane [Job 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#019); [Job
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#015); [Isa
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#008). The 'wind of Yahweh' means that
which Yahweh sends, or causes; and the expression here refers,
doubtless, to the hot or poisonous east winds which blow in Oriental
countries, and which wither and dry up everything before them (compare
[Jon 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#008)).

Surely the people is grass - Lowth reads this, 'this people;' referring
to the Jewish nation. So the Syriac. Perhaps it refers to the people of
Babylon (so Rosenmuller), and means that mighty people would fade away
like grass. But the more probable interpretation is that which regards
it as referring to all people, and of course including the Jews and the
Babylonians. The sense, according to this view, is, 'all nations shall
fade away. All human power shall cease. But the promise of Yahweh shall
survive. It shall be unchanging amidst all revolutions; it shall survive
all the fluctuations which shall take place among people. It may,
therefore, be trusted with unwavering reliance.' To produce that
reliance was the object of the proclamation. On this passage,
descriptive of the state of man, the reader will at once be reminded of
the beautiful language of Shakespeare:

This is the state of man! Today he puts forth

The tender leaves of hope: to-morrow blossoms,

And bears his blushing honors thick upon him;

The third day comes a frost, a killing frost,

And when he thinks, good easy man, full surely

His greatness is a-ripening, nips his root,

And then he falls -

\- Never to hope again.

Hen. VIII, Act. ii. Sc. 2.

In the following passage from Tasso, the same image is adopted:

The gentle budding rose (quoth he) behold,

That first scant peeping forth with virgin beams,

Half ope, half shut, her beauties doth up-fold

In their dear leaves, and less seen fairer seems,

And after spreads them forth more broad and bold,

Then languishes and dies in last extremes.

So in the passing of a day doth pass

The bud and blossom of the life of man,

Nor e'er doth flourish more, but, like the grass

Cut down, becometh withered, pale, and wan.

Fairfax, Edit. Windsor, 1817.

[Isaiah 40:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 40:8</span></span>

The grass withereth ... - This is repeated from the former verse for the
sake of emphasis, or strong confirmation.

But the word of our God - The phrase 'word of our God,' refers either to
his promise to be the protector and deliverer of his people in their
captivity, or, in general, means that all his promises shall be firm and
unchanging.

Shall stand for ever - Amidst all revolutions among men, his promise
shall be firm. It shall not only live amidst the changes of dynasties,
and the revolutions of empires, but it shall continue forever and ever.
This is designed for support to an afflicted and oppressed people; and
it must have been to them, in their bondage, the source of high
consolation. But it is equally so now. Amidst all the changes on earth;
the revolutions of empires; the vanishing of kingdoms, God is the same,
and his promises are unfailing. We see the grass wither at the return of
autumn, or in the drought: we see the flower of the field lose its
beauty, and decay; we see man rejoicing in his vigor and his health, cut
down in an instant; we see cities fall, and kingdoms lose their power
and vanish from among nations, but God changes not. He presides in all
these revolutions, and sits calm and unmoved amidst all these changes.
Not one of his promises shall fail; and at the end of all the changes
which human things shall undergo, Yahweh, the God of his people, will be
the same.

[Isaiah 40:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 40:9</span></span>

O Zion, that bringest good tidings - This is evidently the continuance
of what the 'voice' said, or of the annunciation which was to give joy
to an afflicted and oppressed people. There has been, however, much
diversity of opinion in regard to the meaning of the passage. The margin
renders it, 'Thou that tellest good tidings to Zion,' making Zion the
receiver, and not the publisher of the message that was to convey joy.
The Vulgate, in a similar way, renders it, 'Ascend a high mountain, thou
who bringest good tidings to Zion' (qui evangelizas Zion). So the
Chaldee, understanding this as an address to the prophet, as in [Isa
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001), 'Ascend a high mountain, ye
prophets, who bring glad tidings to Zion.' So Lowth, Noyes, Gesenius.
Grotius, and others. The word מבשׂרת mebas'eret, from בשׂר bâs'ar, means
cheering with good tidings; announcing good news; bearing joyful
intelligence.

It is a participle in the feminine gender; and is appropriately
applicable to some one that bears good tidings to Zion, and not to Zion
as appointed to bear glad titlings. Lowth supposes that it is applicable
to some female whose office it was to announce glad tidings, and says
that it was the common practice for females to engage in the office of
proclaiming good news. On an occasion of a public victory or rejoicing,
it was customary, says he, for females to assemble together, and to
celebrate it with songs, and dances, and rejoicings; and he appeals to
the instance of Miriam and the chorus of women [Exo
15:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020), and to the instance where,
after the victory of David over Goliath, 'all the women came out of the
cities of Israel singing and dancing to meet Saul' [Sa1
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#007). But there are objections to this
interpretation; first, if this was the sense, the word would bare been
in the plural number, since there is no instance in which a female is
employed alone in this service; and, secondly, it was not, according to
this, the office of the female to announce good tidings, or to
communicate a joyful message, but to celebrate some occasion of triumph
or victory.

Grotius supposes that the word is 'feminine in its sound, but common in
its signification;' and thus denotes any whose office it was to
communicate glad tidings. Gesenius (Commentary in loc.) says, that the
feminine form here is used in a collective sense for מבשׂרים mebas'eriym
in the plural; and supposes that it thus refers to the prophets, or
others who were to announce the glad tidings to Zion. Vitringa coincides
with our translation, and supposes that the sense is, that Zion was to
make proclamation to the other cities of Judah of the deliverance; that
the news was first to be communicated to Jerusalem, and that Jerusalem
was entrusted with the office of announcing this to the other cities of
the land; and that the meaning is, that the gospel was to be preached
first at Jerusalem, and then from Jerusalem as a center to the ether
cities of the land, agreeably to [Luk
24:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#049). In this view, also,
Hengstenberg coincides (Christol. vol. i. p. 424). But that the former
interpretation, which regards Zion as the receiver, and not the
promulgator, of the intelligence, is the true one, is apparent, I think,
from the following considerations:

1\. It is that which is the obvious and most correct construction of the
Hebrew.

2\. It is that which is found in the ancient versions.

3\. It accords with the design of the passage.

The main scope of the passage is not to call upon Jerusalem to make
known the glad tidings, but it is to convey the good news to Jerusalem;
to announce to her, lying desolate and waste, that her hard service was
at an end, and that she was to be blessed with the return of happier and
better times (see [Isa 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002)). It would
be a departure from this, to suppose that the subject was diverted in
order to give Jerusalem a command to make the proclamation to the other
cities of the land to say nothing of the impropriety of calling on a
city to go up into a high mountain, and to lift up its voice. On the
meaning of the word 'Zion,' see the note at [Isa
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008).

Get thee up into a high mountain - You who make this proclamation to
Zion. It was not uncommon in ancient times, when a multitude were to be
addressed, or a proclamation to be made, for the crier to go into a
mountain, where he could be seen and heard. Thus Jotham, addressing the
men of Shechem, is said to have gone and 'stood on the top of mount
Gerizim, and lifted up his voice' ([Jdg
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#007); compare [Mat
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001)). The sense is, that the
messengers of the joyful news to Zion were to make themselves distinctly
heard by all the inhabitants of the city, and of the land.

Lift up thy voice - As with a glad and important message. Do not deliver
the message as if you were afraid that it should be heard. It is one of
joy; and it should be delivered in a clear, decided, animated manner, as
if it were important that it should be heard.

With strength - Aloud; with effort; with power (compare [Isa
35:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#003)).

Lift it up - Lift up the voice. The command is repeated, to denote
emphasis. The mind is full of the subject, and the prophet repeats the
command, as a man often does when his mind is full of an idea. The
command to deliver the message of God with animation, earnestness, and
zeal is one that is not unusual in Isaiah. It should be delivered as if
it were true, and as if it were believed to be true. This will not
justify, however, boisterous preaching, or a loud and unnatural tone of
voice - alike offensive to good taste, injurious to the health, and
destructive of the life of the preacher. It is to be remarked, also,
that this command to lift up the voice, pertains to the glad tidings of
the gospel, and not to the terrors of wrath; to the proclamation of
mercy, and not to the denunciation of woe. The glad tidings of salvation
should be delivered in an animated and ardent manner; the future
punishment of the wicked in a tone serious, solemn, subdued.

Say unto the cities of Judah - Not to Jerusalem only, but to all the
cities of the land. They were alike to be blessed on the return from the
captivity - Mike in the preaching of the gospel.

Behold your God! - Lo! your God returns to the city, the temple, and the
land! Lo! he comes (note, [Isa 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003)),
conducting his people as a king to their land! Lo! he will come - under
the Messiah in future times - to redeem and save! What a glad
announcement was this to the desolate and forsaken cities of Judah! What
a glad announcement to the wide world, 'Lo! God has come to redeem and
save; and the desolate world shall be visited with his salvation and
smile, in his mercy through the Messiah!'

[Isaiah 40:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 40:10</span></span>

Behold, the Lord God will come - (See the note at [Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003)) Applied to the condition of the
Jews in exile, this means that God would come to deliver them. Applied
to the times of the Messiah, it means that God would manifest himself in
a powerful manner as mighty to save.

With strong hand - (בחזק bechâzâq). Margin, 'Against the strong.' So
Vitringa and others understand it; and regard it as referring to the
mighty enemies of the people of God, or, as Vitringa particularly
supposes, to the great foe of God and his people - the prince of
darkness - the devil. Lowth also translates it in this manner, 'Against
the strong one.' The Septuagint renders it, Μετά ἰσχύος Meta ischuos -
'With strength.' This is the more probable meaning - that the Lord would
come with the manifestation of strength and power, able to subdue and
vanquish all the enemies of his people, and to effect their complete and
final salvation.

And his arm - The arm is a symbol of strength, because it is by that
that we accomplish our purposes; by that a conqueror slays his enemies
in battle, etc. Thus, 'Break thou the arm of the wicked;' that is,
diminish or destroy his power [Psa
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#015). 'I have broken the arm of
Pharaoh king of Egypt' ([Eze 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#021);
compare [Jer 48:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#025)). Thus it is said
of God, 'Thou hast a mighty arm' [Psa
89:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#013), and, 'His holy arm hath gotten
him the victory' ([Psa 98:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#001); compare
[Exo 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006)). The metaphor is taken from
the act of stretching out the arm to fight in battle, where the arm is
the effective instrument in subduing an enemy.

Shall rule for him - Lowth renders the phrase, לו lō, 'for him,' 'over
him:' - 'And his arm shall prevail over him;' that is, over the strong
and mighty foe. The Septuagint renders it, Μετά κυρίας Meta kurias -
'With dominion.' But the meaning seems to be, 'God is mighty by himself;
his power resides in his own arm; he is not dependent on others; he will
accomplish the deliverance in such a manner that it shall be seen that
he did it alone; and he shall rule for himself, without any aid, and so
that it shall be manifest that he is the sovereign.' In the deliverance
of his people from their captivity, he so directed it, that it was
manifest that he was their deliverer and sovereign; and in the
redemption of man, the same thing is apparent, that the arm of God
effects the deliverance, and that it is his own power that establishes
the dominion.

Behold, his reward is with him - He will be ready to confer the
appropriate reward on his own people. The idea seems to be taken from
the custom of a conqueror, who distributes rewards among his followers
and soldiers after a signal victory. This was always done in ancient
wars, apparently because it seemed to be an act of justice that those
who had gained the victory should share also in the result, and this
participation of the booty was a stimulus to future effort, as well as a
compensation for their valor. The rewards distributed consisted
generally of that which was taken from the conquered; gold, and silver,
and raiment, as well as captives or slaves (see [Gen
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#007); [Exo
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#009); [Sa1
30:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#026); and particularly [Jdg
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#030)):

Have they not sped?

Have they not divided the prey;

To every man a damsel or two';

To Sisera a prey of divers colors,

A prey of divers colors of needle-work,

Of divers colors of needle-work on both sides,

Meet for the necks of them that take the spoil.

The idea here is -

1\. That Yahweh would bestow appropriate rewards on his people.

2\. That they would be conferred on his coming, and not be delayed.

3\. That it should be done by the hand of God himself.

This language was applicable to the interposition of God to save his
people from their long exile, and the 'reward' would be ample in the
restoration to their own land, and the re-establishment of his worship.
It is applicable in a higher sense to the coming of the Messiah to bless
the world. His reward was with him. He blessed his faithful followers on
earth; he will bless them more abundantly in heaven. It will be
assuredly applicable to him when he shall come to gather his people to
himself in the great and last day, and the language before us is used
with reference to that: 'And behold, I come quickly; and my reward is
with me, to give every man according as his work shall be' [Rev
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#012).

And his work - Margin, 'Recompense for his work.' The margin here is the
correct rendering. The Hebrew word strictly indeed denotes work, labor,
business; but it also denotes the wages for work [Lev
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#013); [Psa
109:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#020).

[Isaiah 40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 40:11</span></span>

He shall feed his flock - In the previous verse, the fact had been
asserted that God would come to subdue his foes, and to reward his
people. In this verse, the mild and gentle character of his government
over his people is predicted. It would not be that of a conqueror over
vanquished subjects; but it would be mild and tender, like that of a
shepherd who carries the lambs, which are unable to walk, in his own
arms, and gently leads along the feeble and the delicate. The verb
translated "to feed' (ירעה yire‛eh), denotes more than our word feed at
present. It refers to all the care of a shepherd over his flock; and
means to tend, to guard, to govern, to provide pasture, to defend from
danger, as a shepherd does his flock. It is often applied in the
Scriptures to God represented as the tender shepherd, and especially to
the Redeemer [Psa 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001); [Eze
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023); [Joh
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#014); [Heb
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#020); [Pe1
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#025); [Pe1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#004). It is often applied to a leader
or a ruler of a people [Sa2 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#002); [Sa2
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#007); [Jer
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#002). Thus Homer often uses the
phrase, ποιμήν λαῶν poimēn laōn - 'shepherds of the people,' to denote a
ruler, or monarch. Here it denotes that God would evince toward his
people the same tender care, guardianship and protection, which a
shepherd shows for his flock.

He shall gather the lambs with his arm - This is a most beautiful
expression, denoting the care of God the Saviour for the feeblest and
weakest of his people, and for the young and feeble in years and piety.
A similar thing is often done by a shepherd. The tender lamb, unable to
keep up with the flock, becomes weary and exhausted; and the shepherd
naturally takes it in his arms and carries it. Such a shepherd as this
Virgil beautifully describes:

En, ipse capellas

Protenus aeger argo; hancetiam vix, Tityre, duco;

Hic inter densas corylos modo namque gemellos,

Spem gregis, Ah! silice in nuda connixa reliquet.

Eclog. i. 12.

Lo! I my goats urge fainting o'er the mead;

This, feebler than the rest, with pains I lead.

Yean'd mid yon herds upon the flinty plain,

Her dying twins, my flock's late hope, remain.

Wrangham.

And shall gently lead ... - Margin, 'Give suck.' This is the more
correct translation. It denotes the dams of the flock that would be
easily exhausted by being overdriven, and of which there was, therefore,
special care necessary. Thus Jacob says to his brother Esau, [Gen
33:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#013) : 'The flocks and the herds
giving suck to their young are with me, and if they should be overdriven
all the flock will die.' Of the necessity of such care and attention
there is abundant evidence, and indeed it is manifest at a glance. Dr.
Shaw, speaking of the exposure of the flocks in Syria, says: 'The
greatest skill and vigilance, and even tender care, are required in the
management of such immense flocks as wander on the Syrian plains. Their
prodigious numbers compel the keepers to remove them too frequently in
search of fresh pastures, which proves very destructive to the young
that have not strength to follow.' The following extract from Anderson's
Tour through Greece will also serve to illustrate this passage: 'One of
the great delights in traveling through a pastoral country, is to see
and feel the force of the beautiful imagery in the Scriptures, borrowed
from pastoral life.

All day long the shepherd attends his flock, leading them into "green
pastures," near fountains of water, and chooses a convenient place for
them to "rest at noon." At night he drives them near his tent; and, if
there is danger, encloses them in the fold. They know his voice, and
follow him. When traveling, he tenderly watches over them, and carries
such as are exhausted in his arms. Such a shepherd is the Lord Jesus
Christ.' No description could more beautifully describe the character of
the Redeemer. In the New Testament, he is often described as a kind and
tender shepherd, and regarding the welfare of all his flock, and as
ready to give his life for them [Joh
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#007), [Joh
10:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#009), [Joh
10:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#014); [Heb
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#020); [Pe1
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#025); [Pe1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#004). We are here also strikingly
reminded of the solemn command which he gave to Peter, evincing his
tender regard for his flock, 'Feed my lambs:' 'Feed my sheep' [Joh
16:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015). It proves in regard to the
Redeemer:

1\. That his nature is mild, and gentle, and tender.

2\. That he has a kind regard for all his flock, and will consult the
real interest of all, as a shepherd does of his flock.

3\. That he has a special solicitude for the feeble and infirm, and that
they will be the objects of his tender care.

4\. That he feels a particular solicitude for the young. He knows their
feebleness; he is acquainted with their temptations; he sees the
importance of their being trained up with care; and he looks with deep
interest, therefore, on all the efforts made to guard them from the ways
of sin, and to train them up for his service (compare the note at [Isa
42:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#003)).

[Isaiah 40:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 40:12</span></span>

Who hath measured - The object in this and the following verses to [Isa
40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026), is to show the greatness,
power, and majesty of God, by strong contrast with his creatures, and
more especially with idols. Perhaps the prophet designed to meet and
answer an implied objection: that the work of deliverance was so great
that it could not be accomplished. The answer was, that God had made all
things; that he was infinitely great; that he had entire control over
all the nations; and that he could, therefore, remove all obstacles out
of the way, and accomplish his great and gracious purposes. By man it
could not be done; nor had idol-gods any power to do it; but the Creator
and upholder of all could effect this purpose with infinite case. At the
same time that the argument here is one that is entirely conclusive, the
passage, regarded as a description of the power and majesty of God, is
one of vast sublimity and grandeur; nor is there any portion of the
Sacred Volume that is more suited to impress the mind with a sense of
the majesty and glory of Yahweh. The question, 'who hath measured,' is
designed to imply that the thing referred to here was that which had
never been done, and could never be done by man; and the argument is,
that although that which the prophet predicted was a work which
surpassed human power, yet it could be done by that God who had measured
the waters in the hollow of his hand. The word 'waters' here refers
evidently to the vast collection of waters in the deep - the mighty
ocean, together with all the waters in the running streams, and in the
clouds. See [Gen 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006), where the
firmament is said to have been made to divide the waters from the
waters. A reference to the waters above the heavens occurs in [Psa
148:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#004) :

Praise him, ye heavens of heavens,

And ye waters that be above the heavens.

And in [Pro 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#004), a Similar
description of the power and majesty of God occurs:

Who hath gathered the wind in his fists?

Who hath bound the waters in a garment?

Who hath established all the ends of the earth?

And in [Job 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#008) :

He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds;

And the cloud is not rent under them.

The word 'waters' here, therefore, may include all the water on the
earth, and in the sky. The words, 'the hollow of his hand,' mean
properly the hand as it is closed, forming a hollow or a cavity by which
water can be taken up. The idea is, that God can take up the vast
oceans, and all the waters in the lakes, streams, and clouds, in the
palm of his hand, as we take up the smallest quantity in ours.

And meted out heaven - The word rendered 'meted,' that is, measured (כון
kûn), means properly to stand erect, to set up, or make erect; to found,
fit, adjust, dispose, form, create. It usually has the idea of fitting
or disposing. The word 'span' (זרת zeret) denotes the space from the end
of the thumb to the end of the middle finger, when extended - usually
about nine inches. The idea is, that Yahweh was able to compass or grasp
the heavens, though so vast, as one can compass or measure a small
object with the span. What an illustration of the vastness and
illimitable nature of God!

And comprehended - And measured (כל kôl from כוּל kûl, to hold or
contain); 'Lo, the heavens, and the heaven of heavens cannot contain
thee' [Kg1 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#027).

The dust of the earth - All the earth; all the dust that composes the
globe.

In a measure - (בשׁלשׁ bâshâlı̂sh) Properly three; and then the third
part of anything. Jerome supposes that it means the three fngers, and
that the sense is, that God takes up all the dust of the earth in the
first three fingers of the hand. But the more probable signification is,
that the word denotes that which was the third part of some other
measure, as of an ephah, or bath. In [Psa
80:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#005), the word is used to denote a
large measure:

Thou feedest them with the bread of tears,

And givest them tears to drink in great measure ( שׁלישׁ shâlı̂ysh).

The idea is, that God is so great that he can measure all the dust of
the earth as easily as we can measure a small quantity of grain with a
measure.

And weighed the mountains in scales - The idea here is substantially the
same. It is, that God is so mighty that he can weigh the lofty
mountains, as we weigh a light object in scales, or in a balance; and
perhaps, also, that he has disposed them on the earth as if he had
weighed them out, and adapted them to their proper places and situations
Throughout this entire passage, there is not only the idea of majesty
and power in God, but there is also the idea that he has suited or
adjusted everything by his wisdom and power, and adapted it to the
condition and needs of his creatures.

[Isaiah 40:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 40:13</span></span>

Who hath directed - This passage is quoted by Paul in [Rom
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#034), and referred to by him in [Co1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#016). The word rendered 'directed'
here (תכן tikēn) is the same which is used in the previous verse, 'and
meted out heaven.' The idea here is, 'Who has fitted, or disposed the
mind or spirit of Yahweh? What superior being has ordered, instructed,
or disposed his understanding? Who has qualified him for the exercise of
his wisdom, or for the formation and execution of his plans?' The sense
is, God is supreme. No one has instructed or guided him, but his plans
are his own, and have all been formed by himself alone. And as those
plans are infinitely wise, and as he is not dependent on anyone for
their formation or execution, his people may have confidence in him, and
believe that he will be able to execute his purposes.

The Spirit - The word 'spirit' is used in the Bible in a greater variety
of senses than almost any other word (see the note at [Isa
40:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#007)). It seems here to be used in the
sense of mind, and to refer to God himself. There is no evidence that it
refers to the Holy Spirit particularly. 'The word spirit, he uses,' says
Calvin, 'for reason, judgment. He borrows the similitude from the nature
of mankind, in order that he may more accommodate himself to them; nor,
as it seems to me, does he here speak of the essential Spirit of God'
(Commentary in loc). The design of the prophet is not to refer to the
distinction in the divine nature, or to illustrate the special
characteristics of the different persons of the Godhead; but it is to
set forth the wisdom of Yahweh himself, the one infinite God, as
contradistinguished from idols, and as qualified to guide, govern, and
deliver his people. The passage should not be used, therefore, as a
proof-text in regard to the existence and wisdom of the Holy Spirit, but
is suited to demonstrate only that God is untaught; and that he is
independent and infinite in his wisdom.

Or being his counselor - Margin, as in Hebrew, 'Man of his counsel.' He
is not dependent for counsel on men or angels. He is supreme,
independent, and infinite. None is qualified to instruct him; and all,
therefore, should confide in his wisdom and knowledge.

[Isaiah 40:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 40:14</span></span>

With whom took he counsel - The sentiment of the former verse is
repeated here, in order, probably, to make it more emphatic.

In the path of judgment - The way of judging correctly and wisely; or
the way of administering justice. It denotes here his boundless wisdom
as it is seen in the various arrangements of his creation and
providence, by which all things keep their places, and accomplish his
vast designs.

[Isaiah 40:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 40:15</span></span>

Behold, the nations - All the nations of the earth. This is designed to
show the greatness of God, in comparison with that which strikes man as
great - a mighty nation; and the main object seems to be, to show that
God could accomplish his purposes without their aid, and that they could
not resist him in the execution of his plans. If they were as nothing in
comparison with him, how easily could he execute his purposes! If they
were as nothing, how little could they resist the execution of his
plans!

Are as a drop of a bucket - In comparison with him; or are so esteemed
by him. The drop that falls from the bucket in drawing water is a
trifle. It has no power, and compared with the waters of the ocean it is
as nothing. So small is the power of the nations in comparison with God.
"And are counted." Are thought of, regarded, esteemed by him, or in
comparison with him.

As the small dust of the balance - The small, fine dust which collects
on the best finished and most accurate balance or scales, and which has
no effect in making the scales uneven, or making either side
preponderate. Nothing can be a more striking representation of the fact
that the nations are regarded as nothing in comparison with God.

Behold, he taketh up the isles - Or he is able to do it; he could remove
the isles as the fine dust is driven before the whirlwind. A more
literal translation of this passage would be, 'Lo, the isles are as the
dust which is taken up,' or which one takes up; that is, which is taken
up, and carried away by the wind. There is something unusual in the
expression that God takes up the isles, and the idea is rather that the
isles in his sight are regarded as the fine dust which the wind sweeps
away. So the Chaldee renders it, 'Lo, the isles are like ashes which the
wind drives away.' The word 'isles,' Vitringa and Jerome regard as
denoting not the small portions of land in the sea that are surrounded
by water, but lands which are encompassed and enclosed Mesopotamia. But
there is no reason why it should not be taken here in its usual
signification, as denoting the islands of the sea. They would serve well
to be used in connection with mountains and hills in setting forth the
vast power of God.

As a very little thing - (כדק keddaq). The word דק daq means theft which
is beaten small, or fine; and then fine dust, chaff, or any light thing
which the wind easily sweeps away.

[Isaiah 40:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 40:16</span></span>

And Lebanon - The expression here refers to the trees or the cedars of
Lebanon. Thus it is rendered by the Chaldee: 'And the trees of Lebanon.'
For a description of Lebanon, see the note at [Isa
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#034). It is probable that the word
Lebanon here is not used in the limited sense in which it is sometimes
employed, to denote a single mountain, or a single range of mountains,
but includes the entire ranges lying north of Palestine, and which were
comprehended under the general name of Libanus. The idea here is, that
all these ranges of mountains, abounding in magnificent trees and
forests, would not furnish fuel sufficient to burn the sacrifices which
would be an appropriate offering to the majesty and glory of God.

To burn - To burn for the purpose of consuming the sacrifice.

Nor the beasts thereof for a burnt-offering - As the mountains of
Lebanon were extensive forests, they would abound with wild animals. The
idea is, that all those animals, if offered in sacrifice, would not be
an appropriate expression of what was due to God. It may be remarked
here, if all the vast forests of Lebanon on fire, and all its animals
consumed as an offering to God, were not sufficient to show forth his
glory, how little can our praises express the proper sense of his
majesty and honor! How profound should be our reverence for God! With
what awful veneration should we come before him! The image employed here
by Isaiah is one of great poetic beauty; and nothing, perhaps, could
give a deeper impression of the majesty and honor of the great Yahweh.

[Isaiah 40:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 40:17</span></span>

Are as nothing - This expresses literally what had been expressed by the
beautiful and striking imagery above.

Less than nothing - A strong hyperbolic expression denoting the utter
insignificance of the nations as compared with God. Such expressions are
common in the Scriptures.

And vanity - Hebrew, תהו tôhû - 'Emptiness;' the word which in [Gen
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002) is rendered 'without form.'

[Isaiah 40:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 40:18</span></span>

To whom then will ye liken God? - Since he is so great, what can
resemble him? What form can be made like him? The main idea here
intended to be conveyed by the prophet evidently is, that God is great
and glorious, and worthy of the confidence of his people. This idea he
illustrates by a reference to the attempts which had been made to make a
representation of him, and by showing how vain those efforts were. He
therefore states the mode in which the images of idols were usually
formed, and shows how absurd it was to suppose that they could be any
real representation of the true God. It is possible that this was
composed in the time of Manasseh, when idolatry prevailed to a great
extent in Judah, and that the prophet intended in this manner
incidentally to show the folly and absurdity of it.

[Isaiah 40:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 40:19</span></span>

The workman - The Hebrew word denotes an artificer of any kind, and is
applied to one who engraved on wood or stone [Exo
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#002); to a workman in iron, brass,
stone, wood [Exo 35:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#035); [Deu
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#015); or an artisan, or artificer in
general. It here refers manifestly to a man who worked in the metals of
which idols were commonly made. Those idols were sometimes made of wood,
sometimes of clay, but more frequently, as they are at present in India,
of metal. It became, undoubtedly, a regular trade or business thus to
make idol-gods.

Melteth - Casts or founds.

A graven image - (פסל pesel). This word commonly denotes an image carved
or graven from wood [Exo 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004); [Jdg
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#003); [Isa
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#015), [Isa
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#017); but it is also frequently
applied to a molten image, or one that is cast from metals [Jer
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#014); [Jer
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#017). It is used in this sense here;
as there is an incongruity in the idea of casting, or melting a graven
image.

And the goldsmith spreadeth it over with gold - Idols were frequently
overlaid with gold or silver. Those which were in the temples of the
gods were probably commonly made in this way, and probably those also
which were made for private use, as far as it could be afforded. The
word here rendered 'goldsmith,' however, does not of necessity man a
worker in gold, but a smith in general, or a worker in any kind of
metals.

And casteth silver chains - For the idol. These were not to fasten it,
but for the purpose of ornament. The general principle seems to have
been to decorate their idols with that which was regarded as the highest
ornament among the people; and as chains were used in abundance as a
part of their personal ornaments among the Orientals (see the notes at
[Isa 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#023)), so they made use of the
same kind of ornaments for their idols. The idols of the Hindoos now are
lavishly decorated in this manner.

[Isaiah 40:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 40:20</span></span>

He that is so impoverished - So poor. So it is generally supposed that
the word used here is to be understood, though interpreters have not
been entirely agreed in regard to its signification. The Septuagint
renders the phrase, 'The carpenter chooseth a sound piece of wood.' The
Chaldee. 'He cuts down an ash, a tree which will not rot.' Vulgate,
'Perhaps he chooses a tree which is incorruptible.' Jarchi renders it,
'He who is accustomed to examine, and to judge between the wood which is
durable, and other wood.' But the signification of the word (from סכן
sâkan, "to dwell, to be familiar with anyone") given to it by our
translators, is probably the correct one, that of being too poor to make
a costly oblation. This notion of poverty, Gesenius supposes, is derived
from the notion of being seated; and thence of sinking down from languor
or debility; and hence, from poverty or want.

That he hath no oblation - No offering; no sacrifice; no rich gift. He
is too poor to make such an offering to his god as would be implied in
an idol of brass or other metal, richly overlaid with plates of gold,
and decorated with silver chains. In [Isa
40:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#019), the design seems to have been
to describe the more rich and costly idols that were made; in this, to
describe those that were made by the poor who were unable to offer such
as were made of brass and gold. The word 'oblation,' therefore, that is,
offering, in this place, does not denote an offering made to the true
God, but an offering made to an idol, such as an image was regarded to
be. He could not afford a rich offering, and was constrained to make one
of wood.

Chooseth a tree that will not rot - Wood that will be durable and
permanent. Perhaps the idea is, that as he could not afford one of
metal, he would choose that which would be the most valuable which he
could make - a piece of wood that was durable, and that would thus show
his regard for the god that he worshipped. Or possibly the sense may be,
that he designed it should not be moved; that he expressed a fixed and
settled determination to adhere to the worship of the idol; and that as
he had no idea of changing his religion, the permanency and durability
of the wood would be regarded as a somewhat more acceptable expression
of his worship.

A cunning workman - Hebrew, 'A wise artificer;' a man skilled in the art
of carving, and of making images.

A graven image - An image engraved or cut from wood, in
contradistinction from one that is molten or made from metals.

That shall not be moved - That shall stand long, as the expression of
his devotion to the service of the idol. The wood that was commonly
employed for this purpose as being most durable, as we learn from [Isa
44:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#014), was the cedar, the cypress, or
the oak (see the note in that place). The phrase, 'shall not be moved,'
does not refer so much to its being fixed in one place, as to its
durability and permanency.

[Isaiah 40:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 40:21</span></span>

Have ye not known? - This is evidently an address to the worshippers of
idols, and either designed to be addressed to the Jews themselves in the
times of Manasseh, when idolatry abounded, or to all idolaters. The
prophet had in the previous verses shown the manner in which the idols
were made, and the folly of regarding them as objects of worship. He now
turns and addresses the worshippers of these idols, as being without
excuse. They might have known that these were not the true God. They had
had abundant opportunity of learning his existence and of becoming
acquainted with his majesty and glory. Tradition had informed them of
this, and the creation of the earth demonstrated his greatness and
power. The prophet, therefore, asks them whether they had not known
this? Whether their conduct was the result of ignorance? And the
question implies emphatically that they had known, or had abundant
opportunity to know of the existence and majesty of God. This was
emphatically true of the Jews, and yet they were constantly falling into
idolatrous worship.

From the beginning - Hebrew, 'From the head,' that is, from the very
commencement of the world. Has it not been communicated by tradition,
from age to age, that there is one God, and that he is the Creator and
upholder of all things? This was particularly the case with the Jews,
who had had this knowledge from the very commencement of their history,
and they were, therefore, entirely without excuse in their tendencies to
idolatry.

From the foundations of the earth - Have you not learned the existence
and greatness of God from the fact that the world has been made, and
that it demonstrates the existence and perfection of God? The sacred
writers often speak of the earth as resting on a foundation, as upheld,
etc.:

For he hath founded it upon the seas,

And established it upon the floods.

([Psa 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#002); see also [Pro
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#029)) Perhaps here, however, the word
'foundation' refers rather to the time than to the manner in which the
earth is made, and corresponds to the phrase 'from the beginning;' and
the sense may be, 'Has it not been understood ever since the earth was
founded? Has not the tradition of the existence and perfections of God
been unbroken and constant?' The argument is, that the existence and
greatness of God were fully known by tradition and by his works; and
that it was absurd to attempt to form an image of that God who had laid
the foundations of the world.

[Isaiah 40:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 40:22</span></span>

It is he that sitteth - Margin, 'Him that sitteth,' that is, have you
not known him? The Hebrew literally means 'the sitter, or he sitting on
the circle of the each;' and it may be connected either with [Isa
40:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#021), 'Have ye not known him sitting
on the circle of the earth?' or with [Isa
40:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018), 'What likeness will ye compare
to him that sitteth on the circle of the earth?' In either case the
phrase is designed to show the majesty and glory of God. The word
'sitteth' refers to God as a sovereign or monarch, making the circle of
the earth his throne.

The circle of the earth - Or rather, "above" (על ‛al) the circle of the
earth. The word rendered 'circle' (חוּג chûg) denotes "a circle, sphere,
or arch"; and is applied to the arch or vault of the heavens, in [Pro
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#027); [Job
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#014). The phrase 'circle,' or
'circuit of the earth,' here seems to be used in the same sense as the
phrase orbis terrarum by the Latins; not as denoting a sphere, or not as
implying that the earth was a globe, but that it was an extended plain
surrounded by oceans and mighty waters. The globular form of the earth
was then unknown; and the idea is, that God sat above this extended
circuit, or circle; and that the vast earth was beneath his feet.

And the inhabitants thereof are like grasshoppers - Or rather, like
locusts, for so the Hebrew word properly means. This is designed to show
that the inhabitants of the earth, numerous and mighty as they are, are
as nothing compared with God. The idea is that God is so exalted, that,
as he looks down from that elevated station, all the inhabitants of the
world appear to him as locusts - a busy, agirated, moving, impatient
multitude, spread over the vast circle of the earth beneath him - as
locusts spread in almost interminable bands over the plains in the East.
What a striking illustration of the insignificance of man as he is
viewed from the heavens! What an impressive description of the
nothingness of his mighty plans, and of the vanity of his mightiest
works!

That stretcheth out the heavens - Referring to the firmament above, as
that which seems to be stretched out, or expanded over our heads. The
heavens above are often thus compared to an expanse - either solid [Gen
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#007), or to a curtain, or tent (compare
the note at [Isa 34:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#004)).

As a curtain - The word used here (דק doq) denotes properly fineness,
thinness; and then a fine or thin cloth, or curtain. Here it means a
thin canopy that is stretched over us. The same expression occurs in
[Psa 104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002) (compare [Job
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#008); [Isa
44:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#024)). Probably the reference here is
to the veil, curtain, or awning which the Orientals are accustomed to
draw over the court in their houses. Their houses are constructed with
an open court in the center, with the rooms ranged round it. In that
court or open square there are usually fountains, if the situation is so
that they can be constructed; and they are cool and refreshing places
for the family to sit in the heat of the summer. In hot or rainy
weather, a curtain or awning is drawn over this area. According to the
imago of the prophet here, the heavens are spread out over our heads as
such an awning.

And spreadeth them out as a tent - As a tent that is made for a
habitation. Perhaps the idea is, that the heavens are extended like a
tent in order to furnish a dwelling-place for God. Thus the Chaldee
renders it. If so, it proves that the universe, so vast, was suited up
to be the dwelling-place of the High and Holy One, and is a most
impressive representation of his immensity.

[Isaiah 40:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 40:23</span></span>

That bringeth the princes to nothing - That is, all princes and kings.
No matter how great their power, their wealth, and their dignity, they
are, by his hand, reduced to nothing before him. The design of this
passage is to contrast the majesty of God with that of princes and
nobles, and to show how far he excels them all. The general truth is
therefore stated, that all monarchs are by him removed from their
thrones, and consigned to nothing. The same idea is expressed in [Job
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#021) :

He poureth contempt upon princes,

And weakeneth the strength of the mighty.

And in [Psa 107:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#040) :

He poureth contempt upon princes,

And causeth them to wander in the wilderness where there is no way.

The particular idea here, as appears from the next verse, is, that the
princes and rulers who are opposed to God constitute no real resistance
to the execution of his purposes. He can strip off their honors and
glory, and obliterate even their names.

He maketh the judges of the earth - Kings and princes often executed
judgment personally, and hence, the words judges and kings seem to be
synonymous as they are used here, and in [Psa
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010) :

Be wise now, therefore, O ye kings;

Be instructed, ye judges of the earth.

[Isaiah 40:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 40:24</span></span>

Yea, they shall not be planted - The kings and rulers - especially they
who oppose God in the execution of his purposes. The idea in this verse
is, that their name and family should become extinct in the same way as
a tree does from which no shoot starts up. Although they were great and
mighty, like the tree that sends out far-spreading branches, and strikes
its roots deep, yet God would so utterly destroy them that they should
have no posterity, and their family become extinct. Princes and kings
are often compared to lofty and majestic trees of the forest (compare
[Psa 37:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#035); [Dan
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#007) ff) Vitringa supposes that wicked
rulers are particularly intended here, and that the idea is, that the
wicked princes that persecuted his people should be entirely extinct on
the earth. He refers particularly to Pharaoh, Antiochus Epiphanes, Nero,
Domitian, Decius, Gallus, Galerius, Maxenus, Maximus, and some others,
as instances of this kind, whose families soon became extinct. It may be
remarked, in general, that the families of monarchs and princes become
extinct usually much sooner than others. The fact may be owing in part
to the usual luxury and vice in the families of the great, and in part
to the direct arrangements of God, by which he designs that power shall
not be forever perpetuated in one family, or line. The general idea in
the passage is, that earthly princes and rulers are as nothing When
compared with God, and that he can easily destroy their families and
their name. But there is no improbability in the supposition of
Vitringa, that the prophet refers particularly to the enemies of God and
his cause, and that he intends specifically to affirm that none of these
enemies could prevent or embarrass the execution of his purposes - since
with infinite ease he could entirely destroy their name.

They shall not be sown - The same idea under another figure. The former
referred to princes under the image of a tree; this refers to them under
the image of grain that is sown. The idea is, that their family and name
should be annihilated, and should not spring up in a future generation.
The same image occurs in [Nah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#014), in
respect to the king of Assyria: 'The Lord hath given commandment
concerning thee, that no more of thy name be sown;' that is, that thy
name and family should become entirely extinct.

Yea, their stock - Their stem - referring to the stump or stock of a
tree. When a tree is cut down, the roots often still live, and send up
shoots, or suckers, that grow into trees. Posterity is often, in the
Scriptures, compared to such suckers or shoots from old and decayed
trees (see the notes at [Isa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)).
The meaning here is, that as when a tree falls and dies without sending
up any shoots, so princes should die. They should have no descendants;
no one of their family should sit on their thrones.

Shall blow upon them - As God sends a tempest upon the forest and
uproots the loftiest trees, so he will sweep away the families of
princes. Or rather, perhaps, the idea here is, that God sends a strong
and burning east wind, and withers up everything before it (see this
wind described in the notes at [Isa
37:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#026)).

And they shall wither - Trees, and shrubs, and plants are dried up
before that poisonous and fiery wind - the simoom - and so it would be
with the princes before the blast of Yahweh.

And the whirlwind shall take them away as stubble - This, in its literal
signification, means that the whirlwind bears away the trees of the
forest, and with the same ease God would sweep away the families of the
kings and princes that opposed him and oppressed his people. It may
illustrate this to observe, that the effects of whirlwinds in the East
are often much more violent than they are with us, and that they often
bear away to a great distance the branches of trees, and even the trees
themselves. The following description of a whirlwind observed by Mr.
Bruce, may serve to illustrate this passage, as well as the passage in
[Psa 83:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#013) :

O my God, make them like a wheel;

As the stubble before the wind,

referring to the rotary action of the whirlwind, which often impels
straw like a wheel set in rapid motion. 'Mr. Bruce, in his journey
through the desert of Senaar, had the singular felicity to contemplate
this wonderful phenomenon in all its terrific majesty, without injury,
although with considerable danger and alarm. In that vast expanse of
desert, from west and to northwest of him, he saw a number of prodigious
pillars of sand at different distances, moving, at times, with great
celerity, at others, stalking on with majestic slowness; at intervals he
thought they were coming, in a very few minutes, to overwhelm him and
his companion. Again, they would retreat so as to be almost out of
sight, their tops reaching to the very clouds. There, the tops often
separated from the bodies; and these, once disjoined, dispersed in the
air, and appeared no more. Sometimes they were broken near the middle,
as if struck with a large cannon-shot.

About noon, they began to advance with considerable swiftness upon them,
the wind being very strong at north. Eleven of these awful visitors
ranged alongside of them, about the distance of three miles. The
greatest diameter of the largest appeared to him, at that distance, as
if it would measure ten feet. They retired from them with a wind at
southeast, leaving an impression upon the mind of our intrepid traveler,
to which he could give no name, though he candidly admits that one
ingredient in it was fear, with a considerable deal of wonder and
astonishment. He declares it was in vain to think of flying; the
swiftest horse, or fastest sailing ship, could be of no use to carry
them out of this danger; and the full persuasion of this riveted him to
the spot where he stood. Next day, they were gratified with a similar
display of moving pillars, in form and disposition like those already
described, only they seemed to be more in number and less in size.

They came, several times, in a direction close upon them; that is,
according to Mr. Bruce's computation, within less than two miles. They
became, immediately after sunrise, like a thick wood, and almost
darkened the sun; his rays shining through them for near an hour, gave
them an appearance of pillars of fire. At another time, they were
terrified by an army (as it seemed) of these sand pillars, whose march
was constantly south, a number of which seemed once to be coming
directly upon them; and though they were little nearer than two miles, a
considerable quantity of sand fell around them. On the 21st of November,
about eight in the morning, he had a view of the desert to the westward,
as before, and the sands had already begun to rise in immense twisted
pillars, which darkened the heavens, and moved over the desert with more
magnificence than ever. The sun, shining through the pillars, which were
thicker, and contained more sand, apparently, than on any of the
preceding days, seemed to give those nearest them an appearance as if
spotted with stars of gold.' (Paxton)

[Isaiah 40:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 40:25</span></span>

To whom then will ye liken me? - (See [Isa
40:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018)) The prophet having thus set
forth the majesty and glory of God, asks now with great emphasis, what
could be an adequate and proper representation of such a God. And if God
was such a Being, how great was the folly of idolatry, and how vain all
their confidence in the gods which their own hands had made.

[Isaiah 40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">isa 40:26</span></span>

Lift up your eyes on high - Direct your eyes toward heaven, and in the
contemplation of the wonders of the starry world, and of God's power
there, learn the evidence of his ability to destroy his foes and to save
his friends. Lowth connects this verse with the former, and renders it:

'Saith the Holy One,

Lift up your eyes on high.'

The words 'on high' here are evidently synonymous with heaven, and refer
to the starry worlds. The design of the passage is to convince them of
the folly of idolatry, and of the power and majesty, of the true God. It
is proof of man's elevated nature that he can thus look upward, and
trace the evidences of the power and wisdom of God in the heavens; that
he can raise his eyes and thoughts above the earth, and fix his
attention on the works of God in distant worlds; and in the number, the
order, the greatness, and the harmony of the heavenly bodies, trace the
proofs of the infinite greatness and the wisdom of God. This thought was
most beautifully expressed by one of the ancient poets.

Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram;

Os homini sublime dedit: ccelumque tueri,

Jussit et erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.

Ovid, Met. i. 84-86.

In the Scriptures, God not unfrequently appeals to the starry heavens in
proof of his existence and perfections, and as the most sublime
exhibition of his greatness and power (see [Psa
19:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)). And it may be remarked, that
this argument is one that increases in strength, in the view of people,
from age to age, just in proportion to the advances which are made in
the science of astronomy. It is now far more striking than it was in the
times of Isaiah; and, indeed, the discoveries in astronomical science in
modern times have given a beauty and power to this argument which could
have been but imperfectly understood in the times of the prophets. The
argument is one that accumulates with every new discovery in astronomy;
but is one - such is the vastness and beauty of the system of the
universe - which can be contemplated in its fall power only amidst the
more sublime contemplations of eternity. Those who are disposed to
contemplate this argument more fully, may find it presented with great
eloquence and beauty in Dr. Chalmers' Astronomical Discourses, and in
Dick's Christian Philosopher.

Who hath created these things - These heavens. This is the first
evidence of the power of God in the contemplation of the heavens, that
God is their Creator. The other demonstrations referred to are the fact,
that he brings out their armies as if they were a marshalled host, and
understands and calls all their names.

That bringeth out their hosts - Their armies, for so the word 'hosts'
means (see the note at [Isa 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009)). The
word here alludes to the fact that the heavenly bodies seem to be
marshalled, or regularly arrayed as an array; that they keep their
place, preserve their order, and are apparently led on from the east to
the west, like a vast army under a mighty leader:

Canst thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his season?

Or canst thou guide Arcturus with his sons?

[Job 38:32](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#032)

By number - As if he had numbered, or named them; as a military
commander would call forth his armies in their proper order, and have
them so numbered and enrolled in the various divisions, that he can
command them with ease.

He calleth them all by names - This idea is also taken from a military
leader, who would know the names of the individuals that composed his
army. In smaller divisions of an army, this could of course be done; but
the idea is, that God is intimately acquainted with all the hosts of
stars; that though their numbers appear to us so great, yet he is
acquainted with each one individually, and has that knowledge of it
which we have of a person or object which we recognize by a name. It is
said of Cyrus, that he was acquainted by name with every individual that
composed his vast army. The practice of giving names to the stars of
heaven was early, and is known to have been originated by the Chaldeans.
Intimations of this custom we have not unfrequently in the Scriptures,
as far back as the time of Job:

Which maketh Arcturus, and Orion, and Pleiades,

And the chambers of the south.

[Job 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#009)

Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades?

Or loose the bands of Orion?

Canst thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his season?

Or canst thou guide Arcturus with his sons?

[Job 38:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#031)

This power of giving names to all the stars, is beautifully ascribed to
God in [Psa 147:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#004) :

He telleth the number of the stars,

He calleth them all by their names.

This view of the greatness of God is more striking now than it was in
the times of David or Isaiah. Little then, comparatively, was known of
the number of the stars. But since the invention of the telescope the
view of the heavenly world has been enlarged almost to immensity; arid
though the expression 'he calleth them all by their names,' had great
sublimity as used in the time of Isaiah, yet it raises in us far higher
conceptions of the power and greatness of God when applied to what we
know now of the heavens. Yet doubtless our view of the heavens is much
further beneath the sublime reality than were the prevalent views in the
time of the prophet beneath those which we now have. As an illustration
of this we may remark, that the milky way which stretches across the
heavens, is now ascertained to receive its white appearance from the
mingling together of the light of an innumerable number of stars, too
remote to be seen by the naked eye. Dr. Herschell examined a portion of
the milky way about fifteen degrees long, and two broad, and found that
it contained no fewer than fifty thousand stars, large enough to be
distinctly counted, and he suspected that that portion contained twice
as manymore, which, for the want of sufficient light in his telescope,
he saw only now and then. It is to be remembered, also, that the galaxy,
or milky way, which we see with the naked eye, is only one of a large
number of nebulae of similar construction which are arranged apparently
in strata, and which extend to great length in the heavens. According to
this, and on every correct supposition in regard to the heavens, the
number of the stars surpasses all our powers of computation. Yet God is
said to lead them all forth as marshalled armies - how beautiful a
description when applied to the nebuloe! - and to call all their names.

By the greatness of his might - It is his single and unassisted arm that
conducts them; his own hand alone that sustains them.

Not one faileth - Not one is missing; not one of the immense host is out
of its place, or unnoticed. All are arranged in infinite wisdom; all
observe the proper order, and the proper times. How strikingly true is
this, on the slightest inspection of the heavens. How im pressive and
grand is it in the higher developments of the discoveries of astronomy!

[Isaiah 40:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">isa 40:27</span></span>

Why sayest thou? - This verse is designed to reprove the people for
their want of confidence in God. The idea is, 'If God is so great; if be
arranges the hosts of heaven with such unerring skill, causing all the
stars to observe their proper place and their exact times, the interests
of his people are safe in his hands.' Piety may always find security in
the assurance that He who preserves the unbroken order of the heavens
will not fail to keep and save his people. The language in this verse is
to be understood as addressed to the Jews sighing for deliverance in
their long and painful captivity in Babylon. Their city and temple had
laid waste for many years; their captivity had been long and wearisome,
and doubtless many would be ready to say, that it would never end. To
furnish an argument to meet this state of despondency, the prophet sets
before them this sublime description of the faithfulness and the power
of God.

O Jacob - A name often given to the Jews as the descendants of Jacob.

O Israel - Denoting the same. The name Israel was given to Jacob because
he had power to prevail as a prince with God [Gen
32:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#028); and it became the common name
by which his descendants were known.

My way is hid from the Lord - That is, is not seen, or noticed. The word
'way' here denotes evidently the state or condition; the manner of life,
or the calamities which they experienced. The term is often thus
employed to denote the lot, condition, or manner in which one lives or
acts [Psa 37:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#005); [Isa
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#024); [Jer
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001). The phrase, 'is hid,' means that
God is ignorant of it, or that he does not attend to it; and the
complaint here is, that God had not regarded them in their calamities,
and would not interpose to save them.

And my judgment - My cause. The word here refers to their condition
among the people where they were captive, and by whom they were
oppressed. They are represented as being deprived of their liberty; and
they here complain that God disregarded their cause, and that he did not
come forth to deliver them from their oppressions and their trials.

[Isaiah 40:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">isa 40:28</span></span>

Hast thou not known? - This is the language of the prophet reproving
them for complaining of being forsaken and assuring them that God was
faithful to his promises. This argument of the prophet, which continues
to the close of the chapter, comprises the main scope of the chapter,
which is to induce them to put confidence in God, and to believe that he
was able and willing to deliver them. The phrase, 'Hast thou not known?
refers to the fact that the Jewish people had had an abundant
opportunity of learning, in their history, and from their fathers, the
true character of God, and his entire ability to save them. No people
had had so much light on this subject, and now that they were in trial,
they ought to recall their former knowledge of his character, and
remember his dealings of faithfulness with them and their fathers. It is
well for the people of God in times of calamity and trial to recall to
their recollection his former dealings with his church. That history
will furnish abundant sources of consolation, and abundant assurances
that their interests are safe in his hands.

Hast thou not heard? - From the traditions of the fathers; the
instruction which you have received from ancient times. A large part of
the knowledge of the Jews was traditionary; and these attributes of God,
as a faithful God, had, no doubt, constituted an important part of the
knowledge which had thus been communicated to them.

The everlasting God - The God who has existed from eternity, unlike the
idols of the pagan. If he was from eternity, he would be unchangeable,
and his purposes could not fail.

The Creator of the ends of the earth - The phrase, 'the ends of the
earth,' means the same as the earth itself. The earth is sometimes
spoken of as a vast plain having limits or boundaries (see [Isa
40:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022)). It is probable that this was
the prevailing idea among the ancients (compare [Deu
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017); [Sa1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#010); [Psa
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#006); [Psa
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027); [Psa
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#010); [Psa
65:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#005); [Psa
67:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#007); [Psa
98:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#003); [Isa
43:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#006); [Isa
45:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#022); [Isa
52:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#010)). The argument here is, that he
who has formed the earth could not be exhausted or weary in so small a
work as that of protecting his people.

Fainteth not - Is not fatigued or exhausted. That God, who has formed
and sustained all things, is not exhausted in his powers, but is able
still to defend and guard his people.

There is no searching of his understanding - The God who made all things
must be infinitely wise. There is proof of boundless skill in the works
of his hands, and it is impossible for finite mind fully and adequately
to search out all the proofs of his wisdom and skill. Man can see only a
part - a small part, while the vast ocean, the boundless deep of his
wisdom, lies still unexplored. This thought is beautifully expressed by
Zophar in [Job 11:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#007) :

Canst thou by searching find out God?

Canst thou find out the Almighty unto perfection?

It is as high as heaven;

What canst thou do?

Deeper than hell;

What canst thou know:

The measure thereof is longer than the earth,

And broader than the sea.

The argument here is, that that God who has made all things, must be
intimately acquainted with the needs of his people. They had, therefore,
no reason to complain that their way was hidden from the Lord, and their
cause passed over by him. Perhaps, also, it is implied, that as his
understanding was vast, they ought not to expect to be able to
comprehend the reason of all his doings; but should expect that there
would be much that was mysterious and unsearchable. The reasons of his
doings are often hid from his people; and their consolation is to be
found in the assurance that he is infinitely wise, and that he who rules
over the universe must know what is best, and cannot err.

[Isaiah 40:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">isa 40:29</span></span>

He giveth power to the faint - To his weak and feeble people. This is
one of his attributes; and his people, therefore, should put their trust
in him, and look to him for aid (compare [Co2
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)). The design of this verse is to
give consolation to the afflicted and down-trodden people in Babylon, by
recalling to their minds the truth that it was one of the
characteristics of God that he ministered strength to those who were
conscious of their own feebleness, and who looked to him for support. It
is a truth, however, as applicable to us as to theresa truth inestimably
precious to those who feel that they are weak and feeble, and who look
to God for aid.

[Isaiah 40:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">isa 40:30</span></span>

Even the youths shall faint - The most vigorous young men, those in whom
we expect manly strength, and who are best suited to endure hardy toil.
They become weary by labor. Their powers are soon exhausted. The design
here is, to contrast the most vigorous of the human race with God, and
to show that while all their powers fail, the power of God is
unexhausted and inexhaustible.

And the young men - The word used here denotes properly "those who are
chosen or selected" (בחוּרים bachûriym, Greek ἐκλεκτοὶ eklektoi), and
may be applied to those who were selected or chosen for any hazardous
enterprise, or dangerous achievement in war; those who would be selected
for vigor or activity. The meaning is, that the most chosen or select of
the human family - the most vigorous and manly, must be worn down by
fatigue, or paralyzed by sickness or death; but that the powers of God
never grow weary, and that those who trust in him should never become
faint.

[Isaiah 40:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">isa 40:31</span></span>

But they that wait upon the Lord - The word rendered 'wait upon' here
(from קוה qâvâh), denotes properly to wait, in the sense of expecting.
The phrase, 'to wait on Yahweh,' means to wait for his help; that is, to
trust in him, to put our hope or confidence in him. It is applicable to
those who are in circumstances of danger or want, and who look to him
for his merciful interposition. Here it properly refers to those who
were suffering a long and grievous captivity in Babylon, and who had no
prospect of deliverance but in him. The phrase is applicable also to all
who feel that they are weak, feeble, guilty, and helpless, and who, in
view of this, put their trust in Yahweh. The promise or assurance here
is general in its nature, and is as applicable to his people now as it
was in the times of the captivity in Babylon. Religion is often
expressed in the Scriptures by 'waiting on Yahweh,' that is, by looking
to him for help, expecting deliverance through his aid, putting trust in
him (see [Psa 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#003), [Psa
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#005), [Psa
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#021); [Psa
27:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#014); [Psa
37:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#007), [Psa
37:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#009), [Psa
37:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#034); [Psa
69:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#003); compare [Isa
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#017), note; [Isa
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#018), note).

It does not imply inactivity, or want of personal exertion; it implies
merely that our hope of aid and salvation is in him - a feeling that is
as consistent with the most strenuous endeavors to secure the object, as
it is with a state of inactivity and indolence. Indeed, no man can wait
on God in a proper manner who does not use the means which he has
appointed for conveying to us his blessing. To wait on him without using
any means to obtain his aid, is to tempt him; to expect miraculous
interposition is unauthorized, and must meet with disappointment. And
they only wait on him in a proper manner who expect his blessing in the
common modes in which he imparts it to men - in the use of those means
and efforts which he has appointed, and which he is accustomed to bless.
The farmer who should wait for God to plow and sow his fields, would not
only be disappointed, but would be guilty of provoking Him. And so the
man who waits for God to do what he ought to do; to save him without
using any of the means of grace, will not only be disappointed, but will
provoke his displeasure.

Shall renew their strength - Margin, 'Change.' The Hebrew word commonly
means to change, to alter; and then to revive, to renew, to cause to
flourish again, as, e. g., a tree that has decayed and fallen down (see
the note at [Isa 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#010); compare [Job
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#007)). Here it is evidently used in
the sense of renewing, or causing to revive; to increase, and to restore
that which is decayed. It means that the people of God who trust in him
shall become strong in faith; able to contend with their spiritual foes,
to gain the victory over their sins, and to discharge aright the duties,
and to meet aright the trials of life. God gives them strength, if they
seek him in the way of his appointment - a promise which has been
verified in the experience of his people in every age.

They shall mount up with wings as eagles - Lowth translates this 'They
shall put forth fresh feathers like the moulting eagle;' and in his note
on the passage remarks, that 'it has been a common and popular opinion
that the eagle lives and retains his vigor to a great age; and that,
beyond the common lot of other birds, he moults in his old age, and
renews his feathers, and with them his youth.' He supposes that the
passage in [Psa 103:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#005), 'So that thy
youth is renewed like the eagles,' refers to this fact. That this was a
common and popular opinion among the ancients, is clearly proved by
Bochart (Hieroz. ii. 2. 1. pp. 165-169). The opinion was, that at stated
times the eagle plunged itself in the sea and cast off its old feathers,
and that new feathers started forth, and that thus it lived often to the
hundredth year, and then threw itself in the sea and died. In accordance
with this opinion, the Septuagint renders this passage, 'They shall put
forth fresh feathers (πτεροφυήσουσιν pterophuēsousin) like eagles.'
Vulgate, Assument pennas sicut aquiloe.

The Chaldee renders it, 'They who trust in the Lord shall be gathered
from the captivity, and shall increase their strength, and renew their
youth as a germ which grows up; upon wings of eagles shall they run and
not be fatigued.' But whatever may be the truth in regard to the eagle,
there is no reason to believe that Isaiah here had any reference to the
fact that it moults in its old age. The translation of Lowth was derived
from file Septuagint, and not from the Hebrew text. The meaning of the
Hebrew is simply, 'they shall ascend on wings as eagles,' or 'they shall
lift up the wings as eagles;' and the image is derived from the fact
that the eagle rises on the most vigorous wing of any bird, and ascends
apparently further toward the sun. The figure, therefore, denotes
strength and vigor of purpose; strong and manly piety; an elevation
above the world; communion with God, and a nearness to his throne - as
the eagle ascends toward the sun.

They shall run and not be weary - This passage, also, is but another
mode of expressing the same idea - that they who trust in God would be
vigorous, elevated, unwearied; that he would sustain and uphold them;
and that in his service they would never faint. This was at first
designed to be applied to the Jews in captivity in Babylon to induce
them to put their trust in God. But it is as true now as it was at that
time. It has been found in the experience of thousands and tens of
thousands, that by waiting on the Lord the heart has been invigorated;
the faith has been confirmed; and the affections have been raised above
the world. Strength has been given to bear trial without complaining, to
engage in arduous duty without fainting, to pursue the perilous and
toilsome journey of life without exhaustion, and to rise above the world
in hope and peace on the bed of death.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 41](isa041)

</div>
