<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa006)  [Next](isa008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 7:0</span></span>

Probably no portion of the Bible has been regarded as so difficult of
interpretation, and has given rise to so great a variety of expositions,
as the prophecy which is commenced in this chapter, and which is closed
in [Isa 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#007). The importance of the
prophecy respecting the Messiah ([Isa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014) ff; [Isa
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007); [Isa
9:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001)), is one reason why interpreters
have been so anxious to ascertain the genuine sense; and the
difficulties attending the supposition that there is reference to the
Messiah, have been among the causes why so much anxiety has been felt to
ascertain its true sense.

The prophecy which commences at the beginning of this chapter, is
continued to [Isa 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#007). An this was
evidently delivered at the same time, and constitutes a single vision,
or oracle. This should have been indicated in the division of the
chapters. Great obscurity arises from the arbitrary, and, in many
instances, absurd mode of division into chapters which has been adopted
in the Bible.

This chapter, for convenience of illustration, may be regarded as
divided into four parts:

I. The historical statement with which the whole account is introduced
in [Isa 7:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001). The principal
occurrences referred to in the chapter took place in the time of Ahaz.
For an account of his character and reign, see the Introduction, Section
3. He was an idolater and erected the images, and altars, and groves of
idolatry everywhere. He sacrificed to Baalim, and burned his children in
the valley of Hinnom in honor of Moloch, and ruled Jerusalem everywhere
with abominations, [Kg2 16:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#002); [Ch2
28:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#001). For these abominations, he was
delivered into the hand of the king of Syria, and was subjected to
calamities from the threatened invasion of the united armies of Syria
and Samaria. At this time Rezin was king of Syria, of which Damascus was
the capital; and Pekah was king of Israel or Sumaria. These kings,
during the concluding part of the reign of Jotham, the predecessor of
Ahaz, had formed an alliance and had gone up toward Jerusalem to make
war upon it, but had not been able to take it.

The formation of this confederacy in the time of Jotham is distinctly
declared in [Kg2 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#037). To this
confederacy Isaiah refers in [Isa 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001),
where he says that it occurred in the days of Jotham. The statement is
made by Isaiah here, doubtless, in order to trace the important matter
to which he alludes to its commencement, though what he subsequently
says had particular relation to Ahaz. Though the confederacy was formed
in the time of Jotham, yet the consequences were of long continuance,
and were not terminated until the defeat of Sennacherib in the time of
Hezekiah; see Isa. 37. Isaiah, here, in general, says [Isa
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001) that they went up against
Jerusalem, and could not take it. He may refer here to an expedition
which they made in the time of Jotham, or he may design this as a
"general" statement, intricating the result of "all" their efforts, that
they could not take Jerusalem. If the latter is the proper
interpretation, then the statement in [Isa
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001), was made by Isaiah at a
subsequent period, and is designed to state "all" that occurred.

It is more natural, however, to suppose that they made an attempt in the
time of Jotham to take Jerusalem, but that they were unsuccessful. When
Ahaz came to the throne, the alliance was continued, and the effort was
renewed to take Jerusalem. Formidable preparations were made for the
war, and an invading army came up upon the land. Many of the subjects of
Ahaz were taken captive and carried to Damascus. Pekah killed in one day
120,000 people, and took two hundred thousand captives, and carried them
toward Samaria. They were released from bondage by the solicitation of
Oded, a prophet, who represented to them the impropriety of taking their
brethren captive, and they were re-conveyed to Jericho; [Ch2
28:5-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#005). At about the same time, the
Assyrians took Elath, and retained it as a city belonging to them; [Kg2
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#006). From the report of this strong
alliance and from the ravages which were committed by their united
forces, Ahaz was alarmed, and trembled for the safety of Jerusalem
itself, [Isa 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003).

But instead of looking to God for aid, he formed the purpose of securing
the alliance of the king of "Assyria," and for this purpose sent
messengers to Tigiath-pileser with professions of deep regard, and with
the most costly presents which could be procured by exhausting the
treasury [Kg2 16:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#007), to secure his
friendship and cooperation. To this the king of Assyria agreed, and
entered into the war by making an assault on Damascus; [Kg2
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#009). It was this alliance, and the
confidence which Ahaz had in it, that produced his answer to Isaiah [Isa
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#012), and his refusal to ask a sign of
the Lord; and it was this alliance which subsequently involved Jerusalem
in so much difficulty from the invasion of the Assyrians. The Assyrians,
as might have been foreseen, consulted their own advantage, and not the
benefit of Ahaz. They meant to avail themselves of the opportunity of
subduing, if possible, Judea itself; and, consequently, the land was
subsequently invaded by them, and Jerusalem itself put in jeopardy. This
consequence was distinctly foretold by Isaiah, [Isa
7:17-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#017); [Isa
8:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007). Yet before the alliance was
secured, Ahaz was in deep consternation and alarm, and it was at this
point of time that Isaiah was sent to him, [Isa
7:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#002).

II\. At this time of consternation and alarm, Isaiah was sent to Ahaz to
assure him that Jerusalem would be safe, and that there was no real
cause of alarm, [Isa 7:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003). His main
object was to induce the monarch to repose confidence in Yahweh, and to
believe that his kingdom, protected by God, could not be overthrown.
Isaiah was directed to take with him his son, whose name (Shear-jashub -
"the remnant shall return") was itself a sign or pledge that the nation
should not be "utterly" destroyed, and that, consequently, it could not
become permanently subject to Syria or Sumaria, [Isa
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003). He went to meet Ahaz at the upper
pool, where, probably, Ahaz had gone, attended by many of the court, to
see whether it was practicable to stop the water, so as to prevent an
enemy from procuring it; compare [Ch2
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#004). He directed him not to be afraid
of the enemies that were coming, for they were like smoking,
half-extinguished brands that could do little injury, [Isa
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#004). He assured him that the purpose
of the confederated kings should not be accomplished; that Yahweh had
said that their design could not be established; and that the limits of
their respective kingdoms should be the same that they were then, and
should not be enlarged by the conquest and accession of Jerusalem - for
that Damascus should still remain the capital of Syria, and Samaria of
Ephraim, and that within sixty-five years the kingdom of Ephraim should
be totally destroyed, and of course Jerusalem and Judah could not be
permanently added to it. So far from having Jerusalem as a tributary and
dependent province, as Renraliah had anticipated, his own kingdom was to
be completely and finally destroyed, [Isa
7:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#004). The desire of all this; as to
allay the fears of Ahaz, and to induce him to put confidence in God.

III\. A sign is promised - a proof or demonstration of the truth of what
the prophet had spoken, [Isa 7:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#010).
To the assurance which Isaiah [Isa
7:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#004) had given of the safety of
Jerusalem, Ahaz makes no reply. His whole conduct, however, shows that
he is wholly unimpressed and unaffected by what he had said, and that he
put no confidence in the assuranccs of the prophet. He was not looking
to God for aid, but to the king of Assyria; and he, doubtless, felt that
if his aid was not obtained, his kingdom would be destroyed. He
evidently had no belief in God, and no confidence in the prophet. His
mind was in a restless, uneasy condition from the impending danger, and
from uncertainty whether the aid of the king of Assyria could be
procured. In order to induce him to turn his attention to God, the only
Protector, and to calm his fears, Ahaz is commanded to ask of Yahweh any
sign or miracle which he might desire, in order to confirm what the
prophet had spoken, [Isa 7:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#010).

This Ahaz refuses, [Isa 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#012). He does
it under the semblance of piety, and an unwillingness to appear to tempt
Yahweh. But the "real" cause was, doubtless, that he had no confidence
in Yahweh; he had no belief in what he had spoken; and he was secretly
depending on the aid of the king of Assyria. His reply was couched in
respectful terms, and had the appearance of piety, and was even
expressed in language borrowed from the law, [Deu
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#016). Yet important purposes were to
be answered, by there being a sign or proof that what the prophet had
said should take place. It was important that Ahaz, as the king of
Judah, and as the head of the people, should have evidence that what was
said was true. It was important that a suitable impression should be
made on those who were present, and on the mass of the people, inducing
them to put confidence in Yahweh. It was important that they should look
to future times; to the certain security of the nation, and to the
evidence that the nation "must" be preserved until the great Deliverer
should come.

A sign is, therefore, forced upon the attention of Ahaz. The prophet
tells him that however reluctant he may be to seek a sign, or however
incredulous he might be, yet that Yahweh would give a token, proof, or
demonstration, which would be a full confirmation of all that he had
said. "That would be done which could be done only by Yahweh, and which
could be known only by him;" and "that" would be the demonstration that
Jerusalem would be safe from this impending invasion. A virgin should
bear a son, and before he should arrive at years of discretion, or be
able to discern the difference between good and evil - that is in a
short space of time, the land would be forsaken of both its kings, [Isa
7:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014). Who this virgin was, and what
is the precise meaning of this prediction, has given perhaps, more
perplexity to commentators than almost any other portion of the Bible.
The "obvious" meaning seems to be this.

Some young female, who was then a virgin, and who was unmarried at the
time when the prophet spoke, would conceive, and bear a son. "To" that
son a name would be given, or his birth, in the circumstances in which
it occurred, would make such a name proper, as would indicate that God
was with them, and would be their Protector. Maternal affection would
give the child the name Immanuel. The child would be nurtured up in the
usual way among the Jews [Isa 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#015)
until he would be able to discern between good and evil - that is, until
he should arrive at years of discretion. Between the time which should
elapse from the conception of the child, and the time when he should
arrive at an age to distinguish good from evil, that is in about three
years, the land should be forsaken of the hostile kings, [Isa
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#016). This seems to be the obvious
meaning of this passage; and in this way only could this be a clear and
satisfactory evidence to Ahaz of the certainty that the land would be
entirely and permanently free from the invasion.

God only could know this; and, therefore, this was a proof of the
certainty of what Isaiah had said. But though this is the obvious
meaning, and though such an event only could be a sign to Ahaz that the
land would be forsaken of both the invading kings, yet there is no
reason to doubt that the prophet "so couched" what he said - so
expressed this by the direction of the Holy Spirit, as to be applicable
also to another much more important event, which was to be "also," and
in a much more important sense, a sign of the protection of God - the
birth of the Messiah. He, therefore, selected words which, while they
were applicable to the event immediately to occur, would also cover much
larger ground, and be descriptive of more important events - and events
which were "in the same line and direction" with that immediately to
come to pass - the certainty of the divine protection, and of ultimate
freedom from all danger.

The language, therefore, has, at the commencement of the prophecy, a
fullness of meaning which is not entirely met by the immediate event
which was to occur, and which can be entirely fulfilled only by the
great event which Isaiah ever had in his eye - the birth of the Messiah.
The mind of Isaiah would very naturally be carried forward to that
future event. In accordance with the laws of what may be called
"prophetic suggestion or association," see Introduction, Section 7, iii.
(3), and which are constantly exemplified in Isaiah, his mind would fix
on better times, and more happy events. He saw the birth of a child in a
future age, of which this was but the emblem. That was to be born
literally of a virgin. His "appropriate" name, from his nature, and from
his being the evidence of the divine favor and presence, would be
"Immanuel" - as the appropriate name of this child would be Immanuel,
because he would be the pledge of the divine protection and presence.
The idea is, that there is a "fulness of meaning" in the words used,
which will apply to future events more appropriately than to the one
immediately before the writer. That there is rapid transition - a sudden
carrying the mind forward to rest on a future more important event,
which has been "suggested" by the language used, and which is in the
mind of the speaker or writer so much more important than that which was
first mentioned, as completely to absorb the attention. The reasons for
the view here given are detailed at length in the notes at [Isa
7:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014).

IV\. The prophet had thus far directed all his efforts to convince Ahaz
that from the quarter from which they had apprehended danger, nothing
was to be feared. He now, however [Isa
7:17-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#017), proceeds to assure them that
danger would come from the quarter where they least expected it - from
the very quarter where Ahaz was seeking aid and deliverance - the king
of Assyria. He assures him that the king of Assyria would take advantage
of the alliance, and, under pretence of aiding him, would turn
everything to his own account, and would ultimately bring desolation on
the land of Judah. The calamities which would follow from this unhappy
alliance, the prophet proceeds to state and unfold, and with that
concludes the chapter. It is evident from [Kg2
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#007), that the discourse of Isaiah
made no impression on the mind of Ahaz. He sent messengers with valuable
presents to Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria. Tiglath-pileser
professedly entered into the views of Ahaz, and promised his aid.

He went up against Damascus and took it [Kg2
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#009), after Ahaz had suffered a
terrible overthrow from the united armies of Rezin and Pekah. The land
of Samaria was laid waste by him, and a large part of the inhabitants
carried captive to Assyria, [Kg2
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029). Thus the prediction of Isaiah,
that the land should be forsaken by two kings [Isa
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#016), was fulfilled. But this
deliverance from their invasion was purchased by Ahaz at a vast price.
The real purpose of Tiglath-pileser was not to aid Ahaz, but to make him
and his kingdom dependent and tributary [Ch2
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#021); and this alliance was the first
in the succession of calamities which came upon Judah and Jerusalem, and
which ended only under Hezekiah by the entire destruction of the army of
Sennacherib; see Isa. 37. During the remainder of the reign of Ahaz he
was tributary to Assyria; and when Hezekia [Kg2
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#007) endeavored to throw off the yoke
of Assyria, the attempt involved him in war; subjected his kingdom to
invasion; and was attended with a loss of no small part of the cities
and towns of his kingdom; see 2 Kings 18; 19; 20; Isa. 36; 37; compare
the notes at Isa. 8; [Isa 10:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#028).
Thus the second part of this prophecy was fulfilled. The fuller
statement of these important transactions will be found in the notes at
the various passages which relate to these events.

[Isaiah 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 7:1</span></span>

In the days of Ahaz - Ahaz began to reign about 738 years before Christ.
By a comparison of [Kg2 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#005), ...,
with [Ch2 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#005), etc., it will be seen
that Judea was twice invaded by Rezin and Pekah in the reign of Ahaz;
see the Analysis of the chapter.

That Rezin ... - This confederacy was formed in the time of Jotham; [Kg2
15:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#037). But it was not carried into
execution during his reign. It is evident from this place, that it was
executed in the early part of the reign of Ahaz; probably in the first
or second year of his reign.

Syria - - ארם 'ărâm, so called from Aram [Gen
10:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#022), a son of Shem, and who
populated its chief provinces. It comprehended the country lying between
the Euphrates east, the Mediterranean west, Cilicia north, and Phenicia,
Judea, and Arabia south; see the notes at [Isa
17:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001). Syria of the two rivers is
Mesopotamia. Syria of Damascus, so called because Damascus was its
capital, extended eastward along Mount Libanus, but its limits varied
according to the power of the princes of Damascus. After the reign of
the Seleucidae, Syria came to denote the kingdom or region of which
Antioch was the capital. Here it denotes the Syria lying around
Damascus, and of which Damascus was the capital. - "Calmet."

King of Israel - Of the ten tribes, called the kingdom of Israel, or
Samaria; Note, [Isa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001).

Went up - Jerusalem was situated on hills, and on the highest part of
the land. But it is possible that this language is derived from the fact
that it was the capital. The language is used even when the region from
which the traveler comes does not lie lower than the city. Thus it is
not uncommon to speak of "going up" to London, Paris, etc.

Could not prevail - Hebrew, 'Could not fight against it,' that is, with
happy result, or with success. He was not able to take it. That the
allied kings really besieged Ahaz, is evident from [Kg2
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#005) : They 'came up to Jerusalem to
war, and they besieged Ahaz, but they could not overcome him.' The
reason why they could not take Jerusalem was, probably, not only because
it was a strong place and well defended, but because there was
intelligence that their own dominions were threatened with an invasion
by the Assyrians, and they could not protract their siege of Jerusalem
long enough to take it.

[Isaiah 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 7:2</span></span>

And it was told the house of David - That is, the royal family; or the
king and princes; the government. Ahaz was the descendant and successor
of David.

Syria is confederate with Ephraim - Ephraim was one of the tribes of
Israel, and the kingdom of Israel was often called "Ephraim," or the
kingdom of Ephraim; in the same way as the tribes of Judah and Benjamin
were called the kingdom of Judah. The phrase, 'is confederate with,' is
in Hebrew 'resteth on;' see the margin. The meaning is, that Syria was
"supported by" Ephraim, or was allied with Ephraim. The kingdom of
Israel, or Ephraim, was situated "between" Syria and Jerusalem. Of
course, the latter could not be attacked without marching through the
former, and without their aid. In this sense it was that Syria, or the
Arameans, relied or "rested" on Ephraim. Though Syria was by far the
stronger power, yet it was not strong enough to attack Jerusalem had the
kingdom of Israel been opposed to it.

And his heart - The heart of the king - of Ahaz.

Was moved as the trees of the wood - This is a very beautiful and
striking image. It expresses universal trembling, consternation, and
alarm, as the trees are moved "together" when the wind passes violently
over them. A similar expression is found in Ovid - in "Canaces," Epist.
xi. ver. 76, 77.

Ut quatitur tepido fraxina virga noto

Sic mea vibrari pallentia membra videres.

[Isaiah 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 7:3</span></span>

Then said the Lord - In regard to the purposes for which Isaiah was sent
to meet Ahaz, and the reason why this place was selected, see the
Analysis of the chapter.

Thou and Shear-ashub - The meaning of the name "Shear-jashub" is, 'the
remnant shall return.' The names which Isaiah gave to his sons were
significant or emblematic of some important events which were to occur
to the Jews. They were for "signs" to the people, and had been given in
order to keep before the nation the great truth that God was their
protector, and that however much they might suffer or be punished, yet
the nation would not be totally destroyed until the great Deliverer
should come; see the note at [Isa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014), and [Isa
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#003), note. Why this name was given to
this son, or on what occasion, is not certainly known. It is probable,
however, that was with reference to the future calamities and captivity
of the Jews, denoting that a part of the people would return to the land
of their fathers: compare [Isa
10:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#021). The name was a remembrancer
given by him as a prophet, perhaps, some time before this, that the
nation was not to be wholly annihilated - a truth which Isaiah
everywhere keeps before them in his prophecies; compare the note at [Isa
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#013). "Why" Shear-jashub accompanied
Isaiah now is not recorded. It might be as a pledge to Ahaz of the
purpose of the Lord, that the people should not be destroyed. Ahaz may
have been apprized of the reason why the name was given, and his
presence might serve to mitigate his fears.

At the end of the conduit - A "conduit" is a pipe, or other conductor of
water. The water flowed from a fountain, but was conducted to different
receptacles for the supply of the city.

Of the upper pool - Or the upper receptacle, or pond. Robinson ("Bib.
Researches," i. p. 483) and Pococke ("Descr. of the East," ii. pp. 25,
26) suppose that the upper and lower pools referred to by Isaiah, were
on the west side of the city, the ruins of which now remain. The upper
pool is now commonly called by the monks "Gihon," and by the natives
"Birket el Mamilla." It lies in the basin forming the head of the valley
of Hinnom or Gihon, about seven hundred yards west-northwest from the
Yafa gate, on the west of Jerusalem. The sides of this pool are built of
hewn stones laid in cement, with steps at the corners by which to
descend into it. The bottom is level. The dimensions are as follows:

Length (in Eng. Feet) from east to west 316 Breadth at the west end 200
Breadth at the east end 218 Depth at each end 18

There is no water-course, or other visible means, by which water is now
brought into this reservoir, but it is probable that it was filled in
the rainy seasons by the waters which flowed from the higher ground
round about. From this upper pool a part of the water was conveyed into
the city to the pool of Hezekiah, lying within the walls, and situated
some distance to the northeastward of the Yafa gate. 'Hezekiah stopped
the upper watercourse of Gihon, and brought it straight down to the west
side of the city of David;' [Ch2
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#030); compare the notes at [Isa
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#009). This upper pool had a trench or
'conduit,' and a considerable part of the waters were allowed to flow
through this to the lower pool. The 'lower pool' is mentioned in the Old
Testament only once, and that by Isaiah [Isa
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#009), and there without any hint of
its locality. There is now a large lower pool on the western side of
Jerusalem, which is not improbably the one intended, and which stands in
contrast with the one mentioned here. This pool is called by the Arabs
"Birket es-Sultan." There is, at present, no other pool in the vicinity
of Jerusalem to which the description in Isaiah can be well applied.
This reservoir is situated in the valley of Hinnom or Gihon, southward
from the Yafa gate. Its northern end is nearly upon a line with the
southern wall of the city. The pool was formed by throwing strong walls
across the bottom of the valley, between which the earth was wholly
removed. A road crosses on the causeway at the southern end. The
following are the measurements of this pool:

Length (in Eng. Feet) along the middle 592. Breadth at the north end 245
Breadth at the south end 275 Depth at north end 85 Depth at south end 42

This reservoir was probably filled from the rains, and from the
superfluous waters of the upper pool. It is now in ruins. The water from
this pool would flow off into the valley of Hinnom, and thence, into the
valley of Jehoshaphat or Kedron, or subsequently into the pool of
Hezekiah, situated "within" the city; see the notes at [Isa
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#009), [Isa
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#011). Why Ahaz was at that place, the
prophet does not say. It is possible he was examining it, to see whether
the fountain could be stopped up, or the water diverted so that it could
not be used by the enemy, and so that they could be prevented from
maintaining a protracted siege; compare [Ch2
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#004). It is probable that the king had
gone to this place attended by many of his counselors, and as this was
the main source of the supply of water to the city, a multitude would be
there, and Isaiah could have an opportunity not only to deliver his
message to Ahaz and his court, but in the presence of a considerable
concourse of people, and might thus inspire confidence among the alarmed
and dejected inhabitants of the city.

In the highway of the fuller's field - In the place occupied as a
situation on which to spread, or suspend cloth that was bleached, or
dyed. This situation would be chosen because much water was needed in
bleaching or dyeing cloth. The name 'highway' denotes the public path,
or road that led to this field. Probably, on one side of this highway
was the aqueduct, and on the other the fuller's field. Of the fuller's
field, Eusebius and Jerome merely say that it was shown in their day in
the suburbs of the city. - "Onom." art. "Ager Fullonis."

[Isaiah 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 7:4</span></span>

Take heed - Hebrew 'Keep thyself;' that is, from fear.

Neither be fainthearted - Hebrew, 'Let not thy heart be tender;' that
is, let it not be easily moved; be strong, fearless.

For the tails ... - There is much beauty and force in this comparison.
The "design" of Isaiah is to diminish the fear of Ahaz. Instead,
therefore, of calling them "firebrands" - burning and setting on fire
everything in their way - he calls them the "tails, that is, the ends,"
or remains of firebrand - almost consumed themselves, and harmless. And
instead of saying that they were "burning and blazing," he says that
they were merely "smoking" - the half-burned, decaying remains of what
might have been once formidable. The prophet also is just about to
announce their approaching destruction by the Assyrians; see [Isa
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#008). He, therefore, speaks of them as
already almost extinguished, and incapable of doing extensive injury.

Son of Remaliah - Pekah, [Isa 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001). 'It
is by way of contempt that the king of Israel is not called by his own
name. The Hebrews and Arabians, when they wish to speak reproachfully of
anyone, omit his proper name and call him merely the son of this or
that, especially when his father is but little known or respected. So
Saul names David, in contempt, the son of Jesse; [Sa1
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#027), [Sa1
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#031).' - "Hengstenberg."

[Isaiah 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 7:6</span></span>

And vex it - Margin, 'Weaken it.' Probably the word means to throw into
consternation or fear, by besieging it - "Gesenius."

And let us make a breach therein - Let us break down the walls, etc.

And set a king - Subdue it, and make it tributary to the allied kingdoms
of Syria and Ephraim.

The son of Tabeal - Nothing more is known of this person. He might have
been some disaffected member of the royal family of David, who had
sought the aid of Rezin and Pekah, and who would be allied to them, or
tributary to them. It is possible that he had already a party in
Jerusalem in his favor; compare [Isa
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#012). Probably, the two kings wished
to cut off such portions of the territory of Judah as should be
convenient to them, and to set a king over the remainder, who should be
under their control; or to divide the whole between themselves, by
setting up a king who would be tributary to both.

[Isaiah 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 7:8</span></span>

For the head of Syria - The "capital." The "head" is often used in this
sense.

Is Damascus - For an account of this city, see the notes at [Isa
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001); compare the notes at [Act
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#002). The sense of this passage is, 'Do
not be alarmed as if Rezin was about to enlarge his kingdom, by taking
Judea and making Jerusalem his capital. The revolution which these kings
contemplate cannot be accomplished. The kingdoms of Syria and Israel
shall not be enlarged by the conquest of Judah. The center of their
power shall remain where it is now, and their dominion shall not be
extended by conquest. The capital of Syria is, and shall continue to be,
Damascus. The king of Syria shall be confined within his present limits,
and Jerusalem, therefore, shall be safe.'

The head of Damascus - The "ruler, or king" of Damascus is Rezin.

And within threescore and five years - There has been some inquiry why
"Ephraim" is mentioned here, as the prophet in the former part of the
verse was speaking of "Syria." But it should be remembered that he was
speaking of Syria and Ephraim as "confederate." It was natural,
therefore, to intimate, in close connection, that no fear was to be
apprehended from either of them. There has been much difficulty
experienced in establishing the fact of the exact fulfillment of this,
and in fixing the precise event to which it refers. One catastrophe
happened to the kingdom of Ephraim or Israel within one or two years of
this time, when Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria, invaded the land and
carried no small part of the people to Assyria; [Kg2
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029). Another occurred in the next
reign, the reign of Hoshea, king of Israel, when Shalmaneser king of
Assyria took Samaria, and carried Israel away captive into Assyria; [Kg2
17:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#001).

This occurred in the twelfth year of Ahaz. But that the Israelites
remained in Samaria, and kept up the forms of a civil community, and
were not finally carried away until the time of Esarhaddon, is evident;
compare [Ch2 34:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#006), [Ch2
34:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#033); [Ch2
35:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#018); [Kg2
23:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#019). Manasseh, king of Judah, was
taken captive by the king of Assyria's captains [Ch2
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#002) in the twenty-second year of his
reign; that is, sixty-five years from the second year of Ahaz, when this
prophecy is supposed to have been delivered. And it is also supposed
that at this time Esarhaddon took away the remains of the people in
Samaria, and put an end to the kingdom, and put in their place the
people who are mentioned in [Ezr 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#003).
"Dr. Jubb, as quoted by Lowth." The entire extinction of the people of
Israel and the kingdom did not take place until Esarhaddon put new
colonists from Babylon, and from Cuthah, and from Ava, and from Hamath,
and from Sepharvaim in the cities of Samaria, instead of the children of
Israel; [Kg2 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024); compare [Ezr
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#002), [Ezr
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#010).

Long before this, indeed, the power of the kingdom had been on the wane;
a large portion of the people had been removed [Kg2
17:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#005), [Kg2
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#018); but its entire extinction was
not accomplished, and the kingdom utterly destroyed, until this was
done. Until this occurred, the land might be still regarded as in the
possession somewhat of its former people, and all hopes of their rising
again to the dignity of a kingdom was not extinguished. But when
foreigners were introduced, and took possession of the land; when all
the social organization of the ancient people was dissolved; then it
might be said that 'Ephraim was forever broken,' and that it was
demonstrated that it 'should be no more a people.' Its inhabitants were
transferred to a distant land, no longer to be organized into a unique
community, but to mingle with other people, and finally all traces of
their origin as Jews were to be lost. This event, of placing the
foreigners in the cities of Samaria, occurred just sixty-five years
after it had been predicted by Isaiah. - "Dr. Usher."

It may be asked here, how the statement of what was to occur at so
remote a period as sixty-five years could be any consolation to Ahaz, or
any security that the designs of the kings of Syria and Samaria should
"then" fail of being accomplished? To this we may reply:

\(1\) It was the assurance that Jerusalem could not be finally and
permanently reduced to submission before these dreaded enemies. "Their"
power was to cease, and of course Jerusalem had nothing "ultimately and
finally" to dread.

\(2\) The design was to inspire confidence in Yahweh, and to lead Ahaz
to look directly to him. If these formidable powers could not ultimately
prevail, and if there was a certain prediction that they should be
destroyed, then it was possible for God, if Ahaz would look to him, now
to interpose, and save the city. To inspire that confidence in Yahweh
was the leading purpose of Isaiah.

\(3\) This prediction is in accordance with many which occur in Isaiah,
that all the enemies of the people of God would be ultimately defeated,
and that God, as the head of the theocracy, would defend and deliver his
people; see the notes at Isa. 34. A kingdom that was so soon to be
destroyed as Ephraim was, could not be an object of great dread and
alarm. Rosenmuller conjectures, that Isaiah refers to some unrecorded
prophecy made before his time, that in sixty-five years Israel would be
destroyed; and that he refers here to that prophecy to encourage the
heart of Ahaz, and to remind him that a kingdom could not be very
formidable that was so soon to come to an end. At all events, there is
no contradiction between the prophecy and the fulfillment, for within
the time mentioned here, Ephraim ceased to be a kingdom. The ancient
Jewish writers, with one consent, say, that Isaiah referred here to the
prophecy of Amos, who prophesied in the days of Uzziah, and whose
predictions relate mainly to the kingdom of Israel. But as Amos, does
not specify any particular time when the kingdom should be destroyed, it
is apparent that Isaiah here could not have referred to any recorded
prophecy of his.

Be broken - Its power shall be destroyed; the kingdom, as a kingdom,
shall come to an end.

[Isaiah 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 7:9</span></span>

And the head of Ephraim - The capital city of Ephraim, or of Israel.

Is Samaria - This was long the capital of the kingdom of Israel. For a
description of this city, see the notes at [Isa
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001). The meaning of the prophet is,
that Samaria should continue to be the head of Ephraim; that is,
Jerusalem should not be made its capital.

If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established - There is
considerable variety in the interpretation of these words, though the
general sense is evident. The Chaldee renders them, 'If ye will not
believe the words of the prophet, ye shall not remain.' It is probable
that Ahaz, who was greatly alarmed, and who trembled at the formidable
power of Syria and Israel united, received the annunciation of the
prophet with much distrust. He was anxious about the means of defense,
but did not trust in the promise of God by the prophet. Isaiah,
therefore, assures him, that if he did not believe him; if he did not
put confidence in God, and his promises, he should not be protected from
Syria and Ephraim. They would come and destroy his kingdom. 'You have no
occasion,' is the language of the prophet, 'to fear. God has resolved to
protect you, and no portion of your land shall be taken by your enemies.
Nevertheless, in order that you may obtain deliverance, you must believe
his promise, and put your confidence in him, and not in the aid of the
Assyrians. If you do this, your mind shall be calm, peaceful, and happy.
But if you do "not" do this; if you rely on the aid of Assyria, you
shall be troubled, alarmed, unsuccessful, and bring ruin upon yourself
and nation.' This, therefore, is an exhortation to confide solely in the
promises of God, and is one of the instances constantly occurring in the
Old Testament and the New, showing, that by faith or confidence in God
only, can the mind he preserved calm when in the midst of dangers.

[Isaiah 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 7:11</span></span>

Ask thee - Ask for "thyself;" ask a sign that shall be convincing to
"thyself," since thou dost not fully credit the words of the prophet. It
is evident that the words of the prophet had made no impression on the
mind of Ahaz. God, therefore, proposes to him to ask any "proof or
demonstration" which he might select; anything that would be an
indication of divine power that should put what the prophet had said
beyond doubt. Had Ahaz put confidence in God, he would have believed
what the prophet said without miraculous proof. But he had no such
confidence. 'The prophet, therefore, proposes that he should ask any
miraculous demonstration that what he said would come to pass. This
proposition was made, probably, not so much from respect to Ahaz as to
leave him without excuse, and in order that "the people" might have the
assurance that the city and kingdom were safe.

A sign - A demonstration that shall confirm the promise now made, and
that shall be an evidence that Jerusalem shall be safe. The word used
here, and translated "sign" - 'owt - אות 'ôth - means "a flag," or "a
standard," [Num 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#002); "a memorial or
pledge" of a covenant, [Gen 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#011); any
"pledge, token, or proof" of a divine mission, [Jdg
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#017); or a miracle performed in
attestation of a divine promise or message. This is its sense here. That
which Isaiah had spoken seemed highly improbable to Ahaz, and he asked
him to seek a proof of it, if he doubted, by any prodigy or miracle. It
was customary for miracles or prodigies to be exhibited on similar
occasions; see [Isa 38:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#007), where the
shadow on the dial of this same Ahaz was carried backward ten degrees,
in proof of what the prophet Isaiah had spoken; compare [Sa1
2:27-34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#027); [Kg1
13:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001); [Exo
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#012); [Jdg
6:36-40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#036). That the word here refers to
some event which could be brought about only by divine power, is evident
from the whole connection. No mere natural occurrence could have
satisfied Ahaz, or convey to the people a demonstration of the truth of
what the prophet was saying. And if the prophet had been unable or
unwilling to give a miraculous sign, where is the fitness of the answer
of Ahaz? How could he be regarded as in any way tempting God by asking
it, unless it was something which God only could do? And how could the
prophet bring the charge [Isa 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#013),
that he had not merely offended men, but God also? It is clear,
therefore, that Isaiah was conscious that he was invested by God with
the power of working a miracle, and that he proposed to perform any
miracle which Ahaz should suggest that would serve to remove his doubts,
and lead him to put confidence in God.

Ask it either in the depth ... - He gave him his choice of a miracle -
any sign or wonder in heaven, or on earth - above or below; a miracle in
the sky, or from beneath the earth. Many of the versions understand the
expression 'the depth,' as referring to "the grave," or to the region of
departed souls - "hades." So the Vulgate, Aquila, Symmachus. The Chaldee
reads it, 'Seek that there may be a miracle to thee upon the earth, or a
sign in the heavens.' The literal meaning of the Hebrew is, 'make low,
ask for;' that is, ask for a sign below; obtain, by asking for thyself;
a miracle that shall take place below. It may refer to the earth, or to
the region under the earth, since it stands in contrast with that which
is above. If it refers to the region under the earth, it means that
Isaiah would raise the dead to life if Ahaz desired it; if to the earth,
that any wonder or miracle that should take place in the elements - as a
tempest, or earthquake - should be performed.

The height above - The heaven, or the sky. So the Pharisees desired to
see a sign from heaven, [Mat 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#001).

[Isaiah 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 7:12</span></span>

I will not ask - In this case Ahaz assumed the appearance of piety, or
respect for the command of God. In [Deu
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#016), it is written, 'Thou shalt not
tempt the Lord thy God;' and Ahaz perhaps had this command in his eye.
It was a professed reverence for God. But the true reason why he did not
seek this sign was, that he had already entered into a negotiation with
the king of Assyria to come and defend him; and that he was even
stripping the temple of God of its silver and gold, to secure this
assistance; [Kg2 16:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#007). When people
are depending on their own devices and resources, they are unwilling to
seek aid from God; and it is not uncommon if they excuse their want of
trust in him by some appearance of respect for religion.

Tempt - Try, or do a thing that shall provoke his displeasure, or seek
his interposition in a case where he has not promised it. To tempt God
is the same as to put him to the proof; to see whether he is able to
perform what he proposed. It is evident, however, that here there would
have been no "temptation" of God, since a sign had been offered him by
the prophet in the name of God. 'The answer of Ahaz can be regarded
either as one of bitter scorn, as if he had said, "I will not put thy
God to the proof, in which he will be found lacking. I will not
embarrass thee by taking thee at thy word;" or as the language of a
hypocrite who assumes the mask of reverence for God and his command.' -
"Hengstenberg." Chrysostom and Calvin regard the latter as the correct
interpretation. If it be asked here "why" Ahaz did not put Isaiah to the
test, and "secure," if possible, the divine confirmation to the
assurance that Jerusalem would be safe, the following may be regarded as
the probable reasons:

\(1\) He was secretly relying on the aid of Assyria. He believed that he
could fortify the city, and distress the enemy by turning away the
supply of water, so that they could not carry on a siege, and that all
the further aid which he needed could be derived from the Assyrians.

\(2\) If the miracle had been "really performed," it would have been a
proof that Yahweh was the true God a proof which Ahaz had no desire of
witnessing. He was a gross idolater; and he was not anxious to witness a
demonstration which would have convinced him of the folly and sin of his
own course of life.

\(3\) If the miracle could not be performed, as Ahaz seems to have
supposed would be the case, then it would have done much to unsettle the
confidence of the people, and to have produced agitation and alarm. It
is probable that a considerable portion of the people were worshippers
of Yahweh, and were looking to him for aid. The pious, and the great
mass of those who conformed to the religion of their fathers, would have
been totally disheartened; and this was a result which Ahaz had no
desire to produce.

\(4\) Michaelis has suggested another reason, drawn from the character
of idolatry. According to the prevailing notions at that period, every
nation had its own gods. Those of one people were more, and those of
another less powerful; see [Isa
10:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#010); [Isa
36:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#018); [Isa
37:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#010). If a miracle had been
performed, Ahaz might have believed that it was performed by the god of
the country, who might have had the disposition, but not the power, to
defend him. It would have been to the mind of the idolater no proof that
the god of Syria or Samaria was not more powerful, and might not have
easily overcome him. Ahaz seems to have regarded Yahweh as such a God -
as one of the numerous gods which were to be worshipped, and perhaps as
not the most powerful of the tutelary divinities of the nations. This
was certainly the view of the surrounding idolaters [Isa
10:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#010); [Isa
36:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#018); and it is highly probable
that this view prevailed among the idolatrous Israelites.

[Isaiah 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 7:13</span></span>

O house of David - [Isa 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#002). By this
is to be understood not only the king himself, but the princes and
rulers. Perhaps in addressing him thus, there was implied no small irony
and reproach. David confided in God. But "Ahaz," his descendant, feared
to "tempt" God! As if God could not aid him! Worthy descendant he of the
pious and devoted David!

Is it a small thing - You are not satisfied with wearying people, but
you would also fatigue and wear out the patience of God.

Weary - Exhaust their patience; oppose them; prevent their sayings and
messages; try their spirits, etc.

Men - prophets; the men who are sent to instruct, and admonish.

Will ye weary my God also? - Will you refuse to keep his commands; try
his patience; and exhaust his long-suffering? compare [Isa
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#014). The sense of this passage seems
to be this: When Ahaz refused to believe the bare prediction of the
prophet, his transgression was the more excusable. He had wearied and
provoked him, but Isaiah had as yet given to Ahaz no direct
demonstration that he was from God; no outward proof of his divine
mission; and the offence of Ahaz might be regarded as in a sense
committed against man. It was true, also, that Ahaz had, by his unbelief
and idolatry, greatly tried the feelings of the pious, and wearied those
who were endeavoring to promote true religion. But now the case was
changed. God had offered a sign, and it had been publicly rejected. It
was a direct insult to God; and an offence that demanded reproof.
Accordingly, the manner of Isaiah is at once changed. Soft, and gentle,
and mild before, he now became bold, open, vehement. The honor of God
was concerned; a direct affront had been offered to him by the sovereign
of the people of God; and it was proper for the prophet to show that
"that" was an offence which affected the Divine Majesty, and demanded
the severest reproof.

[Isaiah 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 7:14</span></span>

Therefore - Since you will not "ask" a pledge that the land shall be
safe, Yahweh will furnish one unasked. A sign or proof is desirable in
the case, and Yahweh will not withhold it because a proud and
contemptuous monarch refuses to seek it. Perhaps there is no prophecy in
the Old Testament on which more has been written, and which has produced
more perplexity among commentators than this. And after all, it still
remains, in many respects, very obscure. Its general original meaning is
not difficult. It is, that in a short time - within the time when a
young woman, then a virgin, should conceive and bring forth a child, and
that child should grow old enough to distinguish between good and evils
- the calamity which Ahaz feared would be entirely removed. The
confederacy would be broken up, and the land forsaken by both those
kings. The conception and birth of a child - which could be known only
by him who knows "all" future events - would be the evidence of such a
result. His appropriate "name" would be such as would be a "sign," or an
indication that God was the protector of the nation, or was still with
them. In the examination of this difficult prophecy, my first object
will be to give an explanation of the meaning of the "words and phrases"
as they occur in the passage, and then to show, as far as I may be able,
what was the design of the passage.

The Lord himself - Hebrew, 'Adonai;' see this word explained in the the
note at [Isa 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024). He will do it
without being asked to do it; he will do it though it is rejected and
despised; he will do it because it is important for the welfare of the
nation, and for the confirmation of his religion, to furnish a
demonstration to the people that he is the only true God. It is clearly
implied here, that the sign should be such as Yahweh alone could give.
It would be such as would be a demonstration that he presided over the
interests of the people. If this refers to the birth of a child, then it
means that this was an event which could be known only to God, and which
could be accomplished only by his agency. If it refers to the miraculous
conception and birth of the Messiah, then it means that that was an
event which none but God could accomplish. The true meaning I shall
endeavor to state in the notes, at the close of [Isa
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#016).

Shall give you - Primarily to the house of David; the king and royal
family of Judah. It was especially designed to assure the government
that the kingdom would be safe. Doubtless, however, the word 'you' is
designed to include the nation, or the people of the kingdom of Judah.
It would be so public a sign, and so clear a demonstration, as to
convince them that their city and land must be ultimately safe.

A sign - A pledge; a token; an evidence of the fulfillment of what is
predicted. The word does not, of necessity, denote a miracle, though it
is often so applied; see the notes at [Isa
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#011). Here it means a proof, a
demonstration, a certain indication that what he had said should be
fulfilled. As that was to be such a demonstration as to show that he was
"able" to deliver the land, the word "here" denotes that which was
miraculous, or which could be effected "only" by Yahweh.

Behold - הנה hinnêh. This interjection is a very common one in the Old
Testament. It is used to arrest attention; to indicate the importance of
what was about to be said. It serves to designate persons and things;
places and actions. It is used in lively descriptions, and animated
discourse; when anything unusual was said, or occurred; or any thing
which especially demanded attention; [Gen
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#019); [Gen
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#016); [Gen
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#009); [Gen
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#029); [Gen
40:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#009); [Psa
134:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa134.htm#001). It means here, that an event
was to occur which demanded the attention of the unbelieving monarch,
and the regard of the people - an event which would be a full
demonstration of what the prophet had said, that God would protect and
save the nation.

A virgin - This word properly means a girl, maiden, virgin, a young
woman who is unmarried, and who is of marriageable age. The word עלמה
‛almâh, is derived from the verb עלם ‛âlam, "to conceal, to hide, to
cover." The word עלם ‛elem, from the same verb, is applied to a "young
man," in [Sa1 17:56](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#056); [Sa1
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#022). The word here translated a
virgin, is applied to Rebekah [Gen
24:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#043), and to Miriam, the sister of
Moses, [Exo 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#008). It occurs in only
seven places in the Old Testament. Besides those already mentioned, it
is found in [Psa 68:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#025); [Sol
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003); [Sol
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#008); and [Pro
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#019). In all these places, except,
perhaps, in Proverbs, it is used in its obvious natural sense, to denote
a young, unmarried female. In the Syriac, the word alĕm, means to grow
up, juvenis factus est; juvenescere fecited. Hence, the derivatives are
applied to youth; to young men; to young women - to those who "are
growing up," and becoming youths.

The etymology of the word requires us to suppose that it means one who
is growing up to a marriageable state, or to the age of puberty. The
word maiden, or virgin, expresses the correct idea. Hengstenberg
contends, that it means one "in the unmarried state;" Gesenius, that it
means simply the being of marriageable age, the age of puberty. The
Hebrews usually employed the word בתולה bethûlâh, to denote a pure
virgin (a word which the Syriac translation uses here); but the word
here evidently denotes one who was "then" unmarried; and though its
primary idea is that of one who is growing up, or in a marriageable
state, yet the whole connection requires us to understand it of one who
was "not then married," and who was, therefore, regarded and designated
as a virgin. The Vulgate renders it 'virgo.' The Septuagint, ἡ παρθένος
hē parthenos, "a virgin" - a word which they use as a translation of the
Hebrew בתולה bethûlâh in [Exo
22:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#016); [Lev
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#003), [Lev
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#014); [Deu
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#019), [Deu
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#023), [Deu
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#028); [Deu
32:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#025); [Jdg
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#024); [Jdg
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#012); and in thirty-three other
places (see Trommius' Concordance); of נערה na‛ărâh, a girl, in [Gen
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#014), [Gen
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#016), [Gen
24:55](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#055); [Gen
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#003) (twice); [Kg1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#002); and of עלמה ‛almâh, only in [Gen
24:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#043); and in [Isa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014).

The word, in the view of the Septuagint translators, therefore conveyed
the proper idea of a virgin. The Chaldee uses substantially the same
word as the Hebrew. The idea of a "virgin" is, therefore, the most
obvious and natural idea in the use of this word. It does not, however,
imply that the person spoken of should be a virgin "when the child"
should be born; or that she should ever after be a virgin. It means
simply that one who was "then" a virgin, but who was of marriageable
age, should conceive, and bear a son. Whether she was "to be" a virgin
"at the time" when the child was born, or was to remain such afterward,
are inquiries which cannot be determined by a philological examination
of the word. It is evident also, that the word is not opposed to
"either" of these ideas. "Why" the name which is thus given to an
unmarried woman was derived from the verb to "hide, to conceal," is not
agreed among lexicographers. The more probable opinion is, that it was
because to the time of marriage, the daughter was supposed to be hidden
or concealed in the family of the parents; she was kept shut up, as it
were, in the paternal dwelling. This idea is given by Jerome, who says,
'the name is given to a virgin because she is said to be hidden or
secret; because she does not expose herself to the gaze of men, but is
kept with great care under the custody of parents.' The sum of the
inquiry here, into the meaning of the word translated "virgin," is, that
it does not differ from that word as used by us. The expression means no
more than that one who was then a virgin should have a son, and that
this should be a sign to Ahaz.

And shall call his name - It was usual for "mothers" to give names to
their children; [Gen 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#001); [Gen
19:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#037); [Gen
29:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#032); [Gen
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#018). There is, therefore, no reason
to suppose, as many of the older interpreters did, that the fact that it
is said the mother should give the name, was a proof that the child
should have no human father. Such arguments are unworthy of notice; and
only show to what means people have resorted in defending the doctrines,
and in interpreting the pages of the Bible. The phrase, 'she will name,'
is, moreover, the same as 'they shall name,' or he shall be named. 'We
are not, then, to suppose that the child should actually receive the
name Immanuel as a proper name, since, according to the usage of the
prophet, and especially of Isaiah, that is often ascribed to a person or
thing as a name which belongs to him in an eminent degree as an
attribute; see [Isa 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#005); [Isa
61:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#006); [Isa
62:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#004).' - "Hengstenberg." The idea is,
that that would be a name that might be "appropriately" given to the
child. Another name was also given to this child, expressing
substantially the same thing, with a circumstantial difference; see the
note at [Isa 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#003).

Immanuel - Hebrew 'God with us' - עמנואל ‛immânû'êl - from אל 'ĕl,
"God," and עמנוּ ‛ı̂mmânû, "with us." The name is designed to denote that
God would be with the nation as its protector, and the birth of this
child would be a sign or pledge of it. The mere circumstance that this
name is given, however, does not imply anything in regard to the nature
or rank of the child, for nothing was more common among the Jews than to
incorporate the name, or a part of the name, of the Deity with the names
which they gave to their children. Thus, "Isaiah" denotes the salvation
of Yahweh; "Jeremiah," the exaltation or grandeur of Yahweh, each
compounded of two words, in which the name Yahweh constitutes a part.
Thus, also in "Elijah," the two names of God are combined, and it means
literally, "God the Yahweh." Thus, also "Eliab," God my faather;
"Eliada," knowledge of God; "Eliakim," the resurrection of God; "Elihu,"
he is my God; "Elisha," salvation of God. In none of these instances is
the fact, that the name of God is incorporated with the proper name of
the individual, any argument in respect to his rank or character.

It is true, that Matthew [Mat 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023)
uses this name as properly expressing the rank of the Messiah; but all
that can be demonstrated from the use of the name by Matthew is, that it
properly designated the nature and rank of the Lord Jesus. It was a
pledge, then, that God was with his people, and the name designated by
the prophet had a complete fulfillment in its use as applied to the
Messiah. Whether the Messiah be regarded as himself a pledge and
demonstration of the presence and protection of God, or whether the name
be regarded as descriptive of his nature and dignity, yet there was an
"appropriateness" in applying it to him. It was fully expressive of the
event of the incarnation. Jerome supposes that the name, Immanuel,
denotes nothing more than divine aid and protection. Others have
supposed, however, that the name must denote the assumption of our
nature by God in the person of the Messiah, that is, that God became
man. So Theodoret, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Lactantius, Chrysostom. Calvin,
Rosenmuller, and others. The true interpretation is, that no argument to
prove that can be derived from the use of the name; but when the fact of
the incarnation has been demonstrated from other sources, the "name is
appropriately expressive of that event." So it seems to be used by
Matthew.

It may be quite true, that no argument can be founded on the bare name,
Immanuel; yet that name, "in its connection here," may certainly be
regarded as a designed prediction of the incarnation of Christ. Such a
design our author allows in the prophecy generally. 'The prophet,' says
he, 'designedly made use of language which would be appropriate to a
future and most glorious event.' Why, then, does he speak of the most
pregnant word in the prophecy as if Matthew had accidentally stumbled on
it, and, finding it would appropriately express the nature of Christ,
accomodated it for that purpose? Having originally rejected the
Messianic reference, and been convinced only by a more careful
examination of the passage, that he was in error, something of his old
view seems still to cling to this otherwise admirable exposition. 'The
name Immanuel,' says Professor Alexander, 'although it might be used to
signify God's providential presence merely [Psa
46:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008), 12; [Psa
89:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#025); [Jos
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#005); [Jer
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#008); [Isa
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#002), has a latitude and pregnancy of
meaning which can scarcely be fortuitous; and which, combined with all
the rest, makes the conclusion almost unavoidable, that it was here
intended to express a personal, as well as a providential presence ...
When we read in the Gospel of Matthew, that Jesus Christ was actually
born of a virgin, and that all the circumstances of his birth came to
pass that this very prophecy might be fulfilled, it has less the
appearance of an unexpected application, than of a conclusion rendered
necessary by a series of antecedent facts and reasonings, the last link
in a long chain of intimations more or less explicit (referring to such
prophecies as [Gen 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015); [Mic
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002)).

The same considerations seem to show that the prophecy is not merely
accommodated, which is, moreover, clear fram the emphatic form of the
citation τοῦτο ὅλον γέγονεν ἵνα πληρωθῇ touto holon gegonen hina
plēroothē, making it impossible to prove the existence of any quotation
in the proper sense, if this be not one.' But, indeed, the author
himself admits all this, though his language is less decided and
consistent than could be wished on so important a subject.

[Isaiah 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 7:15</span></span>

Butter and honey - The word rendered "butter" (חמאה chem'âh), denotes
not butter, but thick and curdled milk. This was the common mode of
using milk as an article of food in the East, and is still. In no
passage in the Old Testament does butter seem to be meant by the word.
Jarchi says, that this circumstance denotes a state of plenty, meaning
that the land should yield its usual increase notwithstanding the
threatened invasion. Eustatius on this place says, that it denotes
delicate food. The more probable interpretation is, that it was the
usual food of children, and that it means that the child should be
nourished in the customary manner. That this was the common nourishment
of children, is abundantly proved by Bochart; "Hieroz." P. i. lib. xi.
ch. li. p. 630. Barnabas, in his epistle says, 'The infant is first
nourished with honey, and then with milk.' This was done usually by the
prescription of physicians.

Paulus says, 'It is fit that the first food given to a child be honey,
and then milk.' So Aetius, 'Give to a child, as its first food, honey;'
see "Bochart." Some have, indeed, supposed that this refers to the fact
that the Messiah should be "man" as well as God, and that his eating
honey and butter was expressive of the fact that he had a "human
nature!" But against this mode of interpretation, it is hoped, it is
scarcely needful now to protest. It is suited to bring the Bible into
contempt, and the whole science of exegesis into scorn. The Bible is a
book of sense, and it should be interpreted on principles that commend
themselves to the sober judgment of mankind. The word rendered "honey" -
דבשׁ debash - is the same word - "dibs" - which is now used by the Arabs
to denote the syrup or jelly which is made by boiling down wine. This is
about the consistence of molasses, and is used as an article of food.
Whether it was so employed in the time of Isaiah, cannot now be
determined, but the word here may be used to denote honey; compare the
note at [Isa 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#022).

That he may know - As this translation now stands, it is unintelligible.
It would "seem" from this, that his eating butter and honey would
"contribute" to his knowing good and evil. But this cannot be the
meaning. It evidently denotes 'until he shall know,' or, 'at his
knowing;' Nord. "Heb. Gram.," Section 1026. 3. He shall be no urished in
the usual way, "until" he shall arrive at such a period of life as to
know good from evil. The Septuagint renders it, Πρινη γνῶναι αὐτὸν Prinē
gnōnai auton - 'before he knows.' The Chaldee, 'Until he shall know.'

To refuse the evil ... - Ignorance of good and evil denotes infancy.
Thus, in Nineveh, it is said there were 'more than sixscore thousand
perons that cannot discern between their right hand and left hand;'
commonly supposed to denote infants; [Jon
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#011); compare [Deu
1:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#039). The meaning is, that he should
be nourished in the usual mode in infancy, and before he should be able
to discern right from wrong, the land should be forsaken of its kings.
At what particular period of life this occurs, it may not be easy to
determine. A capability to determine, in some degree, between good and
evil, or between right and wrong, is usually manifest when the child is
two or three years of age. It is evinced when there is a capability of
understanding "law," and feeling that it is wrong to disobey it. This is
certainly shown at a very early period of life; and it is not improper,
therefore, to suppose that here a time was designated which was not more
than two or three years.

[Isaiah 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 7:16</span></span>

The land that thou abhorrest - The land concerning which thou art so
much "alarmed or distressed;" that is, the united land of Syria and
Ephraim. It is mentioned here as 'the land,' or as one land, because
they were united then in a firm alliance, so as to constitute, in fact,
or for the purposes of invasion and conquest, one people or nation. The
phrase, 'which thou abhorrest,' means properly, which thou loathest, the
primary idea of the word - קוץ qûts - being to feel a nausea, or to
vomit. It then means to fear, or to feel alarm; and this, probably, is
the meaning here. Abaz, however, evidently looked upon the nations of
Syria and Samaria with disgust, as well as with alarm. This is the
construction which is given of this passage by the Vulgate, Calvin,
Grotius, Junins, Gataker, and Piscator, as well as by our common
version. Another construction, however, has been given of the passage by
Vitringa, JohnD. Michaelis, Lowth, Gesenius, Rosenmuller, Hengstenberg,
and Hendewerk. According to this, the meaning is not that the "land"
should be the object of abhorrence, but that the kings themselves were
the objects of dislike or dread; and not merely that the two kings
should be removed, but that the land itself was threatened with
desolation. This construction is free from the objections of an
exegetical kind to which the other is open, and agrees better with the
idiom of the Hebrew. According to this, the correct translation would
be:

For before the child shall learn to refuse the

Evil and to choose the good,

Desolate shall be the land, before whose two

Kings thou art in terror.'

Of both her kings - Ahaz took the silver and gold that was found in the
temple, and sent it as a present to the king of Assyria. Induced by
this, the king of Assyria marched against Damascus and killed Rezin,
[Kg2 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#009). This occurred but a short
time after the threatened invasion of the land by Rezin and Remaliah, in
the "third" year of the reign of Ahaz, and, consequently, about one year
after this prophecy was delivered. Pekah, the son of Remaliah, was slain
by Hoshea, the son of Elah, who conspired against him, killed him, and
reigned in his stead. This occurred in the fourth year of the reign of
Ahaz, for Pekah reigned twenty years. Ahaz began to reign in the
seventeenth year of the reign of Pekah, and as Pekah was slain after he
had reigned twenty years, it follows that he was slain in the fourth
year of the reign of Ahaz - perhaps not more than two yearn after this
prophecy was delivered; see [Kg2
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#027), [Kg2
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#030); [Kg2
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#001). We have thus arrived at a
knowledge of the time intended by Isaiah in [Isa
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#016). The whole space of time was not,
probably, more than two years.

Opinions on the Intrepretation of Isaiah 7:14-16

A great variety of opinions have been entertained by interpreters in
regard to this passage [Isa 7:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014).
It may be useful, therefore, to state briefly what those opinions have
been, and then what seems to be the true meaning.

\(i\) The first opinion is that which supposes that by the 'virgin' the
wife of Ahaz is referred to, and that by the child which should be born,
the prophet refers to Hezekiah. This is the opinion of the modern Jewish
commentators generally. This interpretation prevailed among the Jews in
the time of Justin. But this was easily shown by Jerome to be false.
Ahaz reigned in Jerusalem but sixteen years [Kg2
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#002), and Hezekiah was twenty-five
years old when he began to reign [Kg2
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#002), and of course was not less than
nine years old when this prophecy was delivered. Kimchi and Abarbanel
then resorted to the supposition that Ahaz had a second wife, and that
this refers to a child that was to be born of her. This supposition
cannot be proved to be false, though it is evidently a mere supposition.
It has been adopted by the Jews, because they were pressed by the
passage by the early Christians, as constituting an argument for the
divinity of Christ. The ancient Jews, it is believed, referred it mainly
to the Messiah.

\(ii\) Others have supposed, that the prophet designated some virgin who
was then present when the king and Isaiah held their conference, and
that the meaning is, 'as surely as this virgin shall conceive, and bear
a son, so surely shall the land be forsaken of its kings.' Thus
Isenbiehl, Bauer, Cube, and Steudel held, as quoted by Hengstenberg,
"Christol." i. p. 341.

\(iii\) Others suppose that the 'virgin' was not an actual, but only an
ideal virgin. Thus Michaelis expresses it: 'By the time when one who is
yet a virgin can bring forth (that is, in nine months), all will be
happily changed, and the present impending danger so completely passed
away, that if you were yourself to name the child, you would call him
Immanuel.' Thus Eichhorn, Paulus, Hensler, and Ammon understand it; see
"Hengstenberg."

\(iv\) Others suppose that the 'virgin' was the prophet's wife. Thus
Aben Ezra, Jarchi, Faber, and Gesenius. Against this supposition there
is only one objection which has been urged that is of real force, and
that is, that the prophet already had a son, and of course his wife
could not be spoken of as a virgin. But this objection is entirely
removed by the supposition, which is by no means improbable, that the
former wife of the prophet was dead, and that he was about to be united
in marriage to another who was a virgin.

In regard to the prophecy itself, there have been three opinions:

\(i\) That it refers "exclusively" to some event in the time of the
prophet; to the birth of a child then, either of the wife of Ahaz, or of
the prophet, or of some other unmarried female. This would, of course,
exclude all reference to the Messiah. This was formerly my opinion; and
this opinion I expressed and endeavored to maintain, in the first
composition of these notes. But a more careful examination of the
passage has convinced me of its error, and satisfied me that the passage
has reference to the Messtah. The reasons for this opinion I shall soon
state.

\(ii\) The second opinion is, that it has "exclusive and immediate"
reference to the Messiah; that it does not refer at all to any event
which was "then" to occur, and that to Ahaz the future birth of a
Messiah from a virgin, was to be regarded as a pledge of the divine
protection, and an assurance of the safety of Jerusalem. Some of the
objections to this view I shall soon state.

\(iii\) The third opinion, therefore, is that which "blends" these two,
and which regards the prophet as speaking of the birth of a child which
would soon take place of someone who was then a virgin - an event which
could be known only to God, and which would, therefore, constitute a
sign, or demonstration to Ahaz of the truth of what Isaiah said; but
that the prophet intentionally so used language which would "also" mark
a more important event, and direct the minds of the king and people
onward to the future birth of one who should more fully answer to all
that is here said of the child that would be born, and to whom the name
Immanuel would be more appropriately given. This, I shall endeavor to
show, must be the correct interpretation. In exhibiting the reasons for
this opinion, we may, first, state the evidence that the prediction
refers to some child that would be born "soon" as a pledge that the land
would be forsaken of its kings; and secondly, the evidence that it
refers also to the Messiah in a higher and fuller sense.

I. Evidence That the Prophecy Refers to Some Event Which Was Soon to
Occur - To the Birth of a Child of Some One Who Was Then a Virgin, or
Unmarried

\(i\) It is the "obvious" interpretation. It is that which would strike
the great mass of people accustomed to interpret language on the
principles of common sense. If the passage stood by itself; if the
seventh and eighth chapters were "all" that we had; if there were no
allusion to the passage in the New Testament; and if we were to sit down
and merely look at the circumstances, and contemplate the narrative, the
unhesitating opinion of the great mass of people would be, that it
"must" have such a reference. This is a good rule of interpretation.
That which strikes the mass of people; which appears to people of sound
sense as the meaning of a passage on a simple perusal of it, is likely
to be the true meaning of a writing.

\(ii\) Such an interpretation is demanded by the circumstances of the
case. The immediate point of the inquiry was not about the "ultimate and
final" safety of the kingdom - which would be demonstrated indeed by the
announcement that the Messiah would appear - but it was about a present
matter; about impending danger. An alliance was formed between Syria and
Samaria. An invasion was threatened. The march of the allied armies had
commenced. Jerusalem was in consternation, and Ahaz had gone forth to
see if there were any means of defense. In this state of alarm, and at
this juncture, Isaiah went to assure him that there was no cause for
fear. It was not to assure him that the nation should be ultimately and
finally safe - which might be proved by the fact that the Messiah would
come, and that, therefore, God would preserve the nation; but the pledge
was, that he had no reason to fear "this" invasion, and that within a
short space of time the land would 'be forsaken of both its kings.' How
could the fact that the Messiah would come more than seven hundred years
afterward, prove this? Might not Jerusalem be taken and subdued, as it
was afterward by the Chaldeans, and yet it be true that the Messiah
would come, and that God would manifest himself as the protector of his
people? Though, therefore, the assurance that the Messiah would come
would be a general proof and pledge that the nation would be preserved
and ultimately safe, yet it would not be a pledge of the "specific and
immediate" thing which occupied the attention of the prophet, and of
Ahaz. It would not, therefore, be a 'sign' such as the prophet offered
to give, or a proof of the fulfillment of the specific prediction under
consideration. This argument I regard as unanswerable. It is so obvious,
and so strong, that all the attempts to answer it, by those who suppose
there was an immediate and exclusive reference to the Messiah, have been
entire failures.

\(iii\) It is a circumstance of some importance that Isaiah regarded
himself and his children as 'signs' to the people of his time; see [Isa
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018). In accordance with this view, it
seems he had named one child Shear-Jashub, [Isa
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003); and in accordance with the same
view, he afterward named another Maher-shalal-hash-baz - both of which
names are significant. This would seem to imply that he meant here to
refer to a similar fact, and to the birth of a son that should be a sign
also to the people of his time.

\(iv\) An unanswerable reason for thinking that it refers to some event
which was soon to occur, and to the birth of a child "before" the land
should be forsaken of the two kings, is the record contained in [Isa
8:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001). That record is evidently
connected with this account, and is intended to be a public assurance of
the fulfillment of what is here predicted respecting the deliverance of
the land from the threatened invasion. In that passage, the prophet is
directed to take a great roll [Isa
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001), and make a record concerning the
son that was to be born; he calls public witnesses, people of character
and well-known reputation, in attestation of the transaction [Isa
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#002); he approaches the prophetess [Isa
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003); and it is expressly declared [Isa
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#004) that before the child should have
'knowledge to say, My father, and my mother,' that is, be able to
discern between good and evil [Isa
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#016), 'the riches of Damascus and the
spoil of Samaria' should be 'taken away before the king of Assyria.'
This is so evidently a completion of the prophecy in Isa. vii., and a
solemn fulfilling of it in a manner that should be satisfactory to Ahaz
and the people, that it is impossible, it seems to me, to regard it any
otherwise than as a real transaction. Hengstenberg, and those who
suppose the prophecy to refer "immediately and exclusively" to the
Messiah, are obliged to maintain that that was a 'symbolical
transaction' - an opinion which might, with the same propriety, be held
of any historical statement in the Bible; since there is nowhere to be
found a more simple and unvarnished account of mere matter of historical
fact than that. The statement, therefore, in Isa. 8, is conclusive
demonstration, I think, that there was a reference in [Isa
7:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014), to a child of the prophet
that would be soon born, and that would be a "pledge" of the divine
protection, and a "proof or sign" to Ahaz that his land would be safe.

It is no objection to this that Isaiah then had a son [Isa
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003), and that, therefore, the mother
of that son could not be a virgin. There is no improbability in the
supposition that the mother of that son was deceased, and that Isaiah
was about again to be married. Such an event is not so uncommon as to
make it a matter of ridicule (see Hengstenberg, p. 342); or to render
the supposition wholly incredible.

Nor is it any objection that another name was given to the child that
was born to Isaiah; [Isa 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001), [Isa
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#003). Nothing was more common than to
give two names to children. It might have been true that the name
usually given to him was Maher-shalal-hash-baz; and still true that the
circumstances of his birth were such an evidence of the divine
protection, and such an emblem of the divine guardianship, as to make
proper the name Immanuel; see the note at [Isa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014). It may be observed, also, that
on the supposition of the strict and exclusive Messianic interpretation,
the same objection might be made, and the same difficulty would lie. It
was no more true of Jesus of Nazareth than of the child of Isaiah, that
he was commonly called Immanuel. He had another name also, and was
called by that other name. Indeed, there is not the slightest evidence
that the Lord Jesus was "ever" designated by the name Immanuel as a
proper name. All that the passage means is, that such should be the
circumstances of the birth of the child as to render the name Immanuel
proper; not that it would be applied to him in fact as the usual
appellation.

Nor is it any objection to this view, that the mind of the prophet is
evidently directed onward "to" the Messiah; and that the prophecy
terminates [Isa 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#008); [Isa
9:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001) with a reference to him. That
this is so, I admit; but nothing is more common in Isaiah than for him
to commence a prophecy with reference to some remarkable deliverance
which was soon to occur, and to terminate it by a statement of events
connected with a higher deliverance under the Messiah. By the laws of
"prophetic suggestion," the mind of the prophet seized upon resemblances
and analogies; was carried on to future times, which were suggested by
something that he was saying or contemplating as about to occur, until
the mind was absorbed, and the primary object forgotten in the
contemplation of the more remote and glorious event; see the
Introduction to Isaiah, Section 7. III. (3.)

II\. Evidence That the Prophecy Refers to the Messiah

\(i\) The passage in [Mat 1:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#022), is
an evidence that "he" regarded this as having a reference to the
Messiah, and that it had a complete fulfillment in him. This quotation
of it also shows that that was the common interpretation of the passage
in his time, or he would not thus have introduced it. It cannot be
"proved," indeed, that Matthew means to affirm that this was the primary
and original meaning of the prophecy, or that the prophet had a direct
and exclusive reference to the Messiah; but it proves that in his
apprehension the words had a "fulness" of meaning, and an adaptedness to
the actual circumstances of the birth of the Messiah, which would
accurately and appropriately express that event; see the notes at the
passage in Matthew. The prophecy was not completely "fulfilled, filled
up, fully and adequately met," until applied to the Messiah. That event
was so remarkable; the birth of Jesus was so strictly of a virgin, and
his nature so exalted, that it might be said to be a "complete and
entire" fulfillment of it. The language of Isaiah, indeed, was
applicable to the event referred to immediately in the time of Ahaz, and
expressed that with clearness; but it more appropriately and fully
expressed the event referred to by Matthew, and thus shows that the
prophet designedly made use of language which would be appropriate to a
future and most glorious event.

\(ii\) An argument of no slight importance on this subject may be drawn
from the fact, that this has been the common interpretation in the
Christian church. I know that this argument is not conclusive; nor
should it be pressed beyond its due and proper weight. It is of force
only because the united and almost uniform impression of mankind, for
many generations, in regard to the meaning of a written document, is not
to be rejected without great and unanswerable arguments. I know that
erroneous interpretations of many passages have prevailed in the church;
and that the interpretation of many passages of Scripture which have
prevailed from age to age, have been such as have been adapted to bring
the whole subject of scriptural exegesis into contempt. But we should be
slow to reject that which has had in its favor the suffrages of the
unlearned, as well as the learned, in the interpretation of the Bible.
The interpretation which refers this passage to the Messiah has been the
prevailing one in all ages. It was followed by all the fathers and other
Christian expositors until the middle of the eighteenth century
("Hengstenberg"); and is the prevailing interpretation at the present
time. Among those who have defended it, it is sufficient to mention the
names of Lowth, Koppe, Rosenmuller, and Hengstenberg, in addition to
those names which are found in the well-known English commentaries. It
has been opposed by the modern Jews, and by German neologists; but has
"not" been regarded as false by the great mass of pious and humble
Christians. The argument here is simply that which would be applied in
the interpretation of a passage in Homer or Virgil; that where the great
mass of readers of all classes have concurred in any interpretation,
there is "presumptive evidence" that it is correct - evidence, it is
true, which may be set aside by argument, but which is to be admitted to
be of some account in making up the mind as to the meaning of the
passage in question.

\(iii\) The reference to the Messiah in the prophecy accords with the
"general strain and manner" of Isaiah. It is in accordance with his
custom, at the mention of some occurrence or deliverance which is soon
to take place, to suffer the mind to fix ultimately on the more remote
event of the "same general character," or lying, so to speak, "in the
same range of vision" and of thought; see the Introduction, Section 7.
It is also the custom of Isaiah to hold up to prominent view the idea
that the nation would not be ultimately destroyed until the great
Deliverer should come; that it was safe amidst all revolutions; that
vitality would remain like that of a tree in the depth of winter, when
all the leaves are stripped off [Isa
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#013); and that all their enemies would
be destroyed, and the true people of God be ultimately secure and safe
under their great Deliverer; see the notes at Isa. 34; [Isa
35:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001).

It is true, that this argument will not be "very" striking except to one
who has attentively studied this prophecy; but it is believed, that no
one can profoundly and carefully examine the manner of Isaiah, without
being struck with it as a very important feature of his mode of
communicating truth. In accordance with this, the prophecy before us
means, that the nation was safe from this invasion. Ahaz feared the
extinction of his kingdom, and the "permanent" annexation of Jerusalem
to Syria and Samaria. Isaiah told him that that could not occur; and
proffered a demonstration, that in "a very few years" the land would be
forsaken of both its kings. "On another ground also it could not be."
The people of God were safe. His kingdom could not be permanently
destroyed. It must continue until the Messiah should come, and the eye
of the prophet, in accordance with his usual custom, glanced to that
future event, and he became "totally" absorbed in its contemplation, and
the prophecy is finished [Isa 9:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001) by
a description of the characteristics of the light that he saw in future
times rising in dark Galilee [Isa
9:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001), and of the child that should be
born of a virgin then.

In accordance with the same view, we may remark, as Lowth has done, that
to a people accustomed to look for a great Deliverer; that had fixed
their hopes on one who was to sit on the throne of David, the "language"
which Isaiah used here would naturally suggest the idea of a Messiah. It
was so animated, so ill adapted to describe his own son, and so suited
to convey the idea of a most remarkable and unusual occurrence, that it
could scarcely have been otherwise than that they should have thought of
the Messiah. This is true in a special manner of the language in [Isa
9:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001).

\(iv\) An argument for the Messianic interpretation may be derived from
the public expectation which was excited by some such prophecy as this.
There is a striking similarity between it and one which is uttered by
Micah, who was contemporary with Isaiah. Which was penned "first" it
would not be easy to show; but they have internal evidence that they
both had their origin in an expectation that the Messiah would be born
of a virgin; compare the note at [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002). In [Mic
5:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002), the following prediction
occurs: 'But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the
thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is
to be ruler over Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, from
the days of eternity. Therefore, will he give them up, until the time
when she which travaileth hath brought forth.' That this passage refers
to the birth of the Messiah, is demonstrable from [Mat
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#006).

Nothing can be clearer than that this is a prediction respecting the
place of his birth. The Sanhedrim, when questioned by Herod respecting
the place of his birth, answered without the slightest hesitation, and
referred to this place in Micah for proof. The expression, 'she which
travaileth,' or, 'she that bears shall bear' - ילדה יולדה yôlēdâh
yālâdâh, "she bearing shall bear" - refers evidently to some prediction
of such a birth; and the word 'she that bears' (יולדה yôlēdâh) seems to
have been used somewhat in the sense of a proper name, to designate one
who was well known, and of whom there had been a definite prediction.
Rosenmuller remarks, 'She is not indeed expressly called a virgin, but
that she is so is self-evident, since she shall bear the hero of divine
origin (from everlasting), and consequently not begotten by a mortal.
The predictions throw light on each other; Micah discloses the divine
origin of the person predicted, Isaiah the wonderful manner of his
birth.' - "Ros.," as quoted by Hengstenberg. In his first edition,
Rosenmuller remarks on [Mic 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002) : 'The
phrase, "she who shall bear shall bear," denotes the "virgin" from whom,
in a miraculous manner, the people of that time hoped that the Messiah
would be born.' If Micah refers to a well-known existing prophecy, it
must evidently be this in Isaiah, since no other similar prophecy occurs
in the Old Testament; and if he wrote subsequently to Isaiah, the
prediction in Micah must be regarded as a proof that this was the
prevailing interpretation of his time.

That this was the prevailing interpretation of those times, is confirmed
by the traces of the belief which are to be found extensively in ancient
nations, that some remarkable person would appear, who should be born in
this manner. The idea of a Deliverer, to be born of a "virgin," is one
that somehow had obtained an extensive prevalence in Oriental nations,
and traces of it may be found almost everywhere among them. In the
Hindoo Mythology it is said, respecting "Budhu," that be was born of
"Maya," a goddess of the imagination - a virgin. Among the Chinese,
there is an image of a beautiful woman with a child in her arms, which
child, they say, was born of a virgin. The passsge in Virgil is well
known:

Jam redit et Virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna:

Jam nova progenies coelo demittitur alto.

Tu modo mascenti puero, quo ferrea primum

Desinet, ac toto surget gens aurea mundo.

Casta fare Lucina: tuus jam regnat Apollo.

Eclog. iv. 4ff.

Comes the last age, by Cumae's maid foretold;

Afresh the mighty line of years unrolled.

The Virgin now, now Saturn's sway returns;

Now the blest globe a heaven-sprung child adorns,

Whose genial power shall whelm earth's iron race,

And plant once more the golden in its place. -

Thou chaste Lucina, but that child sustain,

And lo! disclosed thine own Apollo's reign.

Wrangham

This passage, though applied by Virgil to a different subject, has been
usually regarded as having been suggested by that in Isaiah. The
coincidence of thought is remarkable on any supposition; and there is no
improbability in the supposition that the expectation of a great
Deliverer to be born of a virgin had prevailed extensively, and that
Virgil made it up in this beautiful manner and applied it to a prince in
his own time. On the prevalent expectation of such a Deliverer, see the
note at [Mat 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#002).

\(v\) But the great and the unanswerable argument for the Messianic
interpretation is derived from the conclusion of the prophecy in [Isa
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#008), and especially in [Isa
9:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001). The prophecy in [Isa
9:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001) is evidently connected with
this; and yet "cannot" be applied to a son of Isaiah, or to any other
child that should be then born. If there is any passage in the Old
Testament that "must" be applied to the Messiah, that is one; see the
notes on the passage. And if so, it proves, that though the prophet at
first had his eye on an event which was soon to occur, and which would
be to Ahaz full demonstration that the land would be safe from the
impending invasion, yet that he employed language which would describe
also a future glorious event, and which would be a fuller demonstration
that God would protect the people. He became fully absorbed in that
event, and his language at last referred to that alone. The child then
about to be born would, in most of the circumstances of his birth, be an
apt emblem of him who should be born in future times, since both would
be a demonstration of the divine power and protection. To both, the name
Immanuel, though not the common name by which either would be
designated, might be appropriately given. Both would be born of a virgin
- the former, of one who was then a virgin, and the birth of whose child
could be known only to God - the latter, of one who should be
appropriately called "the" virgin, and who should remain so at the time
of his birth. This seems to me to be the meaning of this difficult
prophecy. The considerations in favor of referring it to the birth of a
child in the time of Isaiah, and which should be a pledge to him of the
safety of his kingdom "then," seem to me to be unanswerable. And the
considerations in favor of an ultimate reference to the Messiah - a
reference which becomes in the issue total and absorbing - are equally
unanswerable; and if so, then the twofold reference is clear.

[Isaiah 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 7:17</span></span>

The Lord shall bring ... - The prophet having assured Ahaz that his
kingdom should be free from the invasion that then threatened it,
proceeds, however, to state to him that it would be endangered from
another source.

Thy father's house - The royal family - the princes and nobles.

Days that have not come - Times of calamity that have not been equalled.

From the day that Ephraim departed from Judah - From the time of the
separation of the ten tribes from the tribes of Judah and Benjamin.

Even the king of Assyria - This was done in the following manner. Though
the siege which Rezin and Pekah had undertaken was not at this time
successful, yet they returned the year after with stronger forces, and
with counsels better concerted, and again besieged the city. This was in
consequence of the continued and increasing wickedness of Ahaz; [Ch2
28:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#001). In this expedition, a great
multitude were taken captives, and carried to Damascus; [Ch2
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#005). Pekah at this time also killed
120,000 of the Jews in one day [Ch2
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#006); and Zichri, a valiant man of
Ephraim, killed Maaseiah the son of Ahaz. At this time, also, Pekah took
no less than 200,000 of the kingdom of Judah, proposing to take them to
Samaria, but was prevented by the influence of the prophet Oded; [Ch2
28:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#008). In this calamity, Ahaz
stripped the temple of its treasures and ornaments, and sent them to
Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria, to induce him to come and defend him
from the united arms of Syria and Ephraim. The consequence was, as might
have been foreseen, that the king of Assyria took occasion, from this,
to bring increasing calamities upon the kingdom of Ahaz. He first,
indeed, killed Rezin, and took Damascus; [Kg2
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#007).

Having subdued the kingdoms of Damascus and Ephraim, Tiglath-pileser
became a more formidable enemy to Ahaz than both of them. His object was
not to aid Ahaz, but to distress him [Ch2
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#020); and his coming professedly and
at the request of Ahaz, to his help, was a more formidable calamity than
the threatened invasion of both Rezin and Pekah. God has power to punish
a wicked nation in his own way. When they seek human aid, he can make
this a scourge. He has kings and nations under his control; and though a
wicked prince may seek earthly alliance, yet it is easy for God to allow
such allies to indulge their ambition and love of rapine, and make them
the very instruments of punishing the nation which they were called to
defend. It should be observed that this phrase, 'even the king of
Assyria,' is by many critics thought to be spurious, or a marginal
reading, or gloss, that has by some means crept into the text. The
ground of this opinion is, that it does not harmonize entirely with the
following verse, where "Egypt" is mentioned as well as Assyria, and that
it does not agree with the poetical form of the passage.

[Isaiah 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 7:18</span></span>

In that day the Lord shall hiss - see the note at [Isa
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#026).

For the fly - That is, for the army, or the multitude of people. The
comparison of a numerous army with "flies" is not uncommon; see Homer's
"Iliad," B. ii. 469, etc.

\- Thick as insects play,

The wandering nation of a summer's day.

That, drawn by milky streams at evening hours

In gathered swarms surround the rural bowers;

From pail to pail with busy murmur run

The gilded legions, glittering in the sun.

Pope.

The comparison is drawn probably from the "number," but also is intended
to indicate the troublesome character, of the invaders. Perhaps, also,
there is an allusion here to the well-known fact that one of the ten
plagues of Egypt was caused by numerous swarms of flies; [Exo
8:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#021). An army would be brought up
from that country as numerous, as troublesome, and as destructive as was
that swarm of flies. The following description, by Bruce, of a species
of flies in Abyssinia and the adjacent regions, will give an idea of the
character of this calamity, and the force of the language used here:

'This insect is called Zimb; it has not been described by any
naturalist. It is, in size, very little larger than a bee, of a thicker
proportion, and has wings, which are broader than those of a bee, placed
separate, like those of a fly: they are of pure gauze, without color or
spot upon them; the head is large, the upper jaw or lip is sharp, and
has at the end of it a strong pointed hair, of about a quarter of an
inch long; the lower jaw has two of these pointed hairs; and this pencil
of hairs, when joined together, makes a resistance to the finger, nearly
equal to that of a strong hog's bristle; its legs are serrated in the
inside, and the whole covered with brown hair or down. As soon as this
plague appears, and their buzzing is heard, all the cattle forsake their
food, and run wildly about the plain, until they die, worn out with
fatigue, fright, and hunger. No remedy remains, but to leave the black
earth, and hasten down to the sands of Atbara; and there they remain,
while the rains last, this cruel enemy never daring to pursue them
further.

Though his size be immense, as is his strength, and his body covered
with a thick skin, defended with strong hair, yet even the camel is not
capable to sustain the violent punctures the fly makes with his pointed
proboscis. He must lose no time in removing to the sands of Atbara, for
when once attacked by this fly, his body, head, and legs, break out into
large bosses, which swell, break, and putrefy, to the certain
destruction of the creature. Even the elephant and rhinoceros, who, by
reason of their enormous bulk, and the vast quantity of food and water
they daily need, cannot shift to desert and dry places as the season may
require, are obliged to roll themselves in mud and mire, which, when
dry, coats them over like armor, and enables them to stand their ground
against this winged assassin; yet I have found some of these tubercles
upon almost every elephant and rhinoceros that I have seen, and
attribute them to this cause.

All the inhabitants of the seacoast of Melinda, down to Cape Gardefan,
to Saba, and the south coast of the Red Sea, are obliged to put
themselves in motion, and remove to the next sand, in the beginning of
the rainy season, to prevent all their stock of cattle from being
destroyed. This is not a partial emigration; the inhabitants of all the
countries, from the mountains of Abyssinia northward, to the confluence
of the Nile, and Astaboras, are once a year obliged to change their
abode, and seek protection in the sand of Beja; nor is there any
alternative, or means of avoiding this, though a hostile band were in
their way, capable of spoiling them or half their substance. This fly
has no sting, though he seemed to me to be rather of the bee kind; but
his motion is more rapid and sudden than that of the bee, and resembles
that of the gad-fly in England. There is something particular in the
sound or buzzing of this insect; it is a jarring noise together with a
humming, which induces me to believe it proceeds, at least in part, from
a vibration made with the three hairs at his snout.'

The uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt - The remotest part of the
land - that is, from the whole country. Egypt was watered by a single
river; the Nile. But this river emptied into the Mediterranean by
several mouths; and from this river also were cut numerous canals to
water the land. These are intended by the "rivers" of Egypt; see the
notes at [Isa 19:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#006). Those canals
would be stagnant for no small part of the year; and around them would
be produced, as is usual near stagnant waters, great quantities of
flies. This prophecy was fulfilled by the invasion of the land in
subsequent times by the Egyptians; [Kg2
23:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#033); [Ch2
35:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#020), [Ch2
35:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#024); [Ch2
36:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#001).

And for the bee - That is, for the "army." An army is compared to "bees"
on account of their number; perhaps also on account of the pungency and
severity of the sting. The comparison is common; see [Deu
1:44](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#044); [Deu
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#020); [Psa
118:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#012). The Chaldee has rendered this
verse, 'The Lord shall call to a people girded with the armies of the
brave, who are numerous as flies, and shall bring them from the ends of
the land of Egypt; and strong armies, strong as bees, and shall bring
them from the land of Assyria.' No prophecy was ever more completely
fulfilled than this by the successive invasions of Pharaoh-Necho,
Esarhaddon and Nebuchadnezzar; see Isa. 36; 37; [Ch2
36:7-21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#007).

[Isaiah 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 7:19</span></span>

And they shall come - The idea in this verse is, that they would spread
over the land, and lay it waste. The poetic image of flies and bees is
kept up; meaning, that the armies would be so numerous as to occupy and
infest all the land.

And shall rest - As bees do. Thus the "locusts" are said to have
"rested" in all the land of Egypt; [Exo
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#014).

In the desolate valleys - The word translated "valleys" usually means "a
valley with a brook," or a brook itself. The Chaldee translates it, 'In
the streets of cities.' But the idea is derived from the habits of flies
and bees. The meaning is, that they should fill all the land, as
innumerable swarms of flies and bees - would settle down everywhere, and
would infest or consume everything. Bees, probably, chose situations
near to running streams. Virgil, in his directions about selecting a
place for an apiary, gives the following among others:

At liquidi fontes, et stagna virentia musco

Adsint, et tennis fugiens per gramina rivus.

Georg. iv. 18, 19.

But there let pools invite with moss arrayed,

Clear fount and rill that purls along the glade.

Sotheby.

In the holes of the rocks - Probably the same image is referred to here.
It is well known that in Judea, as well as elsewhere, bees were
accustomed to live in the holes or caverns of the rocks. They were very
numerous; and the figure here is, that the Assyrians would be numerous
as the swarms of bees were in that land, even in the high and
inaccessible rocks; compare [Isa
2:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#019).

Upon all thorns - The image here is kept up of flies and bees resting on
everything. "Thorns" here refer to those trees and shrubs that were of
little value; but even on these they would rest.

All bushes - Hebrew 'All trees that are commendable, or that are to be
praised;' see the margin. The word denotes those shrubs and trees that
were objects of "praise;" that is, that were cultivated with great
attention and care, in opposition to "thorns" that grew wild, and
without cultivation, and that were of little value. The meaning of the
passage is, that the land would be invaded in every part, and that
everything, valuable or not, would be laid waste.

[Isaiah 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 7:20</span></span>

In the same day ... - The idea in this verse is the same as in the
preceding, though presented in a different form. The meaning is, that
"God" would bring upon them this punishment, but that he would make use
of the Assyrian as an "instrument" by which to do it.

Shave - The act of shaving off the hair denotes punishment or disgrace;
compare [Sa2 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#004) : 'Hanun took
David's servants, and shaved off one half of their beards;' [Ch1
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#004).

With a razor - Using them as an instrument. God here claims the power of
directing them, and regards them as employed by him; see [Isa
10:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005).

That is hired - This is an allusion to the custom of hiring soldiers, or
employing mercenary armies. Thus Great Britain employed mercenary
troops, or hired of the Germans bodies of Hessians to carry on the war
in America. The meaning here is, that God would employ the Assyrians as
his instruments, to effect his purposes, as though they were hired and
paid by the plunder and spoil of the nation.

By them beyond the river - The river Euphrates. The Euphrates is usually
meant in the Scriptures where 'the river' is mentioned without
specifying the name; [Psa 72:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008); [Psa
80:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002). This was the river which Abraham
had passed; and this, perhaps, was, for a long time, the eastern
boundary of their geographical knowledge; see the note at [Isa
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015).

The head - The hair of the head.

The hair of the feet - Or the other parts of the body; of the lower
parts of the body.

Shall consume the beard - Shall cut off the beard. This was esteemed
particularly disgraceful among the Jews. It is, at this day, among all
Eastern nations. The beard is regarded as a distinguished ornament;
among the Mahometans, it is sworn by, and no higher insult can be
offered than to treat the beard with indignity; compare the note at [Isa
50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006). The meaning is here, that God
would employ the Assyrian as his instrument to lay waste the land.

[Isaiah 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 7:21</span></span>

In that day - In the time specified in the previous verses - in the
judgments that should be brought upon the land by the Egyptians and
Assyrians.

A man shall nourish - Hebrew 'Make to live:' that is, he shall own, or
feed.

A young cow - The Hebrew denotes a heifer that gives milk. The state
which is denoted by this is that of great poverty. Instead of being
engaged in agriculture, of possessing great resources in that time, a
man should depend, for the subsistence of himself and his family, on
what a single cow and two sheep would yield. Probably this is intended
also as a description of the general state of the nation, that it would
be reduced to great poverty.

And two sheep - Two here seems to be used to denote a very small number.
A man, that is, the generality of people, would be so reduced as to be
able to purchase and keep no more.

[Isaiah 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 7:22</span></span>

For the abundance of milk ... - On account, or by means of the great
quantity of milk. This image also denotes that the land should be
desolate, and abandoned by its inhabitants. Such a range would the cow
and sheep have in the lands lying waste and uncultivated, that they
would yield abundance of milk.

For butter and honey - This shall be the condition of all who are left
in the land. Agriculture shall be abandoned, The land shall be desolate.
The few remaining inhabitants shall be dependent on what a very few cows
and sheep shah produce, and on the subsistence which may be derived from
honey obtained from the rocks where bees would lodge. Perhaps, also, the
swarms of bees would be increased, by the fact that the land would be
forsaken, and that it would produce abundance of wild flowers for their
subsistence. The general idea is plain, that the land would be desolate.
Butter and honey, that is, butter mingled with honey, is a common
article of food in the East; see the note at [Isa
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#015). D'Arvieux being in the camp of
an Arab prince who lived in much splendor, and who treated him with
great regard, was entertained, he tells us, the first morning of his
being there, with little loaves, honey, new-churned butter, and cream
more delicate than any he ever saw, together with coffee. - "Voy. dans
la Pal.," p. 24. And in another place, he assures us that one of the
principal things with which the Arabs regale themselves at breakfast is
cream, or new butter mingled with honey. - p. 197. The statement of the
prophet here, that the poor of the land should eat butter and honey, is
not inconsistent with this account of D'Arvieux, that it is regarded as
an article of food with which even princes treat their guests, for the
idea of the prophet is, that when the land should be desolate and
comparatively uninhabited, the natural luxuriant growth of the soil
would produce an abundance to furnish milk, and that honey would abound
where the bees would be allowed to multiply, almost without limit; see
Harmer's Obs., vol. ii. p. 55. Ed. Lond. 1808.

[Isaiah 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 7:23</span></span>

The remainder of this chapter is a description of great desolation
produced by the invasion of the Assyrians. "Where there were a thousand
vines." Where there was a valuable vineyard. In every place, that is,
that was well cultivated and valuable.

At a thousand silverlings - The word rendered 'silvertings' here - כסף
keseph - denotes, properly, silver, of any amount. But it is also used
to denote the silver coin which was in use among the Jews, the shekel.
Perhaps this was the only silver coin which, in early times, they
possessed, and hence, the word shekel is omitted, and so many pieces of
silver are mentioned. Thus, in [Gen
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#016), Abimelech says, that he had
given Abraham, a thousand of silver' - that is, a thousand shekels. The
shekel was worth about two shillings of our money. It is probable that a
vineyard would be valued, in proportion to the number of vines that
could be raised on the smallest space; and the meaning is here, that the
land that was most fertile, and that produced the most, would be
desolate, and would produce only briers and thorns. The land in Judea
admits of a high state of cultivation, and requires it, in order to make
it productive. When neglected, it becomes as remarkably sterile. At
present, it generally bears the marks of great barrenness and sterility.
It is under the oppression of Turkish power and exactions; and the
consequence is, that, to a traveler, it has the appearance of great
barrenness. But, in the high state to which the Jews brought it, it was
eminently fertile, and is capable still of becoming so, if it should be
placed under a government that would encourage agriculture and bestow
freedom. This is the account which all travelers give of it now.

[Isaiah 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 7:24</span></span>

With arrows and with bows ... - This is a continuation of the
description of its desolation. So entirely would it be abandoned, so
utterly desolate would it be, that it would become a vast
hunting-ground. It would be covered with shrubs and trees that would
afford a convenient covert for wild beasts; and would yield to its few
inhabitants a subsistence, not by cultivation, but by the bow and the
arrow. There can scarcely be a more striking description of utter
desolation. But, perhaps, the long captivity of seventy years in Babylon
literally fulfilled it. Judea was a land that, at all times, was subject
to depredations from wild beasts. On the banks of the Jordan - in the
marshes, and amid the reeds that sprung up in the lower bank or border
of the river - the lion found a home, and the tiger a resting place;
compare [Jer 49:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#019). When the land was
for a little time vacated and forsaken, it would be, therefore, soon
filled with wild beasts; and during the desolations of the seventy
years' captivity, there can be no doubt that this was literally
fulfilled.

[Isaiah 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 7:25</span></span>

And on all hills ... - All the fertile places in the mountains that used
to be cultivated with the spade. Vineyards were often planted on the
sides of hills; and those places were among the most productive and
fertile in the land; see [Isa 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001).

The mattock - The spade; the garden hoe; or the weeding-hook. An
instrument chiefly used, probably, in vineyards.

There shall not come thither - There shall not be.

The fear of briers and thorns - This does not make sense; or if it does,
it is not a sense consistent with the connection. The idea of the whole
passage is, that the land, even the most fertile parts of it, should be
given up to briers and thorns; that is, to desolation. The Hebrew here,
is ambiguous. It may mean, 'thou shalt not come there, for fear of the
briers and thorns.' That is, the place that was formerly so fertile,
that was cultivated with the spade, shall now be so completely covered
with thorns, and shall furnish so convenient a resting place for wild
beasts and reptiles, as to deter a man from going there. The Septuagint,
and the Syriac, however, understand it differently - as denoting that
those places should be still cultivated. But this is evidently a
departure from the sense of the connection. Lowth understands it in the
past tense; 'where the fear of briers and thorns never came.' The
general idea of the passage is plain, that those places, once so highly
cultivated, would now be desolate.

Shall be for the sending forth ... - Shall be wild, uncultivated, and
desolate - vast commons on which oxen and sheep shall feed at large.
"Lesser cattle." Hebrew 'Sheep, or the flock.' Sheep were accustomed to
range in deserts and uncultivated places, and to obtain there, under the
guidance of the shepherd, their subsistence. The description, therefore,
in these verses, is one of extensive and wide desolation; and one that
was accomplished in the calamities that came upon the land in the
invasions by the Egyptians and Assyrians.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 8](isa008)

</div>
