<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa065)  [Next](jer000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 66](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 66:0</span></span>

It is generally supposed that this chapter is a continuation of the
subject of the foregoing (Lowth). The general design is to reprove the
hypocritical portion of the nation, and to comfort the pious with the
assurance of the favor of God, the accession of the Gentile world, and
the destruction of the foes of the church. The Jews valued themselves
much upon the pomp of their temple-worship and the splendor of their
ritual; they supposed that that was to he perpetual; and they assumed
great merit to themselves for the regular servives of their religion.
Before the captivity in Babylon they were prone to fall into idolatry;
afterward they were kept from it, and to the present time they have not
been guilty of it - so effectual was that heavy judgment in correcting
this national propensity. But after their captivity their national
proneness to sin assumed another form. That love of form and strict
ceremony; that dependence on mere rites and the external duties of
religion; that heartless and pompous system of worship commenced, which
ultimately terminated in Pharisaic pride, and which was scarcely less an
object of abhorrence to God than gross idolatry. To that state of things
the prophet probably looked forward; and his object in this chapter was
to reprove that reliance on the mere forms of external worship, and the
pride in their temple and its service which he saw would succeed the
return from the exile in Babylon.

It is generally agreed that the reference here is to the state of things
which would follow the return from Babylon. Lowth supposes that it
refers to the time when Herod would be rebuilding the temple in the most
magnificent manner, and when, notwithstanding the heavy judgment of God
was hanging over their heads, the nation was formal in its worship, and
proud and self-confident, as if it was the favorite of God. Vitringa
supposes that it refers to the time of the introduction of the new
economy, or the beginning of the times of the Messiah.

That it refers to times succeeding the captivity at Babylon, and is
designed to be at once a prophetic description and a reproof of the sins
which would prevail after their return, is apparent from the whole
structure of the chapter, and particularly from the following
considerations:

1\. There is no one description, as in the former chapters, of the land
as desolate, or the city of Jerusalem and the temple in ruins (see [Isa
64:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#010)).

2\. There is no charge against them for being idolatrous, as there had
been in the previous chapters (see especially [Isa
65:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#003), [Isa
65:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#011)). The sin that is specified here
is of a wholly different kind.

3\. It is evidently addressed to them when they were either rebuilding
the temple, or when they greatly prided themselves on its service (see
[Isa 66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)).

4\. It is addressed to them when they were engaged in offering sacrifice
with great formality, and with great reliance on the mere external
services of religion; when sacrifice had degenerated into mere form, and
when the spirit with which it was done was as abominable in the sight of
God as the most odious of all crimes.

From these considerations, it seems to me that the chapter is designed
to refer to a state of things that would succeed the return from the
exile at Babylon, and be a general description of the spirit with which
they would then engage in the worship of God. They would indeed rebuild
the temple according to the promise; but they would manifest a spirit in
regard to the temple which required the severe reproof of Yahweh. They
would again offer sacrifice in the place where their fathers had done
it; but though they would be effectually cured of their idolatrous
tendencies, yet they would evince a spirit that was as hateful to God as
the worst form of idolatry, or the most heinous crimes. A large portion,
therefore, of the nation would still be the object of the divine
abhorrence, and be subjected to punishment; but the truly pious would be
preserved, and their number would be increased by the accession of the
Gentile world.

As an additional consideration to show the correctness of this view of
the time to which the chapter refers, we may remark, that a large part
of the prophecies of Isaiah are employed in predicting the certain
return from the exile, the re-establishment of religion in their own
land, and the resumption of the worship of God there. It was natural,
therefore, that the spirit of inspiration should glance at the character
of the natron subsequent to the return, and that the prophet should
give, in the conclusion of his book, a summary graphic description of
what would occur in future times. This I take to be the design of the
closing chapter of the prophecies of Isaiah. He states in general the
character of the Jewish people after the return from the exile; condemns
the sins with which they would then be chargeable; comforts the portion
of the nation that would be disposed in sincerity to serve God; predicts
the rapid and glorious increase of the church; declares that the enemies
of God would be cut off; affirms that all the world would yet come at
stated seasons to worship before God; and closes the whole book by
saying that the people of God would go forth and see all their enemies
slain. This general view may be more distinctly seen by the following
analysis of the chapter:

I. Yahweh says that heaven was his throne, and the earth his footstool,
and that no house which they could build for him would adequately
express his glory; no external worship would suitably declare his
majesty. He preferred the homage of an humble heart to the most
magnificent external worship; the tribute of a sincere offering to the
most costly outward devotion [Isa
66:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001).

II\. He declares his sense of the evil of mere external worship, and
threatens punishment to the hypocrites who should engage in this manner
in his service [Isa 66:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003). In these
verses it is implied that in the service of the temple after the return
from the exile, there would be a spirit evinced in their public worship
that would be as hateful to God as would lie murder or idolatry, or as
would be the cutting off a dog's neck or the sacrifice of swine; that
is, that the spirit of hypocrisy, self-righteousness, and pride, would
be supremely odious in his sight. They were not therefore to infer that
because they would be restored from the exile, therefore their worship
would be pure and acceptable to God. The fact would be that it would
become so utterly abominable in his sight that he would cut them off and
bring all their fears upon them; that is, he would severely punish them.

III\. Yet even then there would be a portion of the people that would
hear the word of the Lord, and to whom he would send comfort and
deliverance. He therefore promises to his true church great extension,
and especially the accession of the Gentiles [Isa
66:5-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#005).

1\. A part of the nation would cast out, and persecute the other, under
pretence of promoting the glory of God and doing his will [Isa
66:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#005). Yet Yahweh would appear for the
joy of the persecuted portion, and the persecutors would be confounded.

2\. A sound is heard as of great agitation in the city; a voice
indicating great and important revolutions [Isa
66:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#006). This voice is designed to
produce consolation to his people; dismay to his foes.

3\. A promise is given of the great and sudden enlargement of Zion - an
increase when conversions would be as sudden as if a child were born
without the ordinary delay and pain of parturition; as great as if a
nation were born in a day [Isa 66:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#007).

4\. All that love Zion are called on to rejoice with her, for the
Gentile nations would come like a flowing stream, and the church would
be comforted, as when a mother comforteth her child [Isa
66:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#010).

IV\. God would punish his foes. He would devote idolaters to destruction
[Isa 66:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#015).

V. He would send the message of salvation to those who were in distant
parts of the world [Isa 66:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#019).

VI\. At that time, the worship of God would everywhere be regularly and
publicly celebrated. From one new moon to another: and from one Sabbath
to another, all flesh would come and worship before God [Isa
66:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#023).

VII\. The friends of God would be permitted to see the final and
interminable ruin of all the transgressors against the Most High [Isa
66:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024). Their destruction would be
complete; their worm would not die, and their fire would not be quenched
and the whole scene of the work of redemption would be wound up in the
complete and eternal salvation of all the true people of God, and in the
complete and eternal ruin of all his foes. With this solemn truth - a
truth relating to the final retribution of mankind, the prophecies of
Isaiah appropriately close. Where more properly could be the winding up
of the series of visions in this wonderful book, than in a view of the
complete destruction of the enemies of God; how more sublimely than by
representing the whole redeemed church as going forth together to look
upon their destruction, as victors go forth to look upon a mighty army
of foes slain and unburied on the battlefield?

[Isaiah 66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 66:1</span></span>

The heaven is my throne - (See the notes at [Isa
57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015)). Here he is represented as
having his seat or throne there. He speaks as a king. heaven is the
place where he holds his court; from where he dispenses his commands;
and from where he surveys all his works (compare [Ch2
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#018); [Mat
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034)). The idea here is, that as God
dwelt in the vast and distant heavens, no house that could be built on
earth could be magnificent enough to be his abode.

The earth is my footstool - A footstool is that which is placed under
the feet when we sit. The idea here is, that God was so glorious that
even the earth itself could be regarded only as his footstool. It is
probable that the Saviour had this passage in his eye in his declaration
in the sermon on the mount, 'Swear not at all; neither by heaven, for it
is God's throne; nor by the earth, for it is his footstool' [Mat
5:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034).

Where is the house that ye build unto me? - What house can you build
that will be an appropriate dwelling for him who fills heaven and earth?
The same idea, substantially, was expressed by Solomon when he dedicated
the temple: 'But will God indeed dwell on the earth? Behold, the heaven,
and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house that
I have builded!' [Kg1 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#027).
Substantially the same thought is found in the address of Paul at
Athens: 'God, that made the world, and all things therein, seeing that
he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands'
[Act 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#024).

And where is the place of my rest? - It has already been intimated (in
the analysis) that this refers probably to the time subsequent to the
captivity. Lowth supposes that it refers to the time of the rebuilding
of the temple by Herod. So also Vitringa understands it, and supposes
that it refers to the pride and self-confidence of those who then
imagined that they were rearing a structure that was worthy of being a
dwelling-place of Yahweh. Grotius supposes that it refers to the time of
the Maccabees, and that it was designed to give consolation to the pious
of those times when they were about to witness the profanation of the
temple by Antiochus, and the cessation of the sacrifices for three years
and a half. 'God therefore shows,' says he, 'that there was no reason
why they should be offended in this thing. The most acceptable temple to
him was a pious mind; and from that the value of all sacrifices was to
be estimated.' Abarbanel supposes that it refers to the times of
redemption.

His words are these: 'I greatly wonder at the words of the learned
interpreting this prophecy, when they say that the prophet in this
accuses the people of his own time on account of sacrifices offered with
impure hands, for lo! all these prophecies which the prophet utters in
the end of his book have respect to future redemption.' See Vitringa.
That it refers to some future time when the temple should be rebuilt
seems to me to be evident. But what precise period it refers to -
whether to times not far succeeding the captivity, or to the times of
the Maccabees, or to the time of the rebuilding of the temple by Herod,
it is difficult to find any data by which we can determine. From the
whole strain of the prophecy, and particularly from [Isa
66:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003), it seems probable that it
refers to the time when the temple which Herod had reared was finishing;
when the nation was full of pride, self-righteousness, and hypocrisy;
and when all sacrifices were about to be superseded by the one great
sacrifice which the Messiah was to make for the sins of the world. At
that time, God says that the spirit which would be evinced by the nation
would be abominable in his sight; and to offer sacrifice then, and with
the spirit which they would manifest, would be as offensive as murder or
the sacrifice of a dog (see the notes at [Isa
66:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003)).

[Isaiah 66:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 66:2</span></span>

For all those things hath mine hand made - That is the heaven and the
earth, and all that is in them. The sense is, 'I have founded for myself
a far more magnificent and appropriate temple than you can make; I have
formed the heavens as my dwelling-place, and I need not a dwelling
reared by the hand of man.'

And all those things have been - That is, have been made by me, or for
me. The Septuagint renders it, 'All those things are mine?' Jerome
renders it, 'All those things were made;' implying that God claimed to
be the Creator of them all, and that, therefore, they all belonged to
him.

But to this man will I look - That is, 'I prefer a humble heart and a
contrite spirit to the most magnificent earthly temple' (see the notes
at [Isa 57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015)).

That is poor - Or rather 'humble.' The word rendered 'poor' (עני ‛ânı̂y),
denotes not one who has no property, but one who is down-trodden,
crushed, afflicted, oppressed; often, as here, with the accessory idea
of pious feeling [Exo 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#012); [Psa
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#002), [Psa
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#009). The Septuagint renders it,
Ταπεινὸν Tapeinon - 'Humble;' not πτωχόν ptōchon (poor). The idea is,
not that God looks with favor on a poor man merely because he is poor -
which is not true, for his favors are not bestowed in view of external
conditions in life - but that he regards with favor the man that is
humble and subdued in spirit.

And of a contrite spirit - A spirit that is broken, crushed, or deeply
affected by sin. It stands opposed to a spirit that is proud, haughty,
self-confident, and self-righteous.

And that trembleth at my word - That fears me, or that reveres my
commands.

[Isaiah 66:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 66:3</span></span>

He that killeth an ox is as if he slew a man - Lowth and Noyes render
this, 'He that slayeth an ox, killeth a man.' This is a literal
translation of the Hebrew. Jerome renders it, 'He who sacrifices an ox
is as if (quasi) he slew a man.' The Septuagint, in a very free
translation - such as is common in their version of Isaiah - render it,
'The wicked man who sacrifices a calf, is as he who kills a dog; and he
who offers to me fine flour, it is as the blood of swine.' Lowth
supposes the sense to be, that the most flagitious crimes were united
with hypocrisy, and that they who were guilty of the most extreme acts
of wickedness at the same time affected great strictness in the
performance of all the external duties of religion. An instance of this,
he says, is referred to by Ezekiel, where he says, 'When they had slain
their children to their idols, then they came the same day into my
sanctuary to profane it' [Eze 23:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#039).

There can be no doubt that such offences were often committed by those
who were very strict and zealous in their religious services (compare
[Isa 1:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011), with [Isa
66:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#021). But the generality of
interpreters have supposed that a different sense was to be affixed to
this passage. According to their views, the particles as if are to be
supplied; and the sense is, not that the mere killing of an ox is as
sinful in the sight of God as deliberate murder, but that he who did it
in the circumstances, and with the spirit referred to, evinced a spirit
as odious in his sight as though he had slain a man. So the Septuagint,
Vulgate, Chaldee, Symmachus, and Theodotion, Junius, and Tremellius,
Grotius, and Rosenmuller, understand it. There is probably an allusion
to the fact that human victims were offered by the pagan; and the sense
is, that the sacrifices here referred to were no more acceptable in the
sight of God than they were.

The prophet here refers, probably, first, to the spirit with which this
was done. Their sacrifices were offered with a temper of mind as
offensive to God as if a man had been slain, and they had been guilty of
murder. They were proud, vain, and hypocritical. 'They had forgotten the
true nature and design of sacrifice, and such worship could not but be
an abhorrence in the sight of God. Secondly, It may also be implied
here, that the period was coming when all sacrifices would be
unacceptable to God. When the Messiah should have come; when he should
have made by one offering a sufficent atonement for the sins of the
whole world; then all bloody sacrifices would be needless, and would be
offensive in the sight of God. The sacrifice of an ox would be no more
acceptable than the sacrifice of a man; and all offerings with a view to
propitiate the divine favor, or that implied that there was a deficiency
in the merit of the one great atoning sacrifice, would be odious to God.

He that sacrificeth a lamb - Margin, 'Kid' The Hebrew word (שׂה s'eh)
may refer to one of a flock, either of sheep or goats [Gen
22:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#007); [Gen
30:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#032). Where the species is to be
distinguished, it is usually specified, as, e. g., [Deu
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#004), כשׂבים שׂה עזים ושׂה ves'ēh
‛ı̂zzym s'ēh kı̂s'âbı̂ym (one of the sheep and one of the goats). Both were
used in sacrifice.

As if he cut off a dog's neck - That is, as if he had cut off a dog's
neck for sacrifice. To offer a dog in sacrifice would have been
abominable in the view of a Jew. Even the price for which he was sold
was not permitted to be brought into the house of God for a vow ([Deu
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#018); compare [Sa1
17:43](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#043); [Sa1
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#014)). The dog was held in veneration
by many of the pagan, and was even offered in sacrifice; and it was,
doubtless, partly in view of this fact, and especially of the fact that
such veneration was shown for it in Egypt, that it was an object of such
detestation among the Jews. Thus Juvenal, Sat. xiv. says:

Oppida tota canem venerantur, nemo Dianam.

'Every city worships the dog; none worship Diana.' Diodorus (B. i.)
says, 'Certain animals the Egyptians greatly venerate (σέβονται
sebontai), not only when alive, but when they are dead, as cats,
ichneumons, mice, and dogs.' Herodotus says also of the Egyptians, 'In
some cities, when a cat dies all the inhabitants cut off their eyebrows;
when a dog dies, they shave the whole body and the head.' In Samothracia
there was a cave in which dogs were sacrificed to Hecate. Plutarch says,
that all the Greeks sacrificed the dog. The fact that dogs were offered
in sacrifice by the pagan is abundantly proved by Bochart (Hieroz. i. 2.
56). No kind of sacrifice could have been regarded with higher
detestation by a pious Jew. But God here says, that the spirit with
which they sacrificed a goat or a lamb was as hateful in his sight as
would be the sacrifice of a dog: or that the time would come when, the
great sacrifice for sin having been made, and the necessity for all
other sacrifice having ceased, the offering of a lamb or a goat for the
expiation of sin would be as offensive to him as would be the sacrifice
of a dog.

He that offereth an oblation - On the word rendered here 'oblation'
(מנחה minchāh). See the notes at [Isa
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013).

As if he offered swine's blood - The sacrifice of a hog was an
abomination in the sight of the Hebrews (see the notes at [Isa
65:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#004)). Yet here it is said that the
offering of the מנחה minchāh, in the spirit in which they would do it,
was as offensive to God as would be the pouring out of the blood of the
swine on the altar, Nothing could more emphatically express the
detestation of God for the spirit with which they would make their
offerings, or the fact that the time would come when all such modes of
worship would be offensive in his sight.

He that burneth incense - See the word 'incense' explained in the notes
at [Isa 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013). The margin here is,
'Maketh a memorial of.' Such is the usual meaning of the word used here
(זכר zâkar), meaning to remember, and in Hiphil to cause to remember, or
to make a memorial. Such is its meaning here. incense was burned as a
memorial or a remembrance-offering; that is, to keep up the remembrance
of God on the earth by public worship (see the notes at [Isa
62:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#006)).

As if he blessed an idol - The spirit with which incense would be
offered would be as offensive as idolatry. The sentiment in all this is,
that the most regular and formal acts of worship where the heart is
lacking, may be as offensive to God as the worst forms of crime, or the
most gross and debasing idolatry. Such a spirit often characterized the
Jewish people, and eminently prevailed at the time when the temple of
Herod was nearly completed, and when the Saviour was about to appear.

[Isaiah 66:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 66:4</span></span>

I also will choose their delusions - Margin, 'Devices.' The Hebrew word
rendered here 'delusions' and 'devices' (תעלוּלים ta‛ălûlı̂ym) properly
denotes petulance, sauciness; and then vexation, adverse destiny, from
עלל ‛âlal, to do, to accomplish, to do evil, to maltreat. It is not used
in the sense of delusions, or devices; and evidently here means the same
as calamity or punishment. Compare the Hebrew in [Lam
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#022). Lowth and Noyes render it,
Calamities; though Jerome and the Septuagint understand it in the sense
of illusions or delusions; the former rendering it, 'Illusiones, and the
latter ἐμπαίγματα empaigmata - 'delusions.' The parallelism requires us
to understand it of calamity, or something answering to 'fear,' or that
which was dreaded; and the sense undoubtedly is, that God would choose
out for them the kind of punishment which would be expressive of his
sense of the evil of their conduct.

And will bring their fears upon them - That is, the punishment which
they have so much dreaded, or which they had so much reason to
apprehend.

Because when I called - (See the notes at [Isa
65:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#012)).

But they did evil before mine eyes - (See the notes at [Isa
65:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#003)).

[Isaiah 66:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 66:5</span></span>

Hear the word of the Lord - This is an address to the pious and
persecuted portion of the nation. It is designed for their consolation,
and contains the assurance that Yahweh would appear in their behalf, and
that they should be under his protecting care though they were cast out
by their brethren. To whom this refers has been a question with
expositors, and it is perhaps not possible to determine with certainty.
Rosenmuller supposes that it refers to the pious whom the 'Jews and
Benjaminites repelled from the worship of the temple.' Grotius supposes
that it refers to those 'who favored Onias;' that is, in the time of
Antiochus Epiphanes. Vitringa supposes that the address is to the
apostles, disciples, and followers of the Lord Jesus; and that it refers
to the persecution which would be excited against them by the Jewish
people. This seems to me to be the most probable opinion:

1\. Because the whole structure of the chapter (see the analysis) seems
to refer to the period when the Messiah should appear.

2\. Because the state of things described in this verse exactly accords
with what occurred on the introduction of Christianity. They who
embraced the Messiah were excommunicated and persecuted; and they who
did it believed, or professed to believe, that they were doing it for
the glory of God.

3\. The promise that Yahweh would appear for their joy, and for the
confusion of their foes, is one that had a clear fulfillment in his
interposition in behalf of the persecuted church.

Your brethren that hated you - No hatred of others was ever more bitter
than was that evinced by the Jews for those of their nation who embraced
Jesus of Nazareth as the Messiah. If this refers to his time, then the
language is plain. But to whatever time it refers, it describes a state
of things where the pious part of the nation was persecuted and opposed
by those who were their kinsmen according to the flesh.

That cast you out - The word used here is one that is commonly employed
to denote excommunication or exclusion from the privileges connected
with the public worship of God. It is language which will accurately
describe the treatment which the apostles and the early diciples of the
Redeemer received at the hand of the Jewish people (see [Joh
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#002), and the Acts of the Apostles
generally).

For my name's sake - This language closely resembles that which the
Saviour used respecting his own disciples and the persecutions to which
they would be exposed: 'But all these things will they do unto you for
my name's sake, because they know not him that sent me' ([Joh
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#021); compare [Mat
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#022); [Mat
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#009)). I have no doubt that this
refers to that period, and to those scenes.

Said, Let the Lord be glorified - That is, they profess to do it to
honor God; or because they suppose that he requires it. Or it means,
that even while they were engaged in this cruel persecution, and these
acts of excommunicating their brethren, they professed to be serving
God, and manifested great zeal in his cause. This has commonly been the
case with persecutors. The most malignant and cruel persecutions of the
friends of God have been originated under the pretext of great zeal in
his service, and with a professed desire to honor his name. So it was
with the Jews when they crucified the Lord Jesus. So it is expressly
said it would be when his disciples would be excommunicated and put to
death [Joh 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#002). So it was in fact in
the persecutions excited by the Jews against the apostles and early
Christians (see [Act 6:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#013); [Act
21:28-31](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#028)). So it was in all the
persecutions of the Waldenses by the Papists; in all the horrors of the
Inquisition; in all the crimes of the Duke of Alva. So it was in the
bloody reign of Mary; and so it has ever been in all ages and in all
countries where Christians have been persecuted. The people of God have
suffered most from those who have been conscientious persecutors; and
the most malignant foes of the church have been found in the church,
persecuting true Christians under great pretence of zeal for the purity
of religion. It is no evidence of piety that a man is full of
conscientious zeal against those whom he chooses to regard as heretics.
And it should always be regarded as proof of a bad heart, and a bad
cause, when a man endeavors to inflict pain and disgrace on others, on
account of their religious opinions, under pretence of great regard for
the honor of God.

But he shall appear to your joy - The sense is, that God would manifest
himself to his people as their vindicator, and would ultimately rescue
them from their persecuting foes. If this is applied to Christians, it
means that the cause in which they were engaged would triumph. This has
been the case in all persecutions. The effect has always been the
permanent triumph and estalishment of the cause that was persecuted.

And they shall be ashamed - How true this has been of the Jews that
persecuted the early Christians! How entirely were they confounded and
overwhelmed! God established permanently the persecuted; he scattered
the persecutors to the ends of the earth!

[Isaiah 66:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 66:6</span></span>

A voice of noise from the city - That is, from the city of Jerusalem.
The prophet sees in a vision a tumult in the city. He hears a voice that
issues from the temple. His manner and language are rapid and hurried -
such as a man would evince who should suddenly see a vast tumultuous
assemblage, and hear a confused sound of many voices. There is also a
remarkable abruptness in the whole description here. The preceding verse
was calm and solemn. It was full of affectionate assurance of the divine
favor to those whom the prophet saw to be persecuted. Here the scene
suddenly changes. The vision passes to the agitating events which were
occurring in the city and the temple, and to the great and sudden change
which would be produced in the condition of the church of God. But to
whom or what this refers has been a subject of considerable difference
of opinion. Grotius understands it of the sound of triumph of Judas
Maccabeus, and of his soldiers, rejoicing that the city was forsaken by
Antiochus, and by the party of the Jews who adhered to him.

Rosenmuller understands it of the voice of God, who is seen by the
prophet taking vengeance on his foes. There can be no doubt that the
prophet, in vision, sees Yahweh taking recompence on his enemies - for
that is expressly specified. Still it is not easy to determine the exact
time referred to, or the exact scene which passes before the mind of the
prophet. To me it seems probable that it is a scene that immediately
preceded the rapid extension of the gospel, and the great and sudden
increase of the church by the accession of the pagan world (see the
following verses); and I would suggest, whether it is not a vision of
the deeply affecting and agitating scenes when the temple and city were
about to be destroyed by the Romans; when the voice of Yahweh would be
heard in the city and at the temple, declaring the punishment which he
would bring on those who had cast out and rejected the followers of the
Messiah [Isa 66:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#005); and when, as a
result of this, the news of Salvation was to be rapidly spread
throughout the pagan world.

This is the opinion, also, of Vitringa. The phrase rendered here 'a
voice of noise' (שׁאון קול qôl shâ'ôn), means properly the voice of a
tumultuous assemblage; the voice of a multitude. The word 'noise' (שׁאון
shâ'ôn) is applied to a noise or roaring, as of waters [Psa
65:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#008); or of a crowd or multitude of
people [Isa 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#014); [Isa
42:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#004); [Isa
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#008); and of war [Amo
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#002); [Hos
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#014). Here it seems probable that it
refers to the confused clamor of war, the battle cry raised by soldiers
attacking an army or a city; and the scene described is probably that
when the Roman soldiers burst into the city, scaled the walls, and
poured desolation through the capital.

A voice from the temple - That is, either the tumultous sound of war
already having reached the temple; or the voice of Yahweh speaking from
the temple, and commanding destruction on his foes. Vitringa supposes
that it may mean the voice of Yahweh breaking forth from the temple, and
commanding his foes to be slain. But to whichever it refers, it
doubtless means that the sound of the tumult was not only around the
city, but in it; not merely in the distant parts, but in the very midst,
and even at the temple.

A voice of the Lord that rendereth recompence - Here we may observe:

1\. That it is recompence taken on those who had cast out their brethren
[Isa 66:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#005).

2\. It is vengeance taken within the city, and on the internal, not the
external enemies.

3\. It is vengeance taken in the midst of this tumult.

All this is a striking description of the scene when the city and temple
were taken by the Roman armies. It was the vengeance taken on those who
had cast out their brethren; it was the vengeance which was to precede
the glorious triumph of truth and of the cause of the true religion.

[Isaiah 66:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 66:7</span></span>

Before she travailed, she brought forth - That is, Zion. The idea here
is, that there would be a great and sudden increase of her numbers. Zion
is here represented, as it often is, as a female (see [Isa
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008)), and as the mother of spiritual
children (compare [Isa 54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001); [Isa
49:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#020)). The particular idea here
is, that the increase would be sudden - as if a child were born without
the usual delay and pain of parturition. If the interpretation given of
[Isa 66:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#006) be correct, then this refers
probably to the sudden increase of the church when the Messiah came, and
to the great revivals of religion which attended the first preaching of
the gospel. Three thousand were converted on a single day Acts 2, and
the gospel was speedily propagated almost all over the known world.
Vitringa supposes that it refers to the sudden conversion of the
Gentiles, and their accession to the church.

She was delivered of a man child - Jerome understands this of the
Messiah. who was descended from the Jewish church. Grotius supposes that
the whole verse refers to Judas Maccabeus, and to the liberation of
Judea under him before anyone could have hoped for it! Calvin
(Commentary in loc.) supposes that the word male here, or manchild,
denotes the manly or generous nature of those who should be converted to
the church; that they would be vigorous and active, not effeminate and
delicate (generosam prolem, non mollem aut effeminatam). Vitringa refers
it to the character and rank of those who should be converted, and
applies it particularly to Constantine, and to the illustrious
philosophers, orators, and senators, who were early brought under the
influence of the gospel. The Hebrew word probably denotes a male, or a
man-child, and it seems to me that it is applied here to denote the
character of the early converts to the Christian faith. They would not
be feeble and effeminate; but vigorous, active, energetic. It may,
perhaps, also be suggested, that, among the Orientals, the birth of a
son was deemed of much more importance, and was regarded as much more a
subject of congratulation than the birth of a female. If an allusion be
had to that fact, then the idea is, that the increase of the church
would be such as would be altogether a subject of exultation and joy.

[Isaiah 66:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 66:8</span></span>

Who hath heard such a thing? - Of a birth so sudden. Usually in
childbirth there are the pains of protracted parturition. The earth
brings forth its productions gradually and slowly. Nations rise by
degrees, and are long in coming to maturity. But here is such an event
as if the earth should in a day be covered with a luxurious vegetation,
or as if a nation should spring at once into being. The increase in the
church would be as great and wonderful as if these changes were to occur
in a moment.

Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? - That is, to produce
its grass, and flowers, and fruit, and trees. The idea is, that it
usually requires much longer time for it to mature its productions. The
germ does not start forth at once; the flower, the fruit, the yellow
harvest, and the lofty tree are not produced in a moment. Months and
years are required before the earth would be covered with its luxuriant
and beautiful productions But here would be an event as remarkable as if
the earth should bring forth its productions in a single day.

Or shall a nation be born at once? - Such an event never has occurred. A
nation is brought into existence by degrees. Its institutions are
matured gradually, and usually by the long process of years. But here is
an event as remarkable as if a whole nation should be born at once, and
stand before the world, mature in its laws, its civil institutions, and
in all that constitutes greatness. In looking for the fulfillment of
this, we naturally turn the attention to the rapid progress of the
gospel in the times of the apostles, when events occurred as sudden and
as remarkable as if the earth, after the desolation of winter or of a
drought, should be covered with rich luxuriance in a day, or as if a
whole nation should start into existence, mature in all its
institutions, in a moment. But there is no reason for limiting it to
that time. Similar sudden changes are to be expected still on the earth;
and I see no reason why this should not be applied to the spread of the
gospel in pagan lands, and why we should not yet look for the rapid
propagation of Christianity in a manner as surprising and wonderful as
would be such an instantaneous change in the appearance of the earth, or
such a sudden birth of a kingdom.

[Isaiah 66:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 66:9</span></span>

Shall I bring to the birth? - The sense of this verse is plain. It is,
that God would certainly accomplish what he had here predicted, and for
which he had made ample arrangements and preparations. He would not
commence the work, and then abandon it. The figure which is used here is
obvious; but one which does not render very ample illustration proper.
Jarchi has well expressed it: 'Num ego adducerem uxorem meam ad sellam
partus, sc. ad partitudinem, et non aperirem uterum ejus, ut foetum suum
in lucem produceret? Quasi diceret; an ego incipiam rem nec possim eam
perficere?'

Shall I cause to bring forth? - Lowth and Noyes render this, 'Shall I,
who begat, restrain the birth?' This accurately expresses the idea. The
meaning of the whole is, that God designed the great and sudden increase
of his church; that the plan was long laid; and that, having done this,
he would not abandon it, but would certainly effect his designs.

[Isaiah 66:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 66:10</span></span>

Rejoice ye with Jerusalem - The idea which is presented in this verse
is, that it is the duty of all who love Zion to sympathize in her joys.
It is one evidence of piety to rejoice in her joy; and they who have no
true joy when God pours down his Spirit, and, in a revival of religion,
produces changes as sudden and transforming as if the earth were
suddenly to pass from the desolation of winter to the verdure and bloom
of summer; or when the gospel makes rapid advances in the pagan world,
have no true evidence that they love God or his cause. Such scenes
awaken deep interest in the bosoms of angels, and in the bosom of God
the Saviour; and they who love that God and Saviour will rejoice in such
scenes, and will mingle their joys and thanksgivings with the joys and
thanksgivings of those who are thus converted and saved.

All ye that mourn for her - That sympathize in her sorrows, and that
mourn over her desolations.

[Isaiah 66:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 66:11</span></span>

That ye may suck - The same figure occurs in [Isa
60:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#016); and substantidally in [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023). See the note at those places.

That ye may milk out - The image is an obvious one. It means that they
who sympathized with Zion would be nourished by the same truth, and
comforted with the same sources of consolation.

And be delighted with the abundance of her glory - Margin, 'Brightness.'
Lowth renders this, 'From her abundant stores.' Noyes, 'From the
fullness of her glory.' Jerome (the Vulgate), 'And that you may abound
with delights from every kind of her glory.' The Septuagint, 'That
sucking ye may be nourished from the commencement' (Thompson); 'or the
entrance of her glory' (ἀπὸ εἰσόδου δόξης αὐτῆς apo eisodou doxēs
autēs). This variety of interpretation has arisen from the uncertain
meaning of the word זיז zı̂yz, rendered 'abundance.' Gesenius supposes
that it is derived from זוּז zûz, meaning:

1\. To move;

2\. To glance, to sparkle, to radiate, from the idea of rapid motion;
hence, to flow out like rays, to spout like milk; and hence, the noun
זיז zı̂yz, means a breast.

This derivation may be regarded as somewhat fanciful; but it will show
why the word 'brightness' was inserted in the margin, since one of the
usual significations of the verb relates to brightness, or to sparkling
rays. Aquila renders it, Ἀπὸ παντοδαπίας Apo pantodapias - 'From every
kind of abundance.' Symmachus, Ἀπὸ πλήθους Apo plēthou - 'From the
multitude.' The word probably refers to the abundance of the
consolations which Zion possessed. Lowth proposes to change the text;
but without any authority. The Chaldee renders it, 'That ye may drink of
the wine of her glory;' where they probably read יין yayin ("wine"),
instead of the present reading.

Of her glory - The abundant favors or blessings conferred on Zion. The
glory that should be manifested to her would be the knowledge of divine
truth, and the provisions made for the salvation of people.

[Isaiah 66:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 66:12</span></span>

For thus saith the Lord - This verse contains a promise of the
conversion of the Gentiles, and the fact that what constituted their
glory would be brought and consecrated to the church of God.

I will extend - The word rendered, I will extend ( נטה nâṭâh) means
properly to stretch out, as the hand or a measure; then to spread out or
expand, as a tent is spread out, to which it is often applied [Gen
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#008); [Gen
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#005); or to the heavens spread out
over our heads like a tent or a curtain [Isa
40:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022). Here it may mean either that
peace would be spread out over the country like the Nile or Euphrates
spread out over a vast region in an inundation; or it may mean, as
Gesenius supposes, 'I will turn peace upon her like a river; that is, as
a stream is turned in its course.' To me it seems that the former is the
correct interpretation; and that the idea is, that God would bring
prosperity upon Zion like a broad majestic river overflowing all its
banks, and producing abundant fertility.

Peace - A general word denoting prosperity of all kinds - a favorite
word with Isaiah to describe the future happiness of the church of God
(see [Isa 9:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006); [Isa
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#012); [Isa
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#017); [Isa
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#007); [Isa
48:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#018); [Isa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007); [Isa
54:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#013); [Isa
55:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#012); [Isa
57:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#019)).

Like a river - That is, says Lowth like the Euphrates. So the Chaldee
interprets it. But there is no evidence that the prophet refers
particularly to the Euphrates. The image is that suggested above - of a
river that flows full, and spreads over the banks - at once an image of
sublimity, and a striking emblem of great prosperity. This same image
occurs in [Isa 48:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#018). See the note at
that place.

And the glory of the Gentiles - (See the notes at [Isa
60:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#005), [Isa
60:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#011)).

Like a flowing stream - Like the Nile, says Vitringa. But the word נחל
nachal is not commonly applied to a river like the Nile; but to a
torrent, a brook, a rivulet - either as flowing from a perennial
fountain, or more commonly a stream running in a valley that is swelled
often by rain, or by the melting of snows in the mountain (see Reland's
Palestine, chapter xlv.) Such is the idea here. The peace or prosperity
of Zion would be like such a swollen stream - a stream overflowing
(שׁוטף shôṭēph) its banks.

Then shall ye suck - [Isa 66:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#011).

Ye shall be borne upon her sides - See this phrase explained in the
notes at [Isa 60:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#004).

And be dandled upon her knees - As a child is by its nurse or mother.
The idea is, that the tenderest care would be exercised for the church;
the same care which an affectionate mother evinces for her children. The
insertion of the word 'her' here by our translators weakens the sense.
The meaning is, not that they should be borne upon the sides and dandled
upon the knees of Zion or of the church; but that God would manifest to
them the feelings of a parent, and treat them with the tenderness which
a mother evinces for her children. As a mother nurses her children at
her side (compare the notes at [Isa
60:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#004)), so would God tenderly provide
for the church; as she affectionately dandles her children on her knees,
so tenderly and affectionately would he regard Zion.

[Isaiah 66:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 66:13</span></span>

As one whom his mother comforteth - See the notes at [Isa
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#015), where the same image occurs.

[Isaiah 66:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 66:14</span></span>

And when ye see this - This great accession to the church from the
Gentile world.

Your bones shall flourish like an herb - This is an image which is often
employed in the Scriptures. When the vigor of the body fails, or when it
is much afflicted, the bones are said to be feeble or weakened, or to be
dried [Psa 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#002); [Psa
51:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#008); [Psa
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#014), [Psa
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#017); [Psa
38:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#003); [Lam
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#013); [Pro
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#030); [Pro
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#022). like manner, prosperity,
health, vigor, are denoted by making the bones fat (see the notes at
[Isa 58:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#011); [Pro
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#020)), or by imparting health,
marrow, or strength to them [Pro 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#008);
[Pro 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#024). The sense here is, that
their vigor would be greatly increased.

The hand of the Lord shall be known - That is, it shall be seen that he
is powerful to defend his people, and to punish their enemies.

[Isaiah 66:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 66:15</span></span>

For behold, the Lord will come with fire - The Septuagint reads this 'As
fire' (ὡς πύρ hōs pur). Fire is a common emblem to denote the coming of
the Lord to judge and punish his enemies [Psa
50:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003) :

Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence;

A fire shall devour before him,

And it shall be very tempestuous round about him.

So [Hab 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#005) :

Before him went the pestilence,

And burning coals went forth at his feet.

So [Psa 97:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#003) :

A fire goeth before him,

And burneth up his enemies round about.

So it is said [Th2 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008), that the Lord
Jesus will be revealed 'in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that
know not God' (compare [Heb 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#027);
[Pe2 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#007)). So Yahweh is said to
breathe out fire when he comes to destroy his foes:

There went up a smoke out of his nostrils,

And fire out of his mouth devoured;

Coals were kindled by it.

[Psa 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#008)

Compare the notes at [Isa 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#006); [Isa
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#030). This is a general promise that
God would defend his church, and destroy his foes. To what this
particularly applies, it may not be possible to determine, and instead
of attempting that, I am disposed to regard it as a promise of a general
nature, that God, in those future times, would destroy his foes, and
would thus extend protection to his people. So far as the language is
concerned, it may be applied either to the destruction of Jerusalem, to
any mighty overthrow of his enemies, or to the day of judgment. The
single truth is, that all his enemies would be destroyed as if Yahweh
should come amidst flames of fire. That truth is enough for his church
to know; that truth should be sufficient to fill a wicked world with
alarm.

And with his chariots like a whirlwind - The principal idea here is,
that he would come with immense rapidity, like a chariot that was borne
forward as on the whirlwind, to destroy his foes. God is often
represented as coming in a chariot - a chariot of the clouds, or of a
whirlwind. [Psa 104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003) :

Who maketh the clouds his chariot,

Who walketh upon the wings of the wind.

Compare [Psa 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#010); see the note at
[Isa 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001). See also [Jer
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013) :

Behold, he shall come up as clouds,

And his chariots shall be as a whirlwind.

Chariots were commonly made with two wheels, though sometimes they had
four wheels, to which two horses, fiery and impetuous, were attached;
and the rapid movement, the swift revolving wheels, and the dust which
they raised, had no slight resemblance to a whirlwind (compare the notes
at [Isa 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#007), [Isa
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#009)). They usually had strong and
sharp iron scythes affixed to the extremities of their axles, and were
driven into the midst of the army of an enemy, cutting down all before
them. Warriors sometimes fought standing on them, or leaping from them
on the enemy. The chariots in the army of Cyrus are said to have been
capacious enough to permit twenty men to fight from them.

To render his anger with fury - Lowth renders this, 'To breathe forth
his anger.' Jerome translates it, Reddere, that is, to render. The
Septuagint, Ἀποδοῦναι Apodounai, to give, or to render. Lowth proposes,
instead of the present text, as pointed by the Masorites, להשׁיב
lehâshı̂yb, to read it להשׁיב lehashı̂yb, as if it were derived from נשׁב
nâshab. But there is no necessity of a change. The idea is, that God
would recompense his fury; or would cause his hand to turn upon them in
fury.

With fury - Lowth renders this, 'In a burning heat.' The word used (חמה
chēmâh) properly means "heat," then anger, wrath; and the Hebrew here
might be properly rendered, 'heat of his anger;' that is, glowing or
burning wrath, wrath that consumes like fire.

With flames of fire - His rebuke shall consume like fiery flames; or it
shall be manifested amidst such flame.

[Isaiah 66:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 66:16</span></span>

For by fire and by his sword - The sword is an instrument by which
punishment is executed (see the notes at [Isa
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#005); compare [Rom
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004)).

Will he plead with all flesh - Or rather, he will judge (נשׁפט
nı̂shephaṭ), that is, he will execute his purposes of vengeance on all
the human race. Of course, only that part is intended who ought to be
subject to punishment; that is, all his foes.

And the slain of the Lord shall be many - The number of those who shall
be consigned to woe shall be immense - though in the winding up of the
great drama at the close of the world, there is reason to hopethat a
large proportion of the race, taken as a whole, will be saved. Of past
generations, indeed, there is no just ground of such hope; of the
present generation there is no such prospect. But brighter and happier
times are to come. The true religion is to spread over all the world,
and for a long period is to prevail; and the hope is, that during that
long period the multitude of true converts will be so great as to leave
the whole number who are lost, compared with those who are saved, much
less than is commonly supposed. Still the aggregate of those who are
lost, 'the slain of the Lord,' will be vast. This description I regard
as having reference to the coming of the Lord to judgment (compare [Th2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008)); or if it refer to any other
manifestation of Yahweh for judgment, like the destruction of Jerusalem
by the Romans, it has a strong resemblance to the final judgment; and,
like the description of that by the Saviour Matt. 24, the language is
such as naturally to suggest, and to be applicable to, the final
judgment of mankind.

[Isaiah 66:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 66:17</span></span>

They that sanctify themselves - That is, who attempt to purify
themselves by idolatrous rites, by ablutions, and lustrations. The
design here is, to describe those who will be exposed to the wrath of
God when he shall come to execute vengeance.

And purify themselves in the gardens - (See the notes at [Isa
65:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#003)).

Behind one tree in the midst - This passage has not a little exercised
the ingenuity of commentators. It is quite evident that our translators
were not able to satisfy themselves with regard to its meaning. In the
margin they have rendered it, 'one after another,' supposing that it may
mean that the idolaters engaged in their sacrifices in a solemn
procession, walking one after another around their groves, their
shrines, or their altars. In the translation in the text, they seem to
have supposed that the religious rites referred to were celebrated
behind one particular selected tree in the garden. Lowth renders it,
'After the rites of Achad.' Jerome renders it, In hortis post januam
intrinsecus - 'In the gardens they sanctify themselves behind the gate
within.' The Septuagint, 'Who consecrate and purify themselves (εἰς τοὺς
κήπους, καὶ ἐν τοῖς προθύροις ἕσθοντες, κ.τ.λ. eis tous kēpous, kai en
tois prothurois hesthontes, etc.) for the gardens, and they who, in the
outer courts, eat swine's flesh,' etc. The Chaldee renders the phrase
סיעא בחר סיעא siy‛ā' bāchar siy‛ā' - 'Multitude after multitude.' The
vexed Hebrew phrase used here, אחד אחר 'achar 'achad, it is very
difficult to explain. The word אחר 'achar means properly after; the
after part; the extremity; behind - in the sense of following after, or
going after anyone. The word אחד 'achad, means properly one; someone;
anyone. Gesenius (Commentary at the place) says that the phrase may be
used in one of the three following senses:

1\. In the sense of one after another. So Sym. and Theo. render it -
ὀπίσω ἀλλήλων opisō allēlōn. Luther renders it, Einer hier, der andere
da - 'one here, another there.'

2\. The word אחד 'achad, may be understood as the name of a god who was
worshipped in Syria, by the name of Adad. This god is that described by
Macrobius, Sat., i. 23: 'Understand what the Assyrians think about the
power of the sun. For to the God whom they worship as Supreme they give
the name Adad, and the signification of this name is One.' That the
passage before us refers to this divinity is the opinion of Lowth,
Grotius, Bochart, Vitringa, Dathe, and others. 'The image of Adad,'
Macrobius adds, 'was designated by inclined rays, by which it was shown
that the power of heaven was in the rays of the sun which were sent down
to the earth.' The same god is referred to by Pliny (Hist. Nat. xxxvii.
71), where he mentions three gems which received their names from three
parts of the body, and were called 'The veins of Adad, the eye of Adad,
the finger of Adad;' and he adds, 'This god was worshipped by the
Syrians.' There can be no doubt that such a god was worshipped; but it
is by no means certain that this idol is here referred to. It is not
improbable, Vitringa remarks, that the name Adad should be written for
Achadh, for the ease of pronunciation - as a slight change in letters
was common for the purpose of euphony. But it is still not quite clear
that this refers to any particular idol.

3\. The third opinion is that of Gesenius and accords substantially with
that which our translators have expressed it the text. According to
that, it should be rendered 'Those who sanctify and purify themselves in
the (idol) groves after one in the midst;' that is, following and
imitating the one priest who directed the sacred ceremonies. It may mean
that a solemn procession was formed in the midst of the grove, which was
led on by the priest, whom all followed; or it may mean that they
imitated him in the sacred rites. It seems tome probable that this
refers to some sacred procession in honor of an idol, where the idol or
the altar was encompassed by the worshippers, and where they were led on
by the officiating priest. Such processions we know were common in pagan
worship.

In the midst - In the midst of the sacred grove; that is, in the darkest
and obscurest recess. Groves were selected for such worship on account
of the sacred awe which it was supposed their dark shades would produce
and cherish. For the same reason, therefore, the darkest retreat - the
very middle of the grove - would be selected as the place where their
religious ceremonies would be performed. I see no evidence that there is
any allusion to any tree here, as our translators seem to have supposed;
still less, that there was, as Burder supposes, any allusion to the tree
of life in the midst of the garden of Eden, and their attempts to
cultivate and preserve the memory of it; but there is reason to believe
that their religious rites would be performed in the center, or most
shady part of the grove.

Eating swine's flesh - That is, in connection with their public worship
(see the notes at [Isa 65:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#004)).

And the abomination - The thing which is held as abominable or
detestable in the law of God. Thus the creeping thing and the reptile
were regarded as abominations [Lev
11:41-42](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#041). They were not to be eaten;
still less were they to be offered in sacrifice (compare [Exo
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#026); [Deu
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#016); [Deu
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#017); see the notes at [Isa
65:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#003)).

And the mouse - The Hebrew word used here means the dormouse - a small
field-mouse. Jerome understands it as meaning the glis, a small mouse
that was regarded as a great delicacy by the Romans. They were carefully
kept and fattened for food (see Varro, De Rust., iii. 15). Bochart
(Hieroz., i. 3, 34) supposes that the name used here is of Chaldaic
origin, and that it denotes a field-mouse. Mice abounded in the East,
and were often exceedingly destructive in Syria (see Bochart; compare
[Sa1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#004)). Strabo mentions that so
vast a multitude of mice sometimes invaded Spain as to produce a
pestilence; and in some parts of Italy, the number of field-mice was so
great that the inhabitants were forced to abandon the country. It was
partly on account of its destructive character that it was held in
abomination by the Hebrews. Yet it would seem that it was eaten by
idolaters; and was, perhaps, used either in their sacrifices or in their
incantations (see the notes at [Isa
65:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#004)). Vitringa supposes that the
description in this verse is applicable to the time of Herod, and that
it refers to the number of pagan customs and institutions which were
introduced under his auspices. But this is by no means certain. It may
be possible that it is a general description of idolatry, and of
idolaters as the enemies of God, and that the idea is, that God would
come with vengeance to cut off all his foes.

[Isaiah 66:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 66:18</span></span>

For I know their works - The word 'know,' says Lowth, is here evidently
left out of the Hebrew text, leaving the sense quite imperfect. It is
found in the Syriac; the Chaldee evidently had that word in the copy of
the Hebrew which was used; and the Aldine and Complutensian editions of
the Septuagint have the word. Its insertion is necessary in order to
complete the sense; though the proof is not clear that the word was ever
in the Hebrew text. The sense is, that though their abominable rites
were celebrated in the deepest recesses of the groves, yet they were not
concealed from God.

That I will gather all nations and tongues - They who speak all
languages (compare [Rev 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009); [Rev
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#011); [Rev
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#009)). The sense is, that the period
would come when Yahweh would collect all nations to witness the
execution of his vengeance on his foes.

And see my glory - That is, the manifestation of my perfections in the
great events referred to here - the destruction of his enemies, and the
deliverance of his people. To what particular period this refers has
been a point on which expositors are by no means agreed. Grotius says it
means, that such shall be the glory of the Jewish people that all
nations shall desire to come and make a covenant with them. The Jewish
interpreters, and among them Abarbanel (see Vitringa), suppose that it
refers to a hostile and warlike assembling of all nations in the time of
the Messiah, who, say they, shall attack Jerusalem with the Messiah in
it, and shall be defeated. They mention particularly that the Turks and
Christians shall make war on Jerusalem and on the true Messiah, but that
they shall be overthrown. Vitringa supposes that it refers to the
assembling of the nations when the gospel should be at first proclaimed,
and when they should be called into the kingdom of God. Many of the
fathers referred it to the final judgment. It is difficult to determine,
amidst this variety of opinion, what is the true meaning. Opinions are
easily given, and conjectures are easily made; and the opinions referred
to above are entitled to little more than the appellation of conjecture.
It seems to me, that there is involved here the idea of the judgment or
punishment on the enemies of God, and at about the same time a
collecting of the nations not only to witness the punishment, but also
to become participants of his favor. In some future time, Yahweh would
manifest himself as the punisher of his enemies, and all the nations
also would be permitted to behold his glory, as if they were assembled
together.

[Isaiah 66:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 66:19</span></span>

And I will set a sign among them - (See the notes at [Isa
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012); [Isa
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#003)). On the meaning of the word
'sign' (אות 'ôth), see the notes at [Isa
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#011). What is its meaning here is to
be determined by the connection. That would seem to me to require some
such interpretation as this: That when God should come [Isa
66:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#017) to take vengeance on his
foes, and to manifest his glory, he would establish some mark or
memorial; would erect some standard, or give some signal, by which his
true friends would escape, and that he would send them to distant
nations to proclaim his truth and gather together those who had not seen
his glory. What that sign should be, he does not here say. Whether a
standard, a secret communication, or some intimation beforehand, by
which they should know the approaching danger and make their escape, is
not declared. It is by no means easy to determine with certainty on this
passage; and it certainly becomes no one to speak dogmatically or very
confidently.

But it seems to me that the whole passage may have been intended, by the
Holy Spirit, to refer to the propagation of the gospel by the apostles.
The heavy judgments referred to may have been the impending calamities
over Jerusalem. The glory of God referred to, may have been the signal
manifestation of his perfections at that period in the approaching
destruction of the city, and in the wonders that attended the coming of
the Messiah. The gathering of the nations [Isa
66:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#018) may possibly refer to the
collecting together of numerous people from all parts of the earth about
that time; that is, either the assembled people at the time of the
Saviour's death [Act 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#008), [Act
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#011), or the gathering of the armies
of the Romans - a commingled multitude from all nations - to inflict
punishment on the Jewish nation, and to behold the manifestation of the
divine justice in the destruction of the guilty Jewish capital.

The 'sign' here referred to, may denote the intimations which the
Redeemer gave to his disciples to discern these approaching calamities,
and to secure their safety by flight when they should be about to appear
[Mat 24:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015). By these warnings and
previous intimations they were to be preserved. The sign was 'among
them,' that is, in the very midst of the nation; and the object of the
intimation was, to secure their safety, and the speedy propagation of
the true religion among all nations. Deeply sensible that there is great
danger of erring here, and that the above view may be viewed as mere
conjecture, I cannot, however, help regarding it as the true exposition.
If there is error in it, it may be pardoned, for it will probably be
felt by most readers of these notes that there has not been a too
frequent reference in the interpretation proposed to the times of the
Christian dispensation.

And I will send those that escape of them - According to the
interpretation suggested above, this refers to the portion of the Jewish
nation that should escape from the tokens of the divine displeasure;
that is, to the apostles and the early disciples of the Redeemer. The
great mass of the nation would be abandoned and devoted to destruction.
But a remnant would be saved (compare [Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009); [Isa
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011), [Isa
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#016)). Of that remnant, God would
send a portion to make his name known to those who had not heard it, and
they would lead distant nations to the knowledge of his truth. The whole
passage is so accurately descriptive of what occurred in the times when
the gospel was first preached to the pagan world, that there can be
little danger of error in referring it to those times. Compare Vitringa
on the passage for a more full view of the reasons of this
interpretation. The names of the places which follow are designed to
specify the principal places where the message would be sent, and stand
here as representatives of the whole pagan world.

To Tarshish - (See the notes at [Isa
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#016); [Isa
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001); [Isa
60:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019)). Tarshish was one of the most
distant seaports known to the Hebrews; and whether it be regarded as
situated in Spain, or in the East Indies, or south of Abyssinia (see the
notes above) it equally denotes a distant place, and the passage means
that the message would be borne to the most remote regions.

Pul - This is supposed to denote some region in Africa. Jerome renders
it, 'Africa.' The Septuagint, Φοὺδ Foud - 'Phud.' Bochart, Phaleg. iv.
26, supposes that it means Philae, a large island in the Nile, between
Egypt and Ethiopia; called by the Egyptians Pilak, i e., the border, or
far country (see Champollion, l'Egypte, i. 158). There are still on that
island remains of some very noble and extensive temples built by the
ancient Egyptians.

And Lud - Jerome renders this, 'Lydia.' The Septuagint 'Lud.' There was
a Lydia in Asia Minor - the kingdom of the celebrated Croesus; but it is
generally supposed that this place was in Africa. Ludim was a son of
Mizraim [Gen 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#013), and the name
Ludim, or Lybians, referring to a people, several times occurs in the
Bible [Jer 46:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#009); [Eze
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#010); [Eze
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#005). These African Lybians are
commonly mentioned in connection with Pul, Ethiopia, and Phut. Bochart
supposes that Abyssinia is intended, but it is by no means certain that
this is the place referred to. Josephus affirms that the descendants of
Ludim are long since extinct, having been destroyed in the Ethiopian
wars. It is clear that some part of Egypt is intended, says Calmer, but
it is not easy to show exactly where they dwelt.

That draw the bow - (קשׁת משׁכי moshekēy qeshet). The Septuagint here
renders the Hebrew phrase simply by Μοσὸχ Mosoch,' understanding it of a
place. Lowth supposes that the Hebrew phrase is a corruption of the word
Moschi, the name of a nation situated between the Euxine and the Caspian
seas. But there is no authority for supposing, as he does, that the word
'bow' has been interpolated. The Chaldee renders it, 'Drawing and
smiting with the bow.' The idea is, that the nations here referred to
were distinguished for the use of thw bow. The bow was in common use in
wars; and it is by no means improbable that at that time they had
acquired special fame in the use of this weapon.

To Tubal - Tubal was the fifth son of Japhet, and is here joined with
Javan because they were among the settlers of Europe. The names before
mentioned together relate to Africa, and the sense there is, that the
message should be sent to Africa; here the idea is, that it should be
sent to Europe. Tubal is commonly united with Meshech, and it is
supposed that they populated countries bordering on each other. Bochart
labors to prove that by Meshech and Tubal are intended the Muscovites
and the Tibarenians. The Tibarenians of the Greeks were the people
inhabiting the country south of the Caucasus, between the Black Sea and
the Araxes. Josephus says, that 'Tubal obtained the Thobelians (Θωβήλους
Thōbēlous) who are reckoned among the Iberians.' Jerome renders it,
'Italy.' It is not possible to determine with certainty the country that
is referred to, though some part of Europe is doubtless intended.

And Javan - Jerome renders this, 'Greece.' So the Septuagint, Εἰς τήν
Ἑλλάδα Eis tēn Hellada - 'To Greece.' Javan was the fourth son of
Japhet, and was the father of the Ionians and the Greeks [Gen
10:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#002). The word 'Ionia,' Greek Ἰων
Iōn, Ἰωνία Iōnia, is evidently derived from the word rendered here
'Javan' (יון yâvân), and in the Scriptures the word comprehends all the
countries inhabited by the descendants of Javan, as well in Greece as in
Asia Minor. Ionia properly was the beautiful province on the western
part of Asia Minor - a country much celebrated in the Greek classics for
its fertility and the salubrity of its climate - but the word used here
includes all of Greece. Thus Daniel [Dan
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#002), speaking of Xerxes, says, 'He
shall stir up all against the realm of Javan.' Alexander the Great is
descried by the same prophet as 'king of Javan' [Dan
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#021); [Dan
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#020). The Hindus call the Greeks
Yavanas - the ancient Hebrew appellation. It is needless to say, on the
supposition that this refers to the propagation of the gospel by the
apostles, that it was fulfilled. They went to Greece and to Asia Minor
in the very commencement of their labors, and seme of the earliest and
most flourishing churches were founded in the lands that were settled by
the descendants of Javan.

To the isles afar off - (See the notes at [Isa
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001)).

That have not heard my fame - Hebrew, 'Who have not heard my report,'
that is, who were ignorant of the true God.

Neither have seen my glory - The glory which he had manifested to the
Hebrews in giving his law, and in the various exhibitions of his
character and perfections among them.

[Isaiah 66:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 66:20</span></span>

And they shall bring all your brethren - That is, as great success shall
attend them as if they should bring back all who had gone there when
scattered abroad, and should present them as an offering to Yahweh. The
image here is taken from the scene which would be presented, should the
distant nations be seen bringing the scattered exiles in all lands on
horses, and on palanquins, and on dromedaries, again to Jerusalem, and
presenting them before Yahweh in the city where they formerly dwelt. It
is the image of a vast caravan, conducted by the pagan world when they
had become tributary to the people of God, and when they united to
return them to their own land. The spiritual signification is, that all
they who should be appropriately called, brethren,' all who should be
the true friends of God, should be brought and offered to Yahweh; that
is, there should be a great accession to the people of God from the
pagan world.

For an offering unto the Lord. - Hebrew, מנחה minchāh - not a bloody
offering or sacrifice: but an offering such as was made by flour, oil,
etc. (see the notes at [Isa 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013).)

Out of all nations - The truth shall be proclaimed in all lands, and a
vast accession shall be made from all parts of the world to the true
church of God. To understand this description, we must form an idea of
immense caravans proceeding from distant parts of the world to
Jerusalem, bearing along the converts to the true religion to be
dedicated to the service of Yahweh.

Upon horses - Horses were little used by the Hebrews (see the notes at
[Isa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#007)), but they are much used by
the Arabs, and form an important part of the caravan that goes to
distant places.

And in chariots - (Compare the notes at [Isa
66:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#015)). It is, however, by no means
certain that the word used here refers to a wheeled vehicle, Such
vehicles were not used in caravans. The editor of the Ruins of Palmyra
tells us that the caravan they formed to go to that place, consisted of
about two hundred persons, and about the same number of beasts of
carriage, which were an odd mixture of horses, camels, mules, and asses;
but there is no account of any vehicle drawn on wheels in that
expedition, nor do we find an account of such things in other eastern
journeys (Harmer). Coaches, Dr. Russel assures us, are not in use in
Aleppo, nor are they commonly used in any of the countries of the East.
The Hebrew word used here (רכב rekeb), means properly riding - riders,
cavalry (see it explained in the notes at [Isa
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#007)); then any vehicle for riding -
whether a wagon, chariot, or litter. Lowth renders it, 'In litters.'
Pitts, in his account of the return from Mecca, describes a species of
litter which was borne by two camels, one before and another behind,
which was all covered over with searcloth, and that again with green
broadcloth, and which was elegantly adorned. It is not improbable that
some such vehicle is intended here, as it is certain that such things as
wagons or chariots are not found in oriental caravans.

And in litters - Margin, 'Coaches.' But the word litters more properly
expresses the idea. Lowth renders it, 'Counes.' Thevenot tells us that
counes are hampers, or cradles, carried upon the backs of camels, one on
each side, having a back, head, and sides, like great chairs. A covering
is commonly laid over them to protect the rider from wind and rain. This
is a common mode of traveling in the East. The coune, or hamper, is
thrown across the back of the camel, somewhat in the manner of
saddle-bags with us. Sometimes a person sits on each side, and they thus
balance each other, and sometimes the end in which the person is placed
is balanced by provisions, or articles of furniture in the other. 'At
Aleppo,' says Dr. Russel, 'women of inferior condition in long journeys
are commonly stowed, one on each side of a mule, in a sort of covered
cradles.' The Hebrew word used here (צב tsab), means properly a litter,
a sedan coach - what can be lightly or gently borne.

The Septuagint renders it, Ἐν λαμπήναις ἡμιόνων μετὰ σκιαδίων En
lampēnais hēmionōn meta skiadiōn - 'In litters of mules, with shades or
umbrellas.' Perhaps the following description of a scene in the khan at
Acre, will afford an apt illustration of this passage. 'The bustle was
increased this morning by the departure of the wives of the governor of
Jaffa. They set off in two coaches of a curious description, common in
this country. The body of the coach was raised on two parallel poles,
somewhat similar to those used for sedan chairs only that in these the
poles were attached to the lower par; of the coach - throwing
consequently the center of gravity much higher, and apparently exposing
the vehicle, with its veiled tenant, to an easy overthrow, or at least
to a very active jolt. Between the poles strong mules were harnessed,
one before and one behind; who, if they should prove capricious, or have
very uneven or mountainous ground to pass, would render the situation of
the ladies still more critical.' (Jowett's Christian Researches in
Syria, pp. 115, 116, Amos Ed.)

And upon swift beasts - Dromedaries. So Lowth and Noyes render it; and
so the word used here - כרכרות kirekârôt - properly denotes. The word is
derived from כיר kārar, to dance; and the name is given to them for
their bounding or dancing motion, their speed being also sometimes
accelerated by musical instruments (Bochart, Hieroz. i. 2, 4). For a
description of the dromedary, see the notes at [Isa
60:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#006).

As the children of Israel - As the Jews bear an offering to Yahweh in a
vessel that is pure, The utmost attention was paid to the cleanliness of
their vessels in their public worship.

[Isaiah 66:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 66:21</span></span>

And I will also take of them for priests - I will give to them an
honorable place in my public service; that is, I will make them
ministers of religion as if they were priests and Levites. This cannot
be taken literally - because the priests and Levites among the Jews were
determined by law, and by regular genealogical descent, and there was no
provision for substituting any in their place. But it must mean that
under the condition of things described here, those who should be
brought from the distant pagan world would perform the same offices in
the service of God which had been performed formerly by the priests and
Levites that is, they would be ministers of religion. The services of
God would no longer be performed by the descendants of Aaron, or be
limited to them, but would be performed by others who should be called
to this office from the pagan world.

[Isaiah 66:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 66:22</span></span>

For as the new heavens and the new earth - (See the notes at [Isa
65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017)).

Shall remain before me - They shall not pass away and be succeeded by
others. The idea is, that the state of things here described would be
permanent and abiding.

So shall your seed and your name remain - (See the notes at [Isa
65:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#015)).

[Isaiah 66:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 66:23</span></span>

And it shall come to pass - As the prophet closes the book and winds up
his whole prophecy, he directs the attention to that future period which
had occupied so much of his attention in vision, when the whole world
should be acquainted with the true religion, and all nations should
worship Yahweh. Of such a book there could be no more appropriate close;
and such a contemplation especially became the last prophetic moments of
the 'evangelical prophet' Isaiah.

From one new moon to another - Margin, 'New moon to his new moon.' The
Hebrew literally is, 'As often as the month cometh in its month;' that
is, in its time, every month, every new moon (Gesenius, Lexicon, on the
word מדי midēy). The Hebrews held a festival on the return of each
month, or at every new moon (see the notes at [Isa
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#014)). A similar prophecy occurs in
[Zac 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#016) : 'And it shall come to
pass, that every one that is left of all the nations which came up
against Jerusalem, shall even go up from year to year to worship the
King, the Lord of hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles.' In
regard to the meaning of this, it is evident that it cannot be taken
literally. In the nature of things it would be impossible for all
nations to go literally before Yahweh in Jerusalem once a month, or once
a year, to worship. It must then be meant that at periodical seasons,
all the human family would worship Yahweh. The festivals of the new
moon, the feast of tabernacles, and the sabbaths, were the set time
among the Hebrews for the worship of God; and the idea is, that on set
times, or at regularly recurring intervals, the worship of God would yet
be celebrated in all lands. I see no evidence, therefore, that this
means that there should be established on the earth the habit of meeting
for prayer, or for the worship of God once a month - anymore than the
passage above quoted from Zechariah proves that a feast like that of
tabernacles would be celebrated once a year. But the idea is clear, that
the time would come when Yahweh would be worshipped regularly and
periodically everywhere; that in all nations his worship would be
established in a manner similar in some respects to that which prevailed
among his people in ancient times.

And from one Sabbath to another - (Compare the notes at [Isa
58:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#013)). There can be no permanent
worship of God, and no permanent religion on earth, without a Sabbath;
and hence it was, that while the observance of the feasts of
tabernacles, and of the Passover, and of the new moons, made a part of
the ceremonial law, the law respecting the sabbaths was incorporated
with the ten commandments as of moral and perpetual obligation; and it
will be literally true that all the race shall yet be brought to worship
God on the return of that holy day. It was instituted in paradise; and
as one design of the plan of redemption is to bring man back to the
state in which he was in paradise, so one effect of the true religion
everywhere will be, and is, to make people reverence the Sabbath of the
Lord. No man becomes truly pious who does not love the holy Sabbath. No
nation ever has been, or ever can be converted which will not, and which
does not, love and observe that day. Every successful effort to
propagate the true religion is a successful effort to extend the
practice of observing it; and just as certain as it is that Christianity
will be spread around the world, so cerrain will it be that the Sabbath
will be observed in all lands. The period is, therefore, yet to arrive
when the delightful spectacle will be presented of all the nations of
the earth bowing on the return of that day before the living God. The
plans of this life will be suspended; toil and care will be laid aside;
and the sun, as he rolls around the world, will rouse nation after
nation to the worship of the true God; and the peace and order and
loveliness of the Christian Sabbath will spread over all the hills and
vales of the world. Who that loves the race will not desire that such a
period may soon come? Who can wonder that Isaiah should have fixed his
eye in the close of his prophetic labors on a scene so full of
loveliness, and so replete with honor to God, and with goodwill to
people?

Shall all flesh - All the human family, all nations - a most unequivocal
promise that the true religion shall yet prevail around the world.

Come to worship before me - That is, they shall assemble for the worship
of God in their respective places of devotion.

[Isaiah 66:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 66:24</span></span>

And they shall go forth - The sense of this verse evidently is, that the
pious and happy worshippers of God shall see the punishment which he
will execute on his and their foes, or shall see them finally destroyed.
It refers to the time when the kingdom of God shall be finally and
perpetually established, and when all the mighty enemies of that kingdom
shall be subdued and punished. The image is probably taken from a scene
where a people whose lands have been desolated by mighty armies are
permitted to go forth after a decisive battle to walk over the fields of
the slain, and to see the dead and the putrifying bodies of their once
formidable enemies.

And look upon the carcasses of the men - The dead bodies of the foes of
God (see [Isa 66:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#015)).

For their worm shall not die - This image is evidently taken from the
condition of unburied bodies, and especially on a battlefield. The
Hebrew word (תולע tôlâ‛) properly refers to the worms which are
generated in such corrupting bodies (see [Exo
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#020); the notes at [Isa
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#011)). It is sometimes applied to the
worm from which the crimson or deep scarlet color was obtained (the
notes at [Isa 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)); but it more
properly denotes that which is produced in putrid substances. This
entire passage is applied by the Saviour to future punishment; and is
the fearful image which he employs to denote the final suffering of the
wicked in hell. My views on its meaning may be seen in the notes at [Mar
9:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044), [Mar
9:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#046).

Neither shall their fire be quenched - The fire that shall consume them
shall burn perpetually. This image is taken evidently from the fires
kindled, especially in the valley of Hinnom, to consume puffed and
decaying substances. That was a valley on the south side of Jerusalem,
into which the filth of the city was thrown. It was the place where,
formerly, an image of brass was raised to Moloch, and where children
were offered in sacrifice [Kg2 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#003);
[Ch2 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#003). See a description of this
in the notes at [Mat 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022). This place
was subsequently regarded as a place of special abomination by the Jews.
The filth of the city was thrown there, and it became extremely
offensive. The air was polluted and pestilential; the sight was
terrific; and to preserve it in any manner pure, it was necessary to
keep fires continually burning there. The extreme loathsomeness of the
place, the filth and putrefaction, the corruption of the atmosphere, and
the lurid fires blazing by day and by night, made it subsequently one of
the most appalling and loathsome objects with which a Jew was
acquainted.

It was called the gehenna of fire, and was the image which the Saviour
often employed to denote the future punishment of the wicked. In that
deep and loathsome vale it seems to have been the common expectation of
the Jews that some great battle would be fought which would establish
the supremacy of their nation over all others. Hence, the Chaldee
renders this, 'They shall go forth, and shall look upon the dead bodies
of the sinners who have rebelled against my word; because their souls
shall not die, and their fire shall not be extinguished; and the wicked
shall be judged in Gehenna (בגיהנם begēyhı̂nâm from גי gay and הנם
hinnôm, hence coming down into Greek as γέεννα geenna), until the
righteous shall say, We have seen enough.' It is, however, by no means
certain that Isaiah refers here especially to the valley of Hinnom. The
image in his mind is evidently that of a vast army slain, and left to
putrify on the field unburied, and where fires would be kindled in part
to consume the heaps of the slain, and in part to save the air from
pestilential influences, All the enemies of God and his church would be
like such a vast host strewed on the plains, and the perpetuity of his
kingdom would be finally established.

And they shall be an abhorring - An object of loathing. So the Hebrew
word דראון dêrâ'ôn, means. It is derived from דרא dârâ', an obsolete
root, signifying, in Arabic, to thrust away, to repel. Jerome renders
it, Ad satietatem visionis - understanding by it, that all flesh should
look upon those dead bodies Until they were satisfied. The Septuagint,
Εἰς ὅρασιν Eis horasin - 'For a vision;' or that all flesh might look
upon them. It is evident that the Septuagint reads the word as if it
were derived from the verb ראה râ'âh), "to see."

Unto all flesh - (See [Isa 66:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#023)). The
sense is, that so entire would be their overthrow, and such objects of
loathing would they become, that all the friends of God would turn from
them in abhorrence. All the enemies of God would be destroyed; the pure
religion would triumph, and the people of God would be secure.

It may be made a question, perhaps, to what period this refers. The
Saviour [Mar 9:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044), [Mar
9:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#046), applied the language to the
future punishment of the wicked, and no one, I think, can doubt that in
Isaiah it includes that consummation of worldly affairs. The radical and
essential idea in the prophet is, as it seems to me, that such would be
the entire overthrow and punishment of the enemies of God; so condign
their punishment; so deep their sufferings; so loathsome and hateful
would they be when visited with the divine vengeance for their sins,
that they would be an object of loathing and abhorrence. They would be
swept off as unworthy to live with God, and they would be consigned to
punishment - loathsome like that of ever gnawing worms on the carcasses
of the slain, and interminable and dreadful like everconsuming and
extinguishable fires.

This is the consummation of the series of bright visions that passed
before the mind of Isaiah, and is an appropriate termination of this
succession of wonderful revelations. Where could it more appropriately
close than in the final triumph of the true religion, and in the
complete and final destruction of all the enemies of Gods. The vision
stretches on to the judgment, and is closed by a contemplation of those
scenes which commence there, but which never end. The church is
triumphant. Its conflicts cease. Its foes are slain. Its Redeemer is
revealed; and its everlasting happiness is founded on a basis which can
never be shaken.

Here I close my labors in endeavoring to elucidate the visions of this
wonderful prophet. I thank God - the source of every right feeling and
every holy desire, and the suggester of every plan that will in any way
elucidate his word or promote his glory - that he ever inclined my heart
to these studies. I thank him for the preservation of my life, and the
continuance of my health, until I am permitted to bring this work to a
close. I record, with grateful emotions, my deep conviction, that if in
any way I have been enabled to explain that which was before dark; to
illustrate that which was obscure; or to present any views which have
not before occurred to those who may peruse this work, it is owing to
the gracious influences of his Holy Spirit. And I desire to render
thanks to the Great Source of light and truth, if I have been enabled to
throw any light on the prophecies recorded here more than 2500 years
ago; or to confirm the faith of any in the truth of the inspiration of
the Bible by tracing the evidences of the fulfillment of those
predictions.

And I now commend the work to the blessing of God, and devote it to the
glory of his name and to the advancement of the Redeemer's kingdom, with
a humble prayer that it may be useful to other minds; but with the deep
conviction, that whatever may be its effect on other minds, I have been
abundantly compensated for all my labor in the contemplation of the
inimitable beauties, and the sublime visions of Isaiah. thanks to God
for this book; thanks for all its beauties, its consolations, its
promises, its views of the Messiah, its predictions of the certain
triumph of truth, and its glowing descriptions of the future conquest of
the church, when God shall extend to it 'peace like a river, and the
glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream.' Come soon that blessed
day, when 'the ransomed of the Lord shall return to Zion, with songs and
everlasting joy upon their heads' [Isa
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#010); when 'the wilderness and the
solitary place shall be glad, and the desert shall rejoice and blossom
as the rose' [Isa 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001); and when it
shall be announced to the church, 'thy sun shall no more go down;
neither shall thy moon withdraw itself, for Yahweh shall be thine
everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended' [Isa
60:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#020).

May I be permitted to close my labors on this book in the beautiful
language of Vitringa? 'These words [Isa
66:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#023) express the final doom of the
two opposite classes of people, the righteous and the wicked, when,
after various preparatory judgments of God, the fates of all ages, and
our own also, shall be determined; with which also this divine book of
Isaiah itself is terminated.

Be it our lot, with those who are holy; with those who fear God and love
the truth; with the humble, meek, and merciful, and with those who
persevere in every good work to the end of life, from the gracious
sentence of our great Lord, Saviour, and Judge, Jesus Christ, to obtain,
by the will of the Father, the same portion with them. In which hope, I
also, now deeply affected, and prostrate before his throne, give humble
thanks to God the Father, and his Son Christ Jesus, through the Spirit,
for the grace and light with which he has endowed me, his unworthy
servant, in commencing and completing the commentary on this book;
entreating, with earnest prayer, of his grace and mercy, that, pardoning
those errors into which erroneously I may have fallen, he will employ
this work, such as it is, to the glory of his name, the use of the
church, and the consolation of his people; and to Him be the glory
throughout all ages.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Introduction](jer000)

</div>
