<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa008)  [Next](isa010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 9:0</span></span>

This chapter Isa. 9 is a continuation of the prophecy begun in Isa. 7,
and continued in Isa. 8. It is composed of mingled threats and promises.
Its characteristic may be said to be "rays of light thrown into the
midst of shades." It promises comfort and deliverance, while at the same
time it denounces the sins of the nation, and assures the nation that
the anger of the Lord is not turned away. The previous chapter had
closed by describing a time of general calamity and darkness. This
begins [Isa 9:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001.md) by showing that the
calamity would not be so great as in former times. It would be
mitigated. There would be light - particularly in the dark regions of
Zebulun and Naphtali - the provinces lying most exposed to the Syrian
invasion. This light or deliverance was connected with the birth of the
promised child [Isa 9:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md); and the
mention of this leads the prophet into a magnificent description of his
names, character, and reign. The prophet then returns to the threatened
destruction of Israel and denounces the divine judgment against it. By
the Syrians and the Philistines it would be invaded and destroyed, [Isa
9:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#008.md). The effects of this, in
cutting off their sources of strength, and producing general dismay and
ruin, are described in the remainder of the chapter, [Isa
9:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013.md). The chapter, therefore, would
impart consolation to the inhabitants of Judah, and is designed to
confirm the promise that it should be safe from the threatened invasion;
compare [Isa 8:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001.md).

[Isaiah 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 9:1</span></span>

Nevertheless - Notwithstanding what is said in the previous chapter of
the calamities that are coming upon Israel. Hengstenberg renders this
whole verse: 'For darkness shall not be upon the land upon which there
is distress; as the former time has dishonored the land of Zebulun and
the land of Naphtali; so shall the time come to honor it, the region on
the border of the sea, by the side of the Jordan, Galilee of the
Gentiles.'

The dimness - The Hebrew word hero denotes obscurity, or darkness; and
is used here, as the word darkness often is in the Scriptures, to denote
calamity or affliction. The dimness, or calamity, here referred to, is
that which is threatened, [Isa
8:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#021.md).

Shall not be such - It shall not be unbroken darkness, and unalleviated
calamity; but it shall be interrupted by the rising of the great light
that shall shine on the dark land of Zebulun and Naphtali.

In her vexation - The word 'her' refers to the whole land of Palestine,
to the afflictions that came upon the whole region. The word vexation,
מוצק mûtsâq means oppression, calamity, or being "straitened, or
pressed."

When at the first - In the former time; on a former occasion.

He lightly afflicted - The word used here, קלל qâlal, means properly, to
be, or make light, or small; and in Hiphil, the form which occurs here,
it often means to "esteem lightly, to despise, to hold in contempt;"
[Sa2 19:43](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#043.md); [Eze
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#007.md). It probably has that sense here,
as the design of the prophet is evidently to speak, not of a light
affliction in the former time, but of a grievous, heavy calamity - a
calamity which would be well denoted by the expression, 'he made them
vile; he exposed them to contempt and derision.' The time to which
reference is made here, was probably the invasion of the land by
Tiglath-pileser; [Kg2 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029.md); [Ch1
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#026.md). In that invasion, the parts of
Zebulun and Naphtali were particularly afflicted. 'Tiglath-pileser took
Ijon, and Gilead, and Galilee, and all the land of Naphtali, and carried
them captive to Assyria;' [Kg2 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029.md).
This region had also been invaded by Benhadad two hundred years before
the time of Isaiah; [Kg1 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#020.md), and
there might have been a reference to these various invasions to which
this northern part of the land of Palestine had been subjected.

The land of Zebulun - The region occupied by the tribe of Zebulun. This
tribe was located between the sea of Tiberias, or the lake Gennesareth,
and the Mediterranean. It extended entirely across from the one to the
other, and as it was thus favored with a somewhat extended seacoast, the
people were more given to commerce than the other tribes, and hence,
mingled more with surrounding nations.

And the land of Naphtali - The region which was occupied by this tribe
was directly north of Zebulun, and of the sea of Galilee, having that
sea and the tribe of Zebulun on the south and southeast, Asher on the
west, and a part of the tribe of Manasseh, on the east.

And afterward - That is, in subsequent times; meaning times that were to
come after the prophecy here delivered. The previous part of the verse
refers to the calamities that had come upon that region in former times.
The expression here refers to what was seen by the prophet as yet to
occur.

Did more grievously afflict - הכביד hı̂kebbı̂yd. This verb has very
various significations. It properly means "to be heavy, to be grievous,
to lie or fall heavy on anyone, to be dull, obstinate; also, to be
honored, respected;" that is, of weight, or influence in society. It
means, in Hiphil, the form which is used here, "to make heavy, or
grievous;" [Kg1 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#010.md); [Isa
47:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#006.md); "to oppress," [Neh
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#015.md); and it also means to "cause to
be honored, or distinguished, to favor. - Gesenius." The connection
requires that it should have this sense here, and the passage means,
that the land which he had made vile in former times, or had suffered to
be despised, he had purposed to honor, or to render illustrious by the
great light that should rise on it. So Lowth, Rosenmuller, and Gesenius,
translate it; see a similar use of the word in [Jer
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#019.md); [Ch2
25:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#019.md); [Sa1
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030.md).

By the way of the sea - The sea of Galilee, or Gennesareth. All this
region was in the vicinity of that sea. The word "way" here, דרך derek,
means toward, or in the vicinity of. The extensive dark region lying in
the vicinity of that sea, Both those tribes bordered on the sea of
Tiberias, or had that as a part of their boundary.

Beyond Jordan - This expression - הירדן עבר ‛ēber hayareddēn - means in
the vicinity of Jordan; the land by the side of the Jordan, or perhaps
that large region through which the upper part of the Jordan passed. It
does not mean strictly on the east of Jordan, but rather the northern
portion of the land. It is such language as a man would use who was
describing the upper and imperfectly known regions of the country - the
dark, uncivilized region through which the upper part of the Jordan
flowed, and the word עבר ‛ēber, rendered here "beyond," means "side" -
by the side of the Jordan.

Galilee of the nations - This was sometimes called upper Galilee. It was
called 'Galilee of the nations,' or of the Gentiles, because it was
surrounded by them, and because the pagan were extensively intermingled
with the Jews. In this region, Solomon had given to Hiram, king of Tyre,
twenty cities; [Kg1 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#002.md). Adjacent to
this region were the countries of Phenicia, Tyre, and Sidon; and the
people would naturally mingle much with them in commerce. The country
abounded with hills and caverns, and, consequently, it was never
possible completely to dislodge from the fastnesses the former
inhabitants of the land. Strabo enumerates among the inhabitants of
Galilee, Arabians and Phenicians. The inhabitants of this country are
represented as having been bold and courageous, but as seditious, and
prone to insolence and rebellion. If it be asked here, in what way this
land had been made contemptible, or why it was regarded as an object of
contempt? we may reply,

\(1\) The district in which these two tribes dwelt constituted the
border-land toward the pagan nations.

\(2\) The Galileans not only dwelt in the vicinity of the pagan, but a
large number of them had actually remained in the country, and it had
been found impossible to expel them from it; [Jdg
1:30-35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#030.md).

\(3\) The Phenicians, with whom they held commercial contact, and with
whom they dwelt intermingled, were among the most corrupt of the pagan
nations. To this may be added,

\(4\) They were far from Jerusalem, and, consequently, the influence of
religion may be supposed to have been less felt among them than among
the other Jews. The true religion was, in a great measure, lost upon
them, and ignorance and superstition took its place. Hence, in the New
Testament, they are spoken of as almost proverbially rude and ignorant.

[Isaiah 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 9:2</span></span>

The people that walked in darkness - The inhabitants of the region of
Galilee. They were represented as walking in darkness, because they were
far from the capital, and from the temple; they had few religious
privileges; they were intermingled with the pagan, and were
comparatively rude and uncultivated in their manners and in their
language. Allusion to this is several times made in the New Testament;
[Joh 1:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#046.md) : 'Can any good thing come
out of Nazareth?' [Joh 7:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#052.md) : 'Search
and look, for out of Galilee ariseth no prophet;' [Mat
26:69](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#069.md); [Mar
14:70](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#070.md). The word walked here is
synonymous with lived, and denotes that thick darkness brooded over the
country, so that they lived, or walked amidst it.

Have seen a great light - Light is not only an emblem of knowledge in
the Scriptures, but of joy, rejoicing, and deliverance. It stands
opposed to moral darkness, and to times of judgment and calamity. What
is the particular reference here, is not agreed by expositors. The
immediate connection seems to require us to understand it of deliverance
from the calamities that were impending over the nation then. They would
be afflicted, but they would be delivered. The tribes of Israel would be
carried captive away; and Judah would also be removed. This calamity
would particularly affect the ten tribes of Israel - the northern part
of the land, the regions of Galilee - "for those tribes would be carried
away not to return." Yet this region also would be favored with a
especially striking manifestation of light. I see no reason to doubt
that the language of the prophet here is adapted to extend into that
future period when the Messiah should come to that dark region, and
become both its light and its deliverer. Isaiah may have referred to the
immediate deliverance of the nation from impending calamities, but there
is a fullness and richness of the language that seems to be applicable
only to the Messiah. So it is evidently understood in [Mat
4:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013.md).

They that dwell - The same people are referred to here as in the former
member of the verse.

In the land of the shadow of death - This is a most beautiful
expression, and is special to the Hebrew poets. The word צלמות
tsalmâveth, is exceedingly poetical. The idea is that of death, as a
dark substance or being, casting a long and chilly shade over the land -
standing between the land and the light - and thus becoming the image of
ignorance, misery, and calamity. It is often used, in the Scriptures, to
describe those regions that were lying as it were in the penumbra of
this gloomy object, and exposed to all the chills and sorrows of this
melancholy darkness. Death, by the Hebrews, was especially represented
as extending his long and baleful shadow ever the regions of departed
spirits; [Job 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#017.md) :

Have the gates of death been opened to thee?

Hast thou seen the gates of the shadow of death?

Before I go - I shall not return -

To the land of darkness

And of the shadow of death.

[Job 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#021.md)

It is thus an image of chills, and gloom, and night - of anything that
resembles the still and mournful regions of the dead. The Chaldee
renders these two verses thus: 'In a former time Zebulun and Naphtali
emigrated; and those who remained after them a strong king shall carry
into captivity, because they did not remember the power which was shown
in the Red Sea, and the miracles which were done in Jordan, and the wars
of the people of the cities. The people of the house of Israel who
walked in Egypt as in the midst of shades, came out that they might see
a great light.'

[Isaiah 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 9:3</span></span>

Thou hast multiplied the nation - Thou hast rendered the nation strong,
powerful, mighty. Several interpreters, as Calvin, Vitringa, and Le
Clerc, suppose that the prophet here, and in the two following verses,
speaks in the first instance of the prosperity near at hand, and of the
rapid increase of the Israelites after the return from the Babylonian
exile, in which the inhabitants of Galilee must have participated, as
may be inferred from the accounts of Josephus respecting the great
population of that province in his time; see Jewish Wars, i. 20, 23.
Vitringa also directs our attention to the fact, that the Jewish people,
after the exile, not only filled Judea, but spread themselves into
Egypt, Syria, Mesopotamia, Asia Minor, Greece, and Italy. But there
seems to be no necessity for referring it to such an increase of the
inhabitants. It may refer to the great increase of the Messiah's
kingdom, or of the kingdom which he would set up, and whose commencement
would be in Galilee; see Hengstenberg, Christol., vol. i. p. 354.

And not increased the joy - The Masoretes here read in the margin לו lô
"to it," instead of לא lo' "not." Eleven manuscripts, two of them
ancient, have this reading. This reading is followed by the Chaldee
Paraphrase, the Syriac, and the Arabic. The Septuagint seems also to
have so understood it. So also it is in the margin, and so the
connection demands; and it is unquestionably the correct reading. It
would then read, 'thou hast increased for it (the nation) the joy.'
Hengstenberg, however, suggests that the phrase may mean, 'whose joy
thou didst not before enlarge,' that is, upon whom thou hast before
inflicted heavy sufferings. But this is harsh, and I see no reason to
doubt that an error may have crept into the text.

They joy before thee according to the joy of harvest - This is a
beautiful figure; and is found frequently in ancient writings. The
harvest was a time of exultation and joy, and was commonly gathered amid
songs and rejoicings, and concluded with a festival. The phrase 'before
thee' refers to the fact that the first-fruits of the harvest among the
Hebrews were presented with thanksgiving before God in the temple; [Deu
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#007.md); [Deu
14:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#022.md).

And as men rejoice ... - This is also an expression of great joy and
rejoicing. Such an occasion, at the close of a battle, when great spoil
or plunder had been taken, would be one of great rejoicing; see [Jdg
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#030.md); [Sa1
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#016.md); [Ch2
20:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#025.md).

[Isaiah 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 9:4</span></span>

For thou hast broken - This verse, and the following, show the way in
which the occasion of the joy had been furnished. The expression 'thou
hast' does not necessarily refer to the past, but is a form of
expression derived from the nature of the prophetic visions, where that
is described as past which is seen to pass before the eyes of the
prophet; see the Introduction, section 7.

The yoke - This word is often used to denote oppression, or tyranny;
[Lev 26:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#013.md); [Deu
28:48](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#048.md) - where oppression is described
as 'an iron yoke;' compare [Kg1 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#004.md);
[Isa 47:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#006.md); [Isa
58:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006.md).

The staff of his shoulder - The word rendered staff here may mean a
bough, a branch, a staff, stick, or rod. Gesenius supposes that the
expression here means the rod by which punishment is inflicted, and that
the, phrase 'rod of, or for the shoulder,' denotes oppression and
servitude. Rosenmuller thinks, that it refers rather to the custom among
the ancients of placing a piece of wood, not unlike a yoke, on the necks
and shoulders of slaves, as a mark of servitude. Hengstenberg
understands it, 'the staff which strikes the neck or back.'

The rod of his oppressor - This, doubtless, refers to the chastisement
which was inflicted on those in bondage, and is a phrase denoting
oppression and servitude. The word 'his' here refers to Israel.

As in the day of Midian - This refers to the deliverance that was
accomplished under Gideon against the Midianites; see Judg. 7; 8. That
deliverance was a remarkable interposition of God. It was accomplished
not by human strength; but was a signal manifestation of the power of
God in delivering the nation from the long oppression of the Midianites.
So the prophet says here, that the deliverance will be as signal a proof
of the presence and power of God as is was in that day. Herder (Hebrew
Poetry, vol. ii. p. 296) says, 'At that period, in the north part of the
country, a great deliverance was wrought. Then, in the obscure forests
of Naphtali and Zebulun, the light of freedom went forth over all the
land. So now, also, in this northern press of nations, in the way along
the sea of Galilee, where now the hostile Syrians are exercising their
oppressions, the light of freedom is going forth, and there shall be joy
and jubilee, like that of the song of Deborah.'

[Isaiah 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 9:5</span></span>

For every battle of the warrior - The expression used here has caused
great difficulty, from the fact that it occurs nowhere else in the
Scriptures. The word סאון se'ôn, rendered here battle, is supposed to
mean rather greaves, or the armor of the warrior which covered the feet
and the legs. It would be literally translated, 'Every greave of those
armed with greaves.' - Gesenius. The Chaldee renders it, 'Forevery gift
of theirs is for evil.' The Syriac, 'Forevery tumult (of battle) is
heard with terror.' Hengstenberg renders it, 'For all war-shoes put on
at the noise of battle, all garments dipped in blood, shall be burnt,
shall be the food of fire.' The idea, according to him, is, that the
great future redemption will be like the deliverance under Gideon;
'because, far from being accomplished by force of arms, with it all
contention and war shall cease.' Gesenius regards the figurative
expression as a general designation of that peace which shall never end.
All the armor used in war shall then be burned, as being of no further
use.

Is with confused noise - The word used here - רעשׁ ra‛ash - denotes,
properly, a shaking, as of a spear; a concussion, tumult, noise, as of a
battle. Here it is supposed to refer to the noise which the armor of the
soldiers made - particularly to the noise made by the greaves, or
war-shoes, worn on the feet and legs. Those greaves were fitted up; it
is said, by numerous large iron hooks, or clasps, and were fastened
sometimes with large nails; compare Josephus, Jewish Wars, B. vi. ch. i.
section 8.

And garments - This word here refers, doubtless, to the soldier's cloak
or blanket.

Rolled in blood - This is a description of the usual effect of war. The
image of war is that of a clangor made by the armor of soldiers, and by
garments that have been dipped in human blood. It is a most revolting
but just image.

But this shall be - In regard to this threatened invasion and danger,
this shall be the result. The meaning is this. The prophet sees the
image of war and of threatened invasion. He hears the clangor of their
greaves - the sound of their march; and he sees the usual emblem of
battle - bloody garments. But he says here, that this invasion shall not
be successful. There was no occasion of alarm. The very armor of the
warrior should be burned up. The enemy should be defeated - and their
greaves, and their bloody garments, should be consumed.

With burning - For burning; that is it shall be consumed.

And fuel of fire - Hebrew, 'Food of fire.' This is a strong, emphatic
expression - 'it shall be to be burned - the food of fire.' It denotes
the certainty that they would be vanquished; that the invading foe would
not be successful; and that his very armory and garments would be
stripped off and burned. To understand this, it is necessary to remark,
that in ancient times it was customary to strip the dead which were
slain in a vanquished army, and to collect their armor, their chariots,
etc., and consume them. The more valued spoils of battle were reserved
as the prey of the victors, or to be suspended in temples censecrated to
the gods; see [Psa 46:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#009.md) :

He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth;

He breaketh the bow;

And cutteth the spear in sunder;

He burneth the chariot in the fire.

Ezekiel has carried out this description more at length:

And the inhabitants of the cities of Israel shall go forth,

And shall set on fire and burn the weapons,

Both the shields and the bucklers,

The bows and the arrows,

And the clubs and the lances.

[Eze 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#009.md).

Zechariah has a similar figure, as descriptive of the time of the
Messiah:

Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion;

Shout, O daughter of Jerusalem;

Behold, thy king cometh unto thee.

And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim,

And the horse from Jerusalem,

And the battle bow shal be cut off, etc.

[Zac 9:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009.md).

This custom prevailed among several nations. Thus Virgil:

\- scutorumque incendi victor acervos.

AEneid, viii. 562.

There can be no doubt, I think, that the prophet here has his eye on the
victories of the Messiah, and that he means to say, that in those
victories all armor would be for fuel of fire; that is, that they would
be achieved without hostile arms. Applied to the Messiah, it means
either that his victories would be complete, or that in his victories
all necessity of such armor would cease. According to this, the passage
teaches that peace should be introduced by him without a conflict, and
thus harmonizes with the numerous parallel passages in which peace is
represented as a characteristic mark of the times of the Messiah, when
contention, war, and destruction shall cease; see [Isa
11:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006.md).

[Isaiah 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 9:6</span></span>

For - This is given as a reason of the victories that were predicted in
the previous verses. That it has reference to the Messiah has been
almost universally conceded; and indeed it does not seem possible to
doubt it. The eye of the prophet seems to have been fixed on this great
and glorious event - as attracting all his attention. The scenes of
coming times, like a panorama, or picture, passed before him. Most of
the picture seems to have been that of battles, conflicts, sieges,
dimness, and thick darkness. But in one portion of the passing scene
there was light. It was the light that he saw rising in the distant and
darkened Galilee. He saw the joy of the people; the armor of war laid
aside; the image of peace succeeding; the light expanding and becoming
more intense as the darkness retired, until he saw in this region the
Prince of Peace - the Sun of Righteousness itself. The eye of the
prophet gazed intently on that scene, and was fixed on that portion of
the picture: he sees the Messiah in his office, and describes him as
already come, and as born unto the nation.

Unto us - For our benefit. The prophet saw in vision the darkness and
gloom of the nation, and saw also the son that would be born to remove
that darkness, and to enlighten the world.

A child - (ילד yeled). This word usually denotes a lad, a boy, a youth.
It is commonly applied to one in early life; but no particular stress is
to be laid on the word. The vision of the prophet is, that the
long-expected Messiah is born, and is seen growing up amidst the
surrounding darkness of the north of Palestine, [Isa
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001.md).

Is born - Not that he was born when the prophet spake. But in prophetic
vision, as the events of the future passed before his mind, he saw that
promised son, and the eye was fixed intently on him; see the
Introduction, section 7, and the note at [Isa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md).

A son - בן bên. This word does not differ materially from the word
translated child. In the future scenes, as they passed before the mind
of the prophet, he saw the child, the son that was to be born, and
described him as he appeared to his view - as a child. Fixing the eye on
him, he proceeds at once to designate his character by stating the
appropriate names which he would bear.

Is given - The Messiah is often represented as having been given, or
sent; or as the rich gift of God; the note at [Act
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#012.md); [Joh
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016.md); [Eph
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022.md); [Joh
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#004.md). The Messiah was pre-eminently
the gift of the God of love. Man had no claim on him, and God
voluntarily gave his Son to be a sacrifice for the sins of the world.

And the government shall be upon his shoulder - The sense of this
passage is, that he shall rule, or that the government shall be vested
in him. Various interpretations have, however, been given of the phrase
'upon his shoulder.' Some have supposed, that it means simply he shall
sustain the government, as the shoulder is that by which we uphold any
thing. Pliny and Cicero thus use the phrase; see Rosenmuller. Others,
that it means that he should wear the royal purple from a child. -
Grotius. Lowth supposes that it refers to the ensign of government - the
scepter, the sword, the keys, or the like, that were borne upon the
shoulder, or suspended from it; see the note at [Isa
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#022.md). It is evident, from this latter
place, that some ensign of office was usually borne upon the shoulder.
The sense is, that he should be a king, and under this character the
Messiah is often predicted.

And his name shall be called - That is, his attributes shall be such as
to make all these applications appropriate descriptions of his power and
work. To be called, and to be, in the Hebrew, often mean the same thing.
The word ויקרא vayı̂qerâ' may possibly mean, Yahweh shall call him; or it
may be regarded as taken impersonally. Such a use of a verb is not
uncommon in Isaiah. 'One calls him,' is, according to the usage in
Isaiah, as ranch as to say, he will justly bear this name; or simply, he
will be.

Wonderful - פלא pele'. This word is derived from the verb פלא pâlâ', to
separate, to distinguish, or to make great. It is applied usually to
anything that is great or wonderful, as a miracle; [Exo
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002.md); [Lam
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#009.md); [Dan
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#006.md). It is applied here to denote the
unusual and remarkable assemblage of qualities that distinguished the
Messiah. Those are specified more particularly in the other part of the
verse; such an assemblage of quailties as to make proper the names
Mighty God, etc. 'The proper idea of the word,' says Hengstenberg, 'is
miraculous. It imports that the personage here referred to, in his being
and in his works, will be exalted above the ordinary course of nature,
and that his whole manifestation will be a miracle.' Yet it seems to me,
that the proper idea of the word is not that of miraculous. It is rather
that which is separated from the ordinary course of events, and which is
suited to excite amazement, wonder, and admiration, whether it be
miraculous or not.

This will be apparent if the following places are examined, where the
word occurs in various forms. It is rendered marvelous, [Psa
118:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#023.md); [Psa
139:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#014.md); [Psa
98:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#001.md); [Job
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#009.md); wonderful, [Sa2
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#026.md); [Psa
139:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#014.md); [Pro
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#018.md); [Job
42:3](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#003.md); [Psa
72:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#018.md); [Psa
86:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#010.md); hidden, [Deu
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#002.md); things too high, [Psa
131:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa131.htm#001.md); miracles, [Jdg
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#013.md); [Exo
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002.md); [Psa
77:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#014.md); [Psa
88:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#010.md); [Psa
89:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#005.md); the word is translated wonders,
in the sense of miracles, in several places; and hard, [Deu
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#008.md); [Jer
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#017.md). From these passages, it is
clear that it may denote that which is miraculous, but that this idea is
not necessarily connected with it. Anything which is suited to excite
wonder and amazement, from any cause, will correspond with the sense of
the Hebrew word. It is a word which expresses with surprising accuracy
everything in relation to the Redeemer. For the Messiah was wonderful in
all things. It was wonderful love by which God gave him, and by which he
came; the manner of his birth was wonderful; his humility, his
self-denial, his sorrows were wonderful; his mighty works were
wonderful; his dying agonies were wonderful; and his resurrection, his
ascension, were all suited to excite admiration and wonder.

Counsellor - This word has been sometimes joined with 'wonderful,' as if
designed to qualify it thus - "wonderful counselor;" but it expresses a
distinct attribute, or quality. The name "counselor" here, יועץ yû‛ēts,
denotes one of honorable rank; one who is suited to stand near princes
and kings as their adviser. It is expressive of great wisdom, and of
qualifications to guide and direct the human race. The Septuagint
translates this phrase, 'The angel of the mighty counsel.' The Chaldee,
'The God of wonderful counsel.'

The mighty God - Syriac, 'The mighty God of ages.' This is one, and but
one out of many, of the instances in which the name God is applied to
the Messiah; compare [Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md); [Rom
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005.md); [Jo1
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020.md); [Joh
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028.md); [Ti1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016.md); [Heb
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008.md). The name 'mighty God,' is
unquestionably attributed to the true God in [Isa
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#021.md). Much controversy has arisen in
relation to this expression; and attempts have been made to show that
the word translated "God," אל 'ĕl, may refer to a hero, a king, a
conqueror. Thus Gesenius renders, it 'Mighty hero;' and supposes that
the name 'God' is used here in accordance with the custom of the
Orientals, who ascribe divine attributes to kings. In like manner
Pluschke (see Hengstenberg) says, 'In my opinion this name is altogether
symbolical. The Messiah shall be called strength of God, or strong God,
divine hero, in order by this name to remind the people of the strength
of God.' But after all such controversy, it still remains certain that
the natural and obvious meaning of the expression is to denote a divine
nature. So it was evidently understood by the ancient versions; and the
fact that the name God is so often applied to Christ in the New
Testament proves that it is to be understood in its natural and obvious
signification.

The everlasting Father - The Chaldee renders this expression, 'The man
abiding forever.' The Vulgate, 'The Father of the future age.' Lowth,
'The Father of the everlasting age.' Literally, it is the Father of
eternity, עד אבי 'ĕby ‛ad. The word rendered "everlasting," עד ‛ad,
properly denotes "eternity," and is used to express "forever;" see [Psa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#006.md), [Psa
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#019.md); [Psa
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#010.md). It is often used in connection
with עולם ‛ôlâm, thus, עולם ועד vā‛ed ‛ôlâm, "forever and ever;" [Psa
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#016.md); [Psa
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#005.md); [Psa
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007.md). The Hebrews used the term father
in a great variety of senses - as a literal father, a grandfather, an
ancestor, a ruler, an instructor. The phrase may either mean the same as
the Eternal Father, and the sense will be, that the Messiah will not, as
must be the ease with an earthly king, however excellent, leave his
people destitute after a short reign, but will rule over them and bless
them forever (Hengstenberg); or it may be used in accordance with a
custom usual in Hebrew and in Arabic, where he who possesses a thing is
called the father of it.

Thus, the father of strength means strong; the father of knowledge,
intelligent; the father of glory, glorious; the father of goodness,
good; the father of peace, peaceful. According to this, the meaning of
the phrase, the Father of eternity, is properly eternal. The application
of the word here is derived from this usage. The term Father is not
applied to the Messiah here with any reference to the distinction in the
divine nature, for that word is uniformly, in the Scriptures, applied to
the first, not to the second person of the Trinity. But it is used in
reference to durations, as a Hebraism involving high poetic beauty. lie
is not merely represented as everlasting, but he is introduced, by a
strong figure, as even the Father of eternity. as if even everlasting
duration owed itself to his paternity. There could not be a more
emphatic declaration of strict and proper eternity. It may be added,
that this attribute is often applied to the Messiah in the New
Testament; [Joh 8:58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058.md); [Col
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#017.md); [Rev
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011.md), [Rev
1:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#017.md); [Heb
1:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#010.md); [Joh
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md).

The Prince of Peace - This is a Hebrew mode of expression denoting that
he would be a peaceful prince. The tendency of his administration would
be to restore and perpetuate peace. This expression is used to
distinguish him from the mass of kings and princes who have delighted in
conquest and blood. In contradistinction from all these, the Messiah
would seek to promote universal concord, and the tendency of his reign
would be to put an end to wars, and to restore harmony and order to the
nations; see the tendency of his reign still further described in [Isa
11:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006.md); the note at [Isa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004.md); see also [Mic
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#004.md); [Hos
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#018.md). It is not necessary to insist on
the coincidence of this description with the uniform character and
instructions of the Lord Jesus. In this respect, he disappointed all the
hopes of the Jewish nation, who, in spite of the plain prophecies
respecting his peaceful character. expected a magnificent prince, and a
conqueror.

The expressions used here imply that he would be more than human. It is
impossible to believe that these appellations would be given under the
Spirit of inspiration to a mere man. They express a higher nature; and
they coincide with the account in the New pressions of a pompous and
high-sounding character were commonly assumed by Oriental princes. The
following is a single instance of their arrogance, ostentation, and
pride. 'Chosroes, king of kings, lord of lords, ruler of the nations;
prince of peace, saviour of men; among the gods, a man good and eternal,
but among people, a god most illustrious, glorious; a conqueror rising
with the sun and giving vision at night.' - Theoph. Simocatta Chr., iv.
8, quoted by Gesenius. But it cannot be pretended, that the Spirit of
inspiration would use titles in a manner so unmeaning and so pompous as
this. Besides, it was one great object of the prophets to vindicate the
name and character of the true God, and to show that all such
appellations belonged to him alone.

However, such appellations might be used by surrounding nations, and
given to kings and princes by the pagan, yet in the Scriptures they are
not given to earthy monarchs. That this passage refers to the Messiah
has been generally conceded, except by the Jews, and by a few later
critics. Jarchi and Kimchi maintain that it refers to Hezekiah. They
have been driven to this by the use which Christians have made of the
passage against the Jews. But the absurdity of this interpretation has
been shown in the notes at [Isa 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014.md).
The ancient Jews incontestably referred it to the Messiah. Thus the
Targum of Jonathan renders it, 'His name shall be called God of
wonderful counsel, man abiding forever, the messiah, משׁיח mâshı̂yach,
whose peace shall be multiplied upon us in his days.' Thus rabbi Jose,
of Galilee, says, 'The name of the Messiah is שׁלום shâlôm, as is said
in [Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md), "Father of Eternity,
Prince of Peace." 'Ben Sira (fol. 40, of the Amsterdam Edition, 1679)
numbers among the eight names of the Messiah those also taken from this
passage, Wonderful, Counsellor, Mighty God, Prince of Peace. The later
Jews, however, have rejected this interpretation, because the Messiah is
here described as God.

[Isaiah 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 9:7</span></span>

Of the increase ... - The word rendered "government" here, משׂרה
mis'râh, means properly his government as a prince - his principality,
and is a continuation of the idea in the previous verse, 'the Prince of
Peace.' It means that his reign as a prince of peace - in extending and
promoting peace, shall be unlimited.

And peace - This does not signify in the original, as our translation
would seem to do, that there should be no end to the increase of his
peace, but that there should be no limit to peace, that is, that his
reign should be one of unlimited peace. The whole is a description of a
prosperous, wide-extended, ever-growing and unlimited empire of peace.

No end - The word used here - קץ qêts - may refer either to space or
time. The connection, however, seems to confine it to time, and to mean
simply that over his wide-extended and peaceful principality he should
reign forever.

Upon the throne of David - See the note at [Act
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#030.md). This was in accordance with the
promise made to David; [Kg1 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#025.md); [Sa2
7:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012.md); [Psa
132:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#011.md). This promise was understood as
referring to the Messiah. The primary idea is, that he should be
descended in the line of David, and accordingly the New Testament
writers are often at pains to show that the Lord Jesus was of that
family; [Luk 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#004.md). When it is said that
he would sit upon the throne of David, it is not to be taken literally.
The uniqueness of the reign of David was, that he reigned over the
people of God. He was chosen for this purpose from humble life; was
declared in his administration to be a man after God's own heart; and
his long and prosperous reign was a reign over the people of God. To sit
upon the throne of David, therefore, means to reign over the people of
God; and in this sense the Messiah sat on his throne. There is also a
similarity in the two administrations, in the fact that the Messiah was
taken from humble life. and that his reign will be far-extended and
prosperous. But the main idea of resemblance is, that the reign of each
extended over the people of God.

And upon his kingdom - That is, over the kingdom of the people of God.
It does not mean particularly the Jews, but all those over whom the
divine administration should be set up.

To order it - To raise up, or confirm it. The word, also, is sometimes
used to denote to found a kingdom. Here it means to confirm it, to cause
it to stand.

And to establish it - To place it on a firm foundation; to make it firm.

With judgment ... - That is, under an administration that shall be just
and right. Most kingdoms have been those of blood, and have been
established by iniquity, and by the unjust overthrow of others. But the
administration of the Messiah shall be established in righteousness, and
shall be destined to extend and perpetuate justice and righteousness
forever. "From henceforth." That is, from the time which was the period
of the prophet's vision, when he saw in vision the Messiah rising in the
dark parts of Galilee; Notes, [Isa
9:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001.md).

The zeal - The word used here denotes "ardor," intense desire in
accomplishing an object; and means that the establishment of this
kingdom was an object of intense and ardent desire on the part of
Yahweh. It is also implied that nothing else than the zeal of Yahweh
could do it. We may remark here:

\(1\) That if Yahweh feels so intense a desire for this, then the
subjects of the Messiah's reign should also feel this.

\(2\) If Yahweh feels this zeal, and if he will certainly accomplish
this, then Christians should be encouraged in their efforts to spread
the gospel. His purpose to do this is their only encouragement - and a
sufficient encouragement - to excite their zeal in this great and
glorious work.

[Isaiah 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 9:8</span></span>

The Lord sent - Not Yahweh here, but "Adonai." It is apparent that this
verse is the commencement of a new prophecy, that is not connected with
that which precedes it. The strain of the preceding prophecy had respect
to Judah; this is confined solely to Israel, or Ephraim. Here the
division of the chapter should have been made, and should not have been
again interrupted until [Isa 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#004.md),
where the prophecy closes. The prophecy is divided into four parts, and
each part is designed to threaten a distinct judgment on some
particular, prominent vice.

I. "Crime" - their pride and ostentation, [Isa
9:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#008.md). "Punishment" - the land would
be invaded by the Syrians and the Philistines, [Isa
9:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#011.md).

II\. "Crime" - they had apostatized from God, and the leaders had caused
them to err, [Isa 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013.md), [Isa
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#016.md). "Punishment" - Yahweh would cut
off the chief men of the nation, [Isa
9:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#014.md), [Isa
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#017.md).

III\. "Crime" - prevalent wickedness in the nation, [Isa
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#018.md). "Punishment" - the anger of
Yahweh, consternation, anarchy, discord, and want, [Isa
9:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#019.md).

IV\. "Crime" - prevalent injustice; [Isa
10:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#001.md). "Punishment" - foreign
invasion, and captivity; [Isa 10:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#003.md).

The poem is remarkably regular in its structure (Lowth), and happy in
its illustrations. At what time it was composed is not certain, but it
has strong internal evidence that it immediately followed the preceding
respecting Judah.

A word - A message, or prediction; Note, [Isa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001.md).

Into Jacob - Jacob was the ancestor of the nation. But the name came to
be appropriated to the ten tribes, as constituting the majority of the
people. It was at first used to denote all the Jews [Num
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#007.md), [Num
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#010.md), [Num
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#023.md); [Num
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017.md), [Num
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#019.md); [Deu
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009.md); [Ch1
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#013.md); [Psa
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007.md); [Psa
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#001.md); but it came, after the revolt of
the ten tribes under Jeroboam, to be used often to denote them alone;
[Amo 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#008.md); [Mic
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#005.md); [Mic
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#001.md); [Mic
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#008.md). The word or message which was
sent, refers undoubtedly to that which immediately follows.

And it hath lighted upon - Hebrew 'It fell.' This is but a varied
expression for, he sent it to Israel.

Israel - The same as Jacob the ten tribes - the kingdom of Ephraim.

[Isaiah 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 9:9</span></span>

And all the people shall know - Shall know the message; or shall know
the judgment which God denounces against their crimes. The Chaldee
renders this, 'All the people have exalted themselves, Ephraim and the
inhabitants of Samaria, in their magnitude, and in the pride of thee
heart.'

Ephraim - This is another name for Israel, as Ephraim was the principal
tribe; Note, [Isa 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#002.md).

And the inhabitants of Samaria - The capital of Ephraim or Israel; Note,
[Isa 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#009.md).

That say in the pride - This is a description of general and prevalent
pride; and it is traced to the source of all pride - the heart. It was a
desire of splendor, power, and magnificence, originating in the heart,
and manifesting itself by the language of self-confidence and defiance
at the judgments of God.

Stoutness - Hebrew 'Greatness.' It means a self-confident purpose; and
indicates the state of feeling in a man when he trusts to his own
resources, and not to God.

[Isaiah 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 9:10</span></span>

The bricks are fallen down - The language of this verse is figurative;
but the sentiment is plain. It contains the confession of the
inhabitants of Samaria, that their affairs were in a ruinous and
dilapidated state; but also their self-confident assurance that they
would be able to repair the evils, and restore their nation to more than
their former magnificence.

Bricks, in oriental countries, were made of clay and straw, and were
rarely turned. Hence, exposed to suns and rains, they soon dissolved.
Walls and houses constructed of such materials would not be very
permanent, and to build with them is strongly contrasted with building
in a permanent and elegant manner with hewn stone.

The meaning is, that their former state was one of less splendor than
they designed that their subsequent state should be. Desolation had come
in upon their country, and this they could not deny. But they
confidently boasted that they would more than repair the evil.

We will build - Our ruined houses and walls.

With hewn stones - At once more permanent and elegant than the
structures of bricks had been.

The sycamores - These trees grew abundantly on the low lands of Judea,
and were very little esteemed; [Kg1
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#027.md); [Ch2
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#015.md); [Ch2
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#027.md).

'This curious tree seems to partake of the nature of two different
species,' says Calmet, 'the mulberry and the fig; the former in its
leaf, and the latter in its fruit. Its Greek name, συκόμορος sukomoros,
is plainly descriptive of its character, being compounded of συκος
sukos, a fig tree, and μορος moros, a mulberry tree. It is thus
described by Norden: "They have in Egypt divers sorts of figs; but if
there is any difference between them, a particular kind differs still
more. I mean that which the sycamore bears, that they name in Arabic
giomez. This sycamore is of the height of a beech, and bears its fruit
in a manner quite different from other trees. It has them on the trunk
itself, which shoots out little sprigs in form of a grapestalk, at the
end of which grows the fruit close to one another, most like bunches of
grapes. The tree is always green, and bears fruit several times in the
year, without observing any certain seasons, for I have seen some
sycamores which had fruit two months after others. This sort of tree is
pretty common in Egypt."' They were not highly valued, though it is
probable they were often employed in building.

They are contrasted with cedars here -

\(1\) Because the cedar was a much more rare and precious wood.

\(2\) Because it was a much more smooth and elegant article of building.

\(3\) Because it was more permanent. The grain and texture of the
sycamore is remarkably coarse and spongy, and could, therefore, stand in
no competition with the cedar for beauty and ornament.

We will change them - We will employ in their stead.

Cedars - The cedar was a remarkably fine; elegant, and permanent wood
for building. It was principally obtained on mount Lebanon, and was
employed in temples, palaces, and in the houses of the rich; see the
note at [Isa 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#018.md).

The sycamore is contrasted with the cedar in [Kg1
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#027.md) : 'Cedars he made to be as
sycamore trees.' The whole passage denotes self-confidence and pride; an
unwillingness to submit to the judgments of God, and a self-assurance
that they would more than repair all the evils that would be inflicted
on them.

[Isaiah 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 9:11</span></span>

Therefore - This verse indicates the punishment that would come upon
them for their pride.

The Lord shall set up - Hebrew, 'Shall exalt.' That is, they shall
overcome and subdue him.

The adversaries of Rezin - King of Syria, [Isa
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001.md). It should be observed here, that
twenty-one manuscripts, instead of adversaries, read princes of Rezin.
The sense seems to require this; as in the following verse, it is said
that the Syrians will be excited against them.

Against him - Against Ephraim.

And join his enemies together - Hebrew, 'Mingle them together.' They
shall be excited into wild and agitated commotion, and shall pour down
together on the land and devour it. In what way this would be done is
specified in [Isa 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#012.md).

[Isaiah 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 9:12</span></span>

The Syrians - [Isa 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001.md). The Syrians
had been the allies of the Israelites. But after the death of Rezin, it
is probable that they joined the Assyrians, and united with them in the
invasion of Samaria. - Aben Ezra; Grotius. "Before." Hebrew 'From the
east.' Syria was situated to the east of Samaria, and the meaning is
here, that they would pour in upon Samaria from that side.

And the Philistines - The Philistines occupied the country southwest of
Samaria, lying along on the shores of the Mediterranean. It is not
particularly mentioned in the Scriptures that they invaded Samaria after
this prediction of Isaiah, but such a thing is by no means improbable.
They were long unsubdued; were full of hostility to the Jewish people;
and were many times engaged with them in wars and several times subdued
them; Judg. 13; 14; [Ch2 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#018.md). The
name Palestine is derived from Philistine, although this people occupied
but a small part of the country; see Reland's Palestine, c. vii.

Behind - That is, from the west - the region where they dwelt. The
sacred writers speak as if looking toward the east, the rising sun, and
they speak of the west as the region behind them; see the notes at [Job
23:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#008.md).

And they shall devour - Hebrew, 'They shall eat.' This figure is taken
from a ravenous beast; and means that they should come up with raging
desires, and fierce impetuosity, to destroy the nation.

With open mouth - Hebrew, 'With the whole mouth.' The metaphor is
derived from raging and furious animals. Chaldee, 'In every place.'

For all this - Notwithstanding all this.

His anger ... - see the note at [Isa
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#025.md).

[Isaiah 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 9:13</span></span>

For the people ... - This is a reason why his anger would not cease, and
it is, at the same time, the suggestion of a new crime for which the
divine judgment would rest upon them. It commences the second part of
the oracle.

Turneth not - It is implied here that it was the design of the
chastisement to turn them to God. In this case, as in many others, such
a design had not been accomplished.

Unto him that smiteth them - To God, who had punished them.

Neither do they seek - They do not seek his protection and favor; they
do not worship and honor him.

The Lord of hosts - Note, [Isa 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009.md).

[Isaiah 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 9:14</span></span>

Will cut off head and tail - This is a proverbial expression, which is
explained in the following verse; see also [Deu
28:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#013.md). The head is often used to
denote those in honor and authority. The tail is an expression
applicable to the lower ranks, and would commonly indicate more than
simply the common people. It would imply contempt; a state of great
abjectness and meanness.

Branch and rush - This is also a proverbial expression, meaning the
highest and lowest; see the note at [Isa
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#015.md). The word here translated
branch, means properly the bough or top of the palm tree. The palm grew
to a great height before it gave out any branches, and hence, the image
is a beautiful one to denote those high in office and authority. The
word rush means the coarse, long-jointed reed, that grows in marshes -
an apt emblem of the base and worthless classes of society.

[Isaiah 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 9:15</span></span>

The ancient - The elder; the old man.

And honorable - Hebrew, 'The man of elevated countenance.' The man of
rank and office.

The prophet that teacheth lies - The false prophet. Of those there were
many; and probably at this time many in Samaria.

[Isaiah 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 9:16</span></span>

For the leaders of this people ... - Note, [Isa
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#012.md). Hebrew 'They that call this
people blessed' - referring more particularly to the false prophets.

They that are led of them - Hebrew, 'They that are called blessed by
them.'

Are destroyed - Hebrew, 'Are swallowed up;' see the note at [Isa
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#012.md). They are ruined; or swallowed up
as in a vast whirlpool or vortex.

[Isaiah 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 9:17</span></span>

Shall have no joy - He shall not delight in them so as to preserve them.
The parallel part of the verse shows that the phrase is used in the
sense of having mercy.

In their young men - The hope and strength of the nation. The word used
here commonly denotes those who are chosen, particularly for purposes of
war. The sense is, that the hope and strength of the nation, that on
which the chief reliance would be placed, would be cut off.

Neither shall have mercy ... - Judgment would sweep through the nation,
even over those who were the usual objects of the divine protection -
widows and orphans; compare [Psa
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#014.md), [Psa
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#018.md); [Psa
48:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005.md); [Deu
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#018.md); [Jer
49:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#011.md); [Hos
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#003.md). These passages show that the
fatherless and the widow are the special objects of the divine favor;
and when, therefore, it is said that the Lord would not have mercy been
on these, it shows the extent and severity of the divine judgments that
were coming on the nation.

For every one is a hypocrite - A deceiver; a dissembler. The word used
here, however. חנף chânêph, means rather a profane or profligate man, a
man who is defiled or polluted, than a dissembler. It is applied often
to idolaters and licentious persons, but not to hypocrites; see [Job
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#013.md); [Job
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#016.md); [Job
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#034.md); [Job
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#008.md); [Dan
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#032.md).

Every mouth speaketh folly - The word rendered folly, may denote
foolishness, but it is also used to denote wickedness or crime; [Sa1
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#023.md). Probably this is the meaning
here. That the character here given of the Ephraimites is correct, is
abundantly shown also by other prophets; see particularly Hosea.

For all this - Notwithstanding all the judgments that should come thus
upon the young men, and widows, and orphans, still his anger was not
turned away. This is the close of the second strophe or part of this
prophecy.

[Isaiah 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 9:18</span></span>

For wickedness - This commences the third part of the prophecy, which
continues to the end of the chapter. It is a description of prevailing
impiety. The effects and prevalence of it are described by the image of
a raging, burning flame, that spreads everywhere: first among the humble
shrubbery - the briers and thorns, then in the vast forests, until it
spreads over the land, and sends a mighty column of flame and smoke up
to heaven.

Burneth as the fire - Spreads, rages. extends as fire does in thorns and
in forests. In what respects it burns like the fire, the prophet
immediately specifies. It spreads rapidly everywhere, and involves all
in the effects. Wickedness is not unfrequently in the Scriptures
compared to a fire that is shut up long, and then bursts forth with
raging violence. Thus [Hos 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#006.md) :

Truly, in the inmost part of it, their heart is like an oven,

While they lie in wait;

All the night their baker sleepeth;

In the morning it burneth like a blazing star.

'As an oven conceals the lighted fire all night, while the baker takes
his rest, and in the morning vomits forth its blazing flame; so all
manner of concupiscence is brooding mischief in their hearts, while the
ruling faculties of reason and conscience are lulled asleep, and their
wicked designs wait only for a fair occasion to break forth.' - Horsely
on Hosea; see also [Isa 50:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#002.md); [Isa
65:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#005.md).

It shall devour - Hebrew, 'It shall eat.' The idea of devouring or
eating, is one which is often given to fire in the Scriptures.

The briers and thorns - By the briers and thorns are meant, doubtless,
the lower part of the population; the most degraded ranks of society.
The idea here seems to be, first, that of impiety spreading like fire
over all classes of people; but there is also joined with it, in the
mind of the prophet, the idea of punishment. Wickedness would rage like
spreading fire; but like fire, also, it would sweep over the nation
accomplishing desolation and calamity, and consuming everything in the
fire oft God's vengeance. The wicked are often compared to thorns and
briers - fit objects to be burned up; [Isa
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#012.md) :

And the people shall be as the burnings of lime;

As thorns cut up shall they be burned in the fire.

And shall kindle - Shall burn, or extend, as sweeping fire extends to
the mighty forest.

In the thickets of the forests - The dense, close forest or grove. The
idea is, that it extends to all classes of people - high as well as low.

And they shall mount up - The Hebrew word used here - יתאבכוּ yit'abekû
from אבך 'âbak - occurs nowhere else. The image is that of a
far-spreading, raging fire, sending columns of smoke to heaven. So, says
the prophet, is the rolling, raging, consuming fire of the sins of the
nation spreading over all classes of people in the land, and involving
all in widespread desolation.

[Isaiah 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 9:19</span></span>

Through the wrath - By the anger, or indignation. This spreading
desolation is the proof of his anger.

Is the land darkened - The word used here - עתם ‛âtham - occurs nowhere
else. According to Gesenius, it is the same as תמם tâmam to be or make
complete; and hence means, "in this place, to be consumed, or laid
waste." Kimchi and Aben Ezra render it, 'The land is darkened.'
Septuagint, Συγκέκαυται Sungkekautai. Chaldee, צרוכת chărôkat - 'Is
scorched.' Jerome renders it, Conturbata est terra - 'The land is
disturbed.' The effect is doubtless such as ascending and spreading
columns of fire and smoke would produce, and perhaps the general word
desolate had better be used in translating the word.

And the people shall be as fuel of the fire - This is an image of
widespread ruin. The idea is, that they shall destroy one another as
pieces of wood, when on fire, help to consume each other. The way in
which it shall be done is stated more fully in the next verse.

No man shall spare his brother - There shall be such a state of
wickedness, that it shall lead to anarchy, and strife, and mutual
destruction. The common ties of life shall be dissolved, and a man shall
have no compassion on his own brother.

[Isaiah 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 9:20</span></span>

And he shall snatch - Hebrew, 'He shall cut off.' Many have supposed
that this refers to a state of famine; but others regard it as
descriptive of a state of faction extending throughout the whole
community, dissolving the most tender ties, arid producing a dissolution
of all the bonds of life. The context [Isa
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#019.md), [Isa
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#021.md) shows, that the latter is meant;
though it is not improbable that it would be attended with famine. When
it is said that he 'would cut off his right hand,' it denotes a
condition of internal anarchy and strife.

And be hungry - And not be satisfied. Such would be his rage, and his
desire of blood, that he would be insatiable. The retarder of those on
one side of him would not appease his insatiable wrath. His desire of
carnage would be so great that it would be like unappeased hunger.

And he shall eat - The idea here is that of contending factions excited
by fury, rage, envy, hatred, contending in mingled strife, and spreading
death with insatiable desire everywhere around them.

They shall eat - Not literally; but "shall destroy." To eat the flesh of
anyone, denotes to seek one's life, and is descriptive of blood-thirsty
enemies; [Psa 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#002.md) : 'When the wicked,
even mine enemies and foes, came upon me to eat up my flesh, they
stumbled and fell;' [Job 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#022.md) :

Why do ye persecute me as God,

And are not satisfied with my flesh?

Compare [Deu 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#016.md); [Jer
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#025.md); [Jer
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#015.md); [Jer
50:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#017.md); [Hos
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#007.md); see Ovid's Metam. 8, 867:

Ipse suos artus lacero divellere morsu

Coepit; et infelix minuendo corpus alebat.

The flesh of his own arm - The Chaldee renders this, 'Each one shall
devour the substance of his neighbor.' Lowth proposes to read it, 'The
flesh of his neighbor.' but without sufficient authority. The expression
denotes a state of dreadful faction - where the ties of most intimate
relationship would be disregarded, represented, here by the appalling
figure of a man's appetite being so rabid that he would seize upon and
devour his own flesh. So, in this state of faction and discord, the rage
would be so great that people would destroy those who were, as it were,
their own flesh, that is, their nearest kindred and friends.

[Isaiah 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 9:21</span></span>

Manasseh, Ephraim - This verse is a continuation of the statement in
regard to the extent and fearfulness of the faction. Those who were
hitherto most tenderly and intimately allied to each other, would now be
engaged in furious strife. Manasseh and Ephraim were the two sons of
Joseph [Gen 46:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#020.md), and their names are
used as expressive of tender union and friendship; compare [Gen
48:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#020.md). The tribes of Ephraim and
Manasseh were near each other, and they always were allied together. The
expression here denotes that they who had hitherto been joined in tender
alliance, would be rent into contending factions, thirsting for each
other's blood.

And they together - They would be united in opposing Judah while they
were devouring each other, as it is not an uncommon thing for those who
are opposed to each other to unite in hostility to a common foe; compare
[Luk 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#012.md). This is an image that
heightens the description of the anarchy - introducing implacable
animosity against another tribe, while they were contending among
themselves. That such anarchies and factions existed, is apparent from
all the history of the kingdom of Israel; compare [Kg2
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#010.md) ff; [Kg2
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#030.md). In this last passage, the death
of Pekah is describer as having occurred in a conspiracy formed by
Hoshea.

For all this ... - see [Isa 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#012.md), note
[Isa 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#025.md). This closes the third
strophe or part of the prophecy under consideration. The fourth and last
strophe occurs in [Isa 10:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#001.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 10](isa010.md)

</div>
