<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa000)  [Next](isa002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

The period of the world in which Isaiah lived was in some respects a
forming period. It was during his life that the kingdom of assyria,
which had so long swayed a scepter of entire dominion over the East,
began to wane, and that its power was broken. The kingdom of babylon,
which ultimately became so vast and mighty, and which destroyed Assyria
itself was established during his life on a basis that secured its
future independence and grandeur. The kingdom of Macedon, whose rise was
followed by so great events under the emperor Alexander, was founded
about the time when Isaiah began his prophetic life (814 b.c.), by
Caranus. carthage had been founded about half a century before (869
b.c.); and rome was founded during his life, 753 b.c. syracuse was built
by Archias of Corinth, during his life, 769 b.c. It is of some
importance in recollecting the events of ancient history to group them
together, and some advantage may be derived to the student from
connecting these events with the name and life of Isaiah.

The following tables, copied mainly from Jahn's Biblical Archaeology,
will give a correct view of the principal chronological events in the
time of Isaiah, and may be of use in the correct understanding of his
prophecies:

Table I - The Kingdoms b.c. Judah Israel Assyria Media Babylon Others
825 Amaziah Jeroboam II.41 years. Arbaces, 29 years. 814 Jonah, the
prophet. Macedonia 811 Uzziah, 52 years. Amos, the prophet. 797
Interreg-num, 79 years. 784 Hosea, the prophet.Interreg-num, 12 years.
773 Zechariah, 6 months.Shallum, 1 month. Phul, 21 years. 772 Menachem,
10 years. 761 Isaiah, the prophet. Pekahiah, 2 years. 759 Jotham, 16
years.

Micah, the prophet. Pekah, 20 years. 753 Tiglath-Pileser, 19 years. Rome
747 Nabonassar 14, or Merodach-Baladan. 743 Ahaz, 16 years 740 Conquers
Damascus, Galilee & Gilead. 739 Interreg-num, 9 years 734 Shalmaneser,
14 years. Nadius, 2, years. 730 Hosea, 9 years. Porus, 5 years. 728
Hezekiah, 29 years. Jugaeus, 5 years. 722 Overthrow of Israel

Table II - The Kingdom b.c. Judah Assyria Media Babylon 721 Hezekiah 720
Sennacherib, 7 years. 718 Dejocces, 53 years. 714 Senn. In Judea. 713
Essar-haddon, 35 years. 709 Arkianus, 5 years. 704 Interreg. 2 years.
702 Belibus, 3 years. 699 Manasseh, 55 years Apronadius, 6 years. 693
Rigebelus, 1 year. 692 Messomordacus, 4 years.

Analysis of the Chapter

This chapter contains:

I. the inscription or title to the whole Book of Isaiah [Isa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001); and,

II\. an entire prophecy respecting the land of Judah. In regard to the
title see the notes at [Isa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001).

The remainder of the chapter Isa. 1:2-31 comprises a single prophecy,
complete in itself, and evidently delivered on a single occasion. It has
no immediate connection with that which follows, though it may have been
delivered about the same period. When it was delivered is not known. We
are informed [Isa 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001) that the vision
of Yahweh, which Isaiah had in the temple, occurred during the last year
of the reign of Uzziah. The only indication which we can have of the
time when this prophecy was uttered, is to be derived from its location,
and from the accordance of its contents with the state of things in
Judea. It is evident that the anchor of the arrangement, whoever he was,
regarded it as properly placed in the order of time before the account
of the vision of Yahweh, that is, as having been uttered before the
death of Uzziah. Nor are the contents of such a nature as to render it
improbable that the collector has followed the natural order in which
the prophecies were delivered.

On some accounts, indeed, it might better be regarded as spoken during
the reign of Ahaz; but at any time of the Jewish history in which Isaiah
lived, it is not an inappropriate description of the character of the
Jewish people. There is one internal indication indeed that it was not
delivered in the time of Ahaz. Ahaz bad filled the land with the groves
and altars of idolatry. See the Introduction, 3. But this prophecy does
not allude to idolatry, as the leading and characteristic sin. It is a
description of a people who still kept up the form of the worship of
Yahweh; of a people deeply depraved indeed, and suffering under the
tokens of the divine displeasure, but who were professedly the
worshippers of the true God. It is descriptive of a time when the nation
was distinguished for hypocrisy rather than idolatry. It naturally
falls, therefore, into the time of Uzziah, or Jotham - as it cannot be
supposed that it delivered during the reign of Hezekiah, it would be so
far misplaced as to constitute the introductory chapter to the whole
series of prophecies.

In regard to the time when it was uttered, and the time to which it
refers, there have been very different opinions. Abarbanel, Grotius, and
Rosenmuller, suppose that it refers to the times of Uzziah; De Wette
supposes that it relates to the reign of Jotham; Piscator, Hensler,
Arnold, regard it as relating to the reign of Ahaz.; and Jarchi,
Vitringa, and Eichhorn, refer it to the times of Hezekiah. In such a
variety of opinion it is impossible to fix the time with any certainty.
Nor is it very material. It was not an inappropriate description of the
general character of the Jewish people; and there can be no doubt that
there were times during the long prophetic life of Isaiah, when it would
be found to accord fully with the condition of the nation. Unhappily,
also, there are times in the church now, when it is fully descriptive of
the character of the professed people of God, and it contains truths,
and fearful denunciations, not less appropriate to them, than they were
to the people who lived in the time of Isaiah.

The prophecy is highly objurgatory and severe in its character. It is
made up of reproof, and of assurances that the evils which they were
suffer. tug were for their hypocrisy, and other sins. It commences with
a solemn and very sublime address to heaven and earth to witness the
dccp depravity, and the pcrvading corruption of the land of Judah. It
was such as was adapted to attract the attention, and to amaze all
beings in heaven and on earth, [Isa
1:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002). The prophet then proceeds to
state that the existing calamities of the nation had been inflicted on
account of their sins, and that for those sins the land was laid waste,
[Isa 1:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005). Yet they kept up the
appearance of religion. They were constant and regular, externally, in
offering sacrifices. But their character was deeply hypocritical. The
services of God were so false and hollow, that he spurned and despised
them. They were a weariness to him, and a burden, [Isa
1:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010). The prophet then calls on the
sinful nation to turn from their sins, and to seek God, with the
assurance that he was willing to re-admit them to his favor; to pardon
all their crimes, and to receive them as his own children, [Isa
1:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016). If they did not do it, he
assures them that heavier judgments would come upon them than they had
yet experienced, [Isa 1:21-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021); and
that God would so deal with them as to effect a change in the nation,
and to restore the happier and purer state of things existing in former
days. The wicked would be punished, and Zion would be redeemed, [Isa
1:26-31](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#026).

[Isaiah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 1:1</span></span>

The vision - The first verse evidently is a title, but whether to the
whole book or only to a part of it has been questioned. As it stands
here, however, it seems clearly intended to include the entire book,
because it embraces all that was seen during the reigns of Uzziah,
Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah; that is, during the whole prophetic life of
the prophet. The same title is also given to his prophecies in [Ch2
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#032) : 'Now the rest of the acts of
Hezekiah, and his goodness, behold they are written in the vision of
Isaiah.' Vitringa supposes that the former part of this title, 'the
vision of Isaiah,' was at first affixed to the single prophecy contained
in the first chapter, and that the latter part was inserted afterward as
an introduction to the whole book. This might have been done by Isaiah
himself if he collected his prophecies into a volume, or by some other
inspired man who collected and arranged them; see the Introduction to
Isa. 36.

The word "vision," חזון chăzôn, denotes properly that which is seen,
from the verb, חזה châzâh, "to see, to behold." It is a term which is
often used in reference to the prophecies of the Old Testament; [Num
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006); [Num
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#004); [Sa1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001); [Psa
89:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#019); [Dan
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#019); [Dan
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#002); [Dan
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#001); [Nah
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001); [Gen
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001); [Isa
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#002); [Isa
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#001). Hence, the prophets were
anciently called "Seers," as those who saw or witnessed events which
were yet to come; compare [Sa1 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#009) :
'He that is now called a prophet was beforetime called a "Seer;"' [Sa1
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#011), [Sa1
9:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#018); [Ch1
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#022); [Ch1
29:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#029); [Kg2
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013). In these visions the objects
probably were made to pass before the mind of the prophet as a picture,
in which the various events were delineated with more or less
distinctness, and the prophecies were spoken, or recorded, as the
visions appeared to the observer. As many events could be represented
only by symbols, those symbols became a matter of record, and are often
left without explanation. On the nature of the prophetic visions, see
Introduction, Section 7. (4.)

Of Isaiah - The name Isaiah ישׁעיהו yesha‛yâhû from ישׁע yesha‛ -
salvation, help, deliverance - and יהוה yehovâh or Jehovah, means
'salvation of Yahweh,' or 'Yahweh will save.' The Vulgate renders it
"Isaias"; the Septuagint has: Ησαΐ́ας Eesaias, "Esaias." This is also
retained in the New Testament; [Mat
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#003); [Mat
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#014); [Mat
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#017); [Mat
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#007); [Mar
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#006); [Luk
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#017); [Joh
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#039); [Act
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#028); [Rom
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#027), etc. In the book of Isaiah
itself we find the form ישׁעיהו yesha‛yâhû, but in the inscription the
rabbis give the form ישׁעיה yesha‛yâh. It was common among the Hebrews
to incorporate the name Yahweh, or a part of it, into their proper
names; see the note at [Isa 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014).
Probably the object of this was to express veneration or regard for him
- as we now give the name of a parent or friend to a child; or in many
cases the name may have been given to record some signal act of mercy on
the part of God, or some special interposition of his goodness. The
practice of incorporating the name of the God that was worshipped into
proper names was common in the East. Thus the name "Bel," the principal
idol worshipped in Babylon, appears in the proper names of the kings, as
Belshazzar, etc.; compare the note at [Isa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001). It is not known that the name
was given to Isaiah with any reference to the nature of the prophecies
which he would deliver; but it is a remarkable circumstance that it
coincides so entirely with the design of so large a portion of his
predictions. The substance of the latter portion of the book, at least,
is the salvation which Yahweh would effect for his people from their
oppressers in Babylon, and the far mightier deliverance which the world
would experience under the Messiah.

The son of Amoz - See the Introduction, Section 2. "Concerning Judah."
The Jews after the death of Solomon were divided into two kingdoms; the
kingdom of Judah, and of Israel, or Ephraim. The kingdom of Judah
included the tribes of Judah and Benjamin. Benjamin was a small tribe,
and it was not commonly mentioned, or the name was lost in that of
Judah. The kingdom of Israel, or Ephraim, included the remaining ten
tribes. Few of the prophets appeared among them; and the personal
ministry of Isaiah does not appear to have been at all extended to them.

Jerusalem - The capital of the kingdom of Judah. It was on the dividing
line between the tribes of Judah and Benjamin. It is supposed to have
been founded by Melchizedek, who is called king of Salem [Gen
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018), and who is supposed to have
given this name "Salem" to it. This was about 2000 years before Christ.
About a century after its foundation as a city, it was captured by the
"Jebusites," who extended its walls and built a citadel on Mount Zion.
By them it was called Jebus. In the conquest of Canaan, Joshua put to
death its king [Jos 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#023), and
obtained possession of the town, which was jointly occupied by the
Hebrews and Jebusites until the latter were expelled by David, who made
it the capital of his kingdom under the name of "Jebus-Salem," or, for
the sake of easier pronunciation by changing the Hebrew letter ב (b)
into the Hebrew letter ר (r), "Jerusalem." After the revolt of the ten
tribes, it of course became the capital of the kingdom of Judah. It was
built on hills, or rocks, and was capable of being strongly fortified,
and was well adapted to be the capital of the nation. For a more full
description of Jerusalem, see the notes at [Mat
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001). The vision which is here spoken
of as having been seen respecting Judah and Jerusalem, pertains only to
this chapter; see [Isa 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001).

In the days of Uzziah - In the time, or during the reign of Uzziah; 2
Chr. 26; compare the Introduction, Section 3. He was sixteen years old
when he began to reign, and reigned fifty-two years. It is not affirmed
or supposed that Isaiah began to prophesy at the commencement of his
reign. The first part of the long reign of Uzziah was prosperous. He
gained important victories over his enemies, and fortified his kingdom;
[Ch2 26:5-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#005). He had under him an army
of more than three hundred thousand men. But he became proud - attempted
an act of sacrilege - was smitten of God, and died a leper. But though
the kingdom under Uzziah was flourishing, yet it had in it the elements
of decay. During the previous reign of Joash, it had been invaded and
weakened by the Assyrians, and a large amount of wealth had been taken
to Damascus, the capital of Syria; [Ch2
24:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#023). It is not improbable that
those ravages were repeated during the latter part of the reign of
Uzziah; compare [Isa 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007).

Jotham - He began to reign at the age of twenty-five years, and reigned
sixteen years; [Ch2 27:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#001).

Ahaz - He began to reign at the age of twenty, and reigned sixteen
years. He was a wicked man, and during his reign the kingdom was
involved in crimes and calamities; 2 Chr. 28.

Hezekiah - He was a virtuous and upright prince. He began his reign at
the age of twenty-five years, and reigned twenty-nine; 2 Chr. 29; see
the Introduction Section 3,

[Isaiah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 1:2</span></span>

Hear, O heavens - This is properly the beginning of the prophecy. It is
a sublime commencement; and is of a highly poetic character. The heavens
and the earth are summoned to bear witness to the apostasy, ingratitude,
and deep depravity of the chosen people of God. The address is
expressive of deep feeling - the bursting forth of a heart filled with
amazement at a wonderful and unusual event. The same sublime beginning
is found in the song of Moses, [Deu
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001) :

Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak;

And hear, O earth, the words of my mouth.

Compare [Psa 4:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#003). Thus also the
prophets often invoke the hills and mountains to hear them; [Eze
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#003) : 'Ye mountains of Israel, hear
the words of the Lord God: Thus saith the Lord God to the mountains, and
to the hills, and to the rivers, and to the valleys;' compare [Eze
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#001). 'Be astonished, O ye heavens, at
this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, saith the Lord,' [Jer
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#012). By the heavens therefore, in
this place, we are not to understand the inhabitants of heaven, that is,
the angels, anymore than by the hills we are to understand the
inhabitants of the mountains. It is high poetic language, denoting the
importance of the subject, and the remarkable and amazing truth to which
the attention was to be called.

Give ear, O earth - It was common thus to address the earth on any
remarkable occasion, especially anyone implying warm expostulation, [Jer
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#019); [Jer
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#029); [Mic
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#002); [Mic
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#002); [Isa
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#001); [Isa
49:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#013).

For - Since it is Yahweh that speaks, all the universe is summoned to
attend; compare [Psa 33:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#008) : 'Let all
the earth fear the Lord; let all the inhabitants of the World stand in
awe of him. For he spake and it was done; he commanded and it stood
fast.'

The Lord - - יהוה yehovâh, or Jehovah. The small capitals used here and
elsewhere throughout the Bible in printing the word Lord, denote that
the original word is Yahweh. It is derived from the verb היה hâyâh, "to
be;" and is used to denote "being," or the fountain of being, and can be
applied only to the true God; compare [Exo
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014) : 'And God said unto Moses, I Am
That I Am, אהיה אשׁר אהיה 'eheyeh 'ăsher 'eheyeh; [Exo
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#003); [Num
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#021); [Isa
47:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#008). It is a name which is never
given to idols, or conferred on a creature; and though it occurs often
in the Hebrew Scriptures, as is indicated by the small capitals, yet our
translators have retained it but four times; [Exo
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#003); [Psa
83:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#018); [Isa
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#002); [Isa
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#004). In combination, however, with
other names, it occurs often. Thus in Isaiah, meaning the salvation of
Yahweh; "Jeremiah," the exaltation or grandeur of Yahweh, etc.; compare
[Gen 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#014) : 'Abraham called the name
of the place "Jehovah-jireh,'" [Exo
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#015); [Jdg
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#024); [Eze
48:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#035). The Jews never pronounced this
name, not even in reading their own Scriptures. So sacred did they deem
it, that when it occurred in their books, instead of the word Yahweh,
they substituted the word אדני 'ădonāy, "Lord." Our translators have
shown respect to this feeling of the Jews in regard to the sacredness of
the name; and hence, have rendered it by the name of Lord - a word which
by no means conveys the sense of the word Yahweh. It would have been an
advantage to our version if the word Yahweh had been retained wherever
it occurs in the original.

I have nourished - Hebrew "I have made great;" גדלתי gı̂daletı̂y. In Piel,
the word means "to make great, to cause to grow;" as e. g., the hair;
[Num 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#005), plants, [Isa
44:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#014); then to educate or bring up
children; [Isa 49:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#021); [Kg2
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#006)

And brought up - רוממתי romamethı̂y, from רום rûm, "to lift up" or
"exalt." In Piel it means to bring up, nourish, educate; [Isa
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#004). These words, though applied
often to the training up of children, yet are used here also to denote
the elevation to which they had been raised. He had not merely trained
them up, but he had trained them up to an elevated station; to special
honor and privileges. "Children." Hebrew בנים bânnı̂ym - sons." They were
the adopted children of God; and they are represented as being weak, and
ignorant, and helpless as children, when he took them under his fatherly
protection and care; [Hos 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001) : 'When
Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my son out of Egypt;'
compare the note at [Mat 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#015); [Isa
63:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#008).

They have rebelled - This complaint was often brought against the Jews;
compare [Isa 63:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#010); [Jer
2:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#006). This is the sum of the charge
against them. God had shown them special favors. He recounted his mercy
in bringing them out of Egypt; and on the ground of this, he demanded
obedience and love; compare [Exo
20:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#001). And yet they bad forgotten
him, and rebelled against him. The Targum of Jonathan, an ancient
Chaldee version, has well expressed the idea here. 'Hear, O heavens,
which were moved when I gave my law to my people: give ear, O earth,
which didst tremble before my word, for the Lord has spoken. My people,
the house of Israel, whom I called sons - I loved them - I honored them,
and they rebelled against me.' The same is true substantially of all
sinners; and alas, how often may a similar expostulation be made with
the professed people of God!

[Isaiah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 1:3</span></span>

The ox ... - The design of this comparison is to show the great
stupidity and ingratitude of the Jews. Even the least sagacious and most
stupid of the animals, destitute as they are of reason and conscience,
evince knowledge anal submission far more than the professed people of
God. The ox is a well known domestic animal, remarkable for patient
willingness to toil, and for submission to his owner.

Knoweth his owner - Recognizes, or is submissive to him.

The ass - A well known animal, proverbial for dulness and stupidity.

His master's crib - אבוס 'êbûs from אבס 'âbas, to heap up, and then to
fatten. Hence, it is applied to the stall, barn, or crib, where cattle
are fed, or made fat; [Job 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#009); [Pro
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#004). The donkey has sufficient
knowledge to understand that his support is derived from that. The idea
is, that the ox was more submissive to laws than the Jews; and that even
the most stupid animal better knew from where support was to be derived,
than they did the source of their comfort and protection. The donkey
would not wander away, and the ox would not rebel as they had done. This
comparison was very striking, and very humiliating, and nothing could be
more suited to bring down their pride. A similar comparison is used
elsewhere. Thus, in [Jer 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#007), the Jews
are contrasted with the stork: 'Yea, the stork in the heaven knoweth her
appointed times; and the turtle Dove, and the crane, and the swallow,
observe the time of their coming; but my people know not the judgment of
the Lord.' This idea has been beautifully expressed by Watts:

The brutes obey their God,

And bow their necks to men;

But we more base, more brutish things,

Reject his easy reign.

Compare [Hos 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#004).

But Israel - The name Israel, though after the division of the tribes
into two kingdoms specifically employed to denote that of the ten
tribes, is often used in the more general sense to denote the whole
people of the Jews, including the kingdom of Judah. It refers here to
the kingdom of Judah, though a name is used which is not inappropriately
characteristic of the whole people.

Doth not know - The Latin Vulgate, the Septuagint, and the Arabic, add
the word 'me.' The word know is used in the sense of recognizing him as
their Lord; of acknowledging him, or submitting to him.

Doth not consider - Hebrew, Do not "understand." They have a stupidity
greater than the brute.

[Isaiah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 1:4</span></span>

Ah! sinful nation - The word rendered 'ah!' - הוי hôy - is not a mere
exclamation, expressing astonishment. It is rather an interjection
denouncing threatening, or punishment. 'Wo to the sinful nation.'
Vulgate, 'Vae genti peccatrici.' The corruption pertained to the nation,
and not merely to a part. It had become general.

Laden with iniquity - The word translated "laden" - כבד kebed - denotes
properly anything "heavy," or burdensome; from כבד kâbad, "to be heavy."
It means that they were oppressed, and borne down with the "weight" of
their sins. Thus we say, Sin sits "heavy" on the conscience. Thus Cain
said, 'My punishment is greater than I can bear;' [Gen
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#013). The word is applied to an
"employment" as being burdensome; [Exo
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#018) : 'This thing is too "heavy" for
thee.' [Num 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#014) : 'I am not able to
bear eli this people alone; it is too "heavy" for me.' It is applied
also to a "famine," as being heavy, severe, distressing. [Gen
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#010) : 'For the famine was "grievous"
(כבד kâbed, heavy) in the land;' [Gen
41:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#031). It is also applied to "speech,"
as being heavy, dull, unintelligible. [Exo
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#010) : 'I am slow (heavy כבד kebad) of
speech, and of a slow (heavy כבד kebad) tongue.' It is not applied to
sin in the Scriptures, except in this place, or except in the sense of
making atonement for it. The idea however, is very striking - that of a
nation - an entire people, bowed and crushed under the enormous weight
of accumulated crimes. To pardon iniquity, or to atone for it, is
represented by bearing it, as if it were a heavy burden. [Exo
28:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#038), [Exo
28:43](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#043), 'That Aaron may bear the
iniquity of the holy things.' [Lev
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#017) : 'God hath given it you to bear
the iniquity of the congregation.' [Lev
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#009); [Lev
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#022); [Num
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#001); [Isa
53:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#006) : 'Jehovah hath laid on him the
iniquity of us all.' [Isa 53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011) : 'He
shall bear their iniquities.' [Pe1
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024) : 'Who his own self bare our sins
in his own body on the tree.'

A seed - זרע zera‛, from זרע zâra‛, to sow, to scatter, to disperse. It
is applied to seed sown in a field; [Jdg
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#003); [Gen
1:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#011); [Gen
47:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#023); to plants set out, or
engrafted; or to planting, or transplanting a nation. [Isa
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#010) : 'And thou shalt set it
(תזרענוּ tizerâ‛enû shalt sow, or plant it) with strange slips.' Hence,
it is applied to children, posterity, descendants, from the resemblance
to seed sown, and to a harvest springing up, and spreading. The word is
applied by way of eminence to the Jews, as being the seed or posterity
of Abraham, according to the promise that his seed should be as the
stars of heaven; [Gen 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#007); [Gen
13:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#015); [Gen
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005), [Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018); [Gen
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007), ...

Children - Hebrew sons - the same word that is used in [Isa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002). They were the adopted people or
sons of God, but they had now become corrupt.

That are corrupters - mashchiytiym - משׁחיתים mashechı̂ythı̂ym, from שׁחת
shachath, to destroy, to lay waste, as an invading army does a city or
country; [Jos 22:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#033); [Gen
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#013). To destroy a vineyard; [Jer
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#010). To break down walls; [Eze
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#004). Applied to conduct, it means to
destroy, or lay waste virtuous principles; to break down the barriers to
vice; to corrupt the morals. [Gen 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#012)
: 'And God looked upon the earth, and it was corrupt - נשׁחתה
nı̂shechâthâh; for all flesh had corrupted his way - השׁחית hı̂shechı̂yth -
upon the earth;' [Deu 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#016); [Deu
31:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#029); [Jdg
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#019). They were not merely corrupt
themselves, but they corrupted others by their example. This is always
the case. When people become infidels and profligates themselves, they
seek to make as many more as possible. The Jews did this by their wicked
lives. The same charge is often brought against them; see [Jdg
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#012); [Zep
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#007).

They have provoked - Hebrew נאצוּ nı̂'ătsû 'They have despised the Holy
One;' compare [Pro 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#030); [Pro
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#012); [Pro
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#005). Vulgate, 'They have blasphemed.'
Septuagint, παρωργίσατε parōrgisate. 'You have provoked him to anger.'
The meaning is, that they had so despised him, as to excite his
indignation.

The Holy One of Israel - God; called the Holy One of Israel because he
was revealed to them as their God, or they were taught to regard him as
the sacred object of their worship.

They are gone away backward - Lowth: 'They have turned their backs upon
him.' The word rendered "they are gone away," נזרוּ nâzorû, from זור
zûr, means properly, to become estranged; to be alienated. [Job
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#013) : 'Mine acquaintance are verily
estranged from me.' It means especially that declining from God, or that
alienation, which takes place when people commit sin; [Psa
78:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#030).

[Isaiah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 1:5</span></span>

Why ... - The prophet now, by an abrupt change in the discourse, calls
their attention to the effects of their sins. Instead of saving that
they had been smitten, or of saying that they had been punished for
their sins, he assumes both, and asks why it should be repeated. The
Vulgate reads this: 'Super quo - on what part - shall I smite you
anymore?' This expresses well the sense of the Hebrew - על־מה ‛al-meh -
upon what; and the meaning is, 'what part of the body can be found on
which blows have not been inflicted? On every part there are traces of
the stripes which have been inflicted for your sins.' The idea is taken
from a body that is all covered over with weals or marks of blows, and
the idea is, that the whole frame is one continued bruise, and there
remains no sound part to be stricken. The particular chastisement to
which the prophet refers is specified in [Isa
1:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007). In [Isa
1:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005), he refers to the calamities of
the nation, under the image of a person wounded and chastised for
crimes. Such a figure of speech is not uncommon in the classic writers.
Thus Cicero (de fin. iv. 14) says, 'quae hie reipublicae vulnera
imponebat hie sanabat.' See also Tusc. Quaes. iii. 22; Ad Quintum
fratrem, ii. 25; Sallust; Cat. 10.

Should ye be stricken - Smitten, or punished. The manner in which they
had been punished, he specities in [Isa
1:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007). Jerome says, that the sense is,
'there is no medicine which I can administer to your wounds. All your
members are full of wounds; and there is no part of your body which has
not been smitten before. The more you are afflicted, the more will your
impiety and iniquity increase.' The word here, תכוּ tukû, from נכה
nâkâh, means to smite, to beat, to strike down, to slay, or kill. It is
applied to the infliction of punishment on an individual; or to the
judgments of God by the plague, pestilence, or sickness. [Gen
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#002) : 'And they smote the men that
were at the door with blindness.' [Num
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#012) : 'And I will smite them with
the pestilence.' [Exo 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#025) : 'After
that the Lord had smitten the river,' that is, had changed it into
blood; compare [Isa 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#020); [Zac
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#002). Here it refers to the judgments
inflicted on the nation as the punishment of their crimes.

Ye will revolt - Hebrew You will add defection, or revolt. The effect of
calamity, and punishment, will be only to increase rebellion. Where the
heart is right with God, the tendency of affliction is to humble it, and
lead it more and more to God. Where it is evil, the tendency is to make
the sinner more obstinate and rebellious. This effect of punishment is
seen every where. Sinners revolt more and more. They become sullen, and
malignant, and fretful; they plunge into vice to seek temporary relief,
and thus they become more and more alienated from God.

The whole head - The prophet proceeds to specify more definitely what he
had just said respecting their being stricken. He designates each of the
members of the body - thus comparing the Jewish people to the human body
when under severe punishment. The word head in the Scriptures is often
used to denote the princes, leaders, or chiefs of the nation. But the
expression here is used as a figure taken from the human body, and
refers solely to the punishment of the people, not to their sins. It
means that all had been smitten - all was filled with the effects of
punishment - as the human body is when the head and all the members are
diseased.

Is sick - Is so smitten - so punished, that it has become sick and
painful. Hebrew לחלי lâchŏlı̂y - for sickness, or pain. The preposition ל
denotes a state, or condition of anything. [Psa
69:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#021). 'And in (ל) my thirst, they
gave me vinegar to drink.' The expression is intensive, and denotes that
the head was entirely sick.

The whole heart faint - The heart is here put for the whole region of
the chest or stomach. As when the head is violently pained, there is
also sickness at the heart, or in the stomach, and as these are
indications of entire or total prostration of the frame so the
expression here denotes the perfect desolation which had come over the
nation.

Faint - Sick, feeble, without vigor, attended with nausea. [Jer
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#018) : 'When I would comfort myself in
my sorrow, my heart is faint within me;' [Lam
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#022). When the body is suffering; when
severe punishment is inflicted, the effect is to produce landor and
faintness at the seat of life. This is the idea here. Their punishment
had been so severe for their sins, that the heart was languid and feeble
- still keeping up the figure drawn from the human body.

[Isaiah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 1:6</span></span>

From the sole of the foot ... - Or is we say, 'from head to foot,' that
is, in every part of the body. There may be included also the idea that
this extended from the lowest to the highest among the people. The
Chaldee paraphrase is, 'from the lowest of the people even to the
princes - all are contumacious and rebellious.'

No soundness - מתם methôm, from תמם tâmam, to be perfect, sound,
uninjured. There is no part unaffected; no part that is sound. It is all
smitten and sore.

But wounds - The precise shade of difference between this and the two
following words may not be apparent. Together, they mean Such wounds and
contusions as are inflicted upon man by scourging, or beating him. This
mode of punishment was common among the Jews; as it is at the East at
this time. Abarbanel and Kimchi say that the word rendered here "wounds"
(פצע petsa‛, a verbal from פצע pâtsa‛ to wound, to mutilate), means an
open wound, or a cut from which blood flows.

Bruises - חבורה chabbûrâh. This word means a contusion, or the effect of
a blow where the skin is not broken; such a contusion as to produce a
swelling, and livid appearance; or to make it, as we say, black and
blue.

Putrifying sores - The Hebrew rather means recent, or fresh wounds; or
rather, perhaps, a running wound, which continues fresh and open; which
cannot be cicatrized, or dried up. The Septuagint renders it elegantly
πληγή φλγμαίνουσα plēgē flegmainous, a swelling, or tumefying wound. The
expression is applied usually to inflammations, as of boils, or to the
swelling of the tonsils, etc.

They have not been closed - That is, the lips had not been pressed
together, to remove the blood from the wound. The meaning is, that
nothing had been done toward healing the wound. It was an unhealed,
undressed, all-pervading sore. The art of medicine, in the East,
consists chiefly in external applications; accordingly the prophet's
images in this place are all taken from surgery. Sir John Chardin, in
his note on [Pro 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#008), 'It shall be
health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones,' observes, that the
comparison is taken from the plasters, ointments, oils, and frictions,
which are made use of in the East in most maladies. 'In Judea,' says
Tavernier, 'they have a certain preparation of oil, and melted grease,
which they commonly use for the healing of wounds.' Lowth. Compare the
note at [Isa 38:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#021).

Neither mollified with ointment - Neither made soft, or tender, with
ointment. Great use was made, in Eastern nations, of oil, and various
kinds of unguents, in medicine. Hence, the good Samaritan is represented
as pouring in oil and wine into the wounds of the man that fell among
thieves [Luk 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#034); and the apostles
were directed to anoint with oil those who were sick; [Jam
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014); compare [Rev
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#018).

Ointment - Hebrew oil. שׁמן shemen. The oil of olives was used commonly
for this purpose. The whole figure in these two verses relates to their
being punished for their sins. It is taken from the appearance of a man
who is severely, beaten, or scourged for crime; whose wounds had not
been dressed, and who was thus a continued bruise, or sore, from his
head to his feet. The cause of this the prophet states afterward, [Isa
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010) ff. With great skill he first
reminds them of what they saw and knew, that they were severely
punished; and then states to them the cause of it. Of the calamities to
which the prophet refers, they could have no doubt. They were every
where visible in all their cities and towns. On these far-spreading
desolations, he fixes the eye distinctly first. Had he begun with the
statement of their depravity, they would probably have revolted at it.
But being presented with a statement of their sufferings, which they all
saw and felt, they were prepared for the statement of the cause. To find
access to the consciences of sinners, and to convince them of their
guilt, it is often necessary to remind them first of the calamities in
which they are actually involved; and then to search for the cause. This
passage, therefore, has no reference to their moral character. It
relates solely to their punishment. It is often indeed adduced to prove
the doctrine of depravity; but it has no direct reference to it, and it
should not be adduced to prove that people are depraved, or applied as
referring to the moral condition of man. The account of their moral
character, as the cause of their calamities, is given in [Isa
1:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010). That statement will fully
account for the many woes which had come on the nation.

[Isaiah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 1:7</span></span>

Your country is desolate - This is the literal statement of what he had
just affirmed by a figure. In this there was much art. The figure [Isa
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006) was striking. The resemblance
between a man severely beaten, and entirely livid and sore, and a land
perfectly desolate, was so impressive as to arrest the attention. This
had been threatened as one of the curses which should attend
disobedience; [Lev 26:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#033) :

And I will scatter you among the heathen,

And will draw out a sword after you:

And your land shall be desolate,

And your cities waste.

Compare [Isa 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#031); [Deu
28:49-52](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#049). It is not certain, or agreed
among expositors, to what time the prophet refers in this passage. Some
have supposed that he refers to the time of Ahaz, and to the calamities
which came upon the nation during his reign; [Ch2
28:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#005). But the probability is, that
this refers to the time of Uzziah; see the Analysis of the chapter. The
reign of Uzziah was indeed prosperous; 2 Chr. 26. But it is to be
remembered that the land had been ravaged just before, under the reigns
of Joash and Amaziah, by the kings of Syria and Israel; [Kg2
14:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#008); 2 Chr. 24; 25; and it is by
no means probable that it had recovered in the time of Uzziah. It was
lying under the effect of the former desolation, and not improbably the
enemies of the Jews were even then hovering around it, and possibly
still in the very midst of it. The kingdom was going to decay, and the
reign of Uzziah gave it only a temporary prosperity.

Is desolate - Hebrew: "Is desolation." שׁממה shemâmâh. This is a Hebrew
mode of emphatic expression, denoting that the desolation was so
universal that the land might be said to be entirely in ruins.

Your land - That is, the fruit, or productions of the land. Foreigners
consume all that it produces.

Strangers - זרים zâryı̂m, from זור zûr, to be alienated, or estranged,
[Isa 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004). It is applied to foreigners,
that is, those who were not Israelites, [Exo
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#033); and is often used to denote an
enemy, a foe, a barbarian; [Psa 109:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#011)
:

Let the extortioner catch all that he hath,

And let the strangers plunder his labor.

[Eze 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#009); [Eze
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#010); [Eze
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#012); [Hos
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#009); [Hos
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#007). The word refers here particularly
to the Syrians.

Devour it - Consume its provisions.

In your presence - This is a circumstance that greatly heightens the
calamity, that they were compelled to look on and witness the
desolation, without being able to prevent it.

As overthrown by strangers - זרים כמהפכה kemahpêkâh zâryı̂m - from הפך
hâphak, to turn, to overturn, to destroy as a city; [Gen
19:21-25](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#021); [Deu
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#022). It refers to the changes which
an invading foe produces in a nation, where everything is subverted;
where cities are destroyed, walls are thrown down, and fields and
vineyards laid waste. The land was as if an invading army had passed
through it, and completely overturned everything. Lowth proposes to read
this, 'as if destroyed by an inundation;' but without authority. The
desolation caused by the ravages of foreigners, at a time when the
nations were barbarous, was the highest possible image of distress, and
the prophet dwells on it, though with some appearance of repetition.

[Isaiah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 1:8</span></span>

And the daughter of Zion - Zion, or Sion, was the name of one of the
hills on which the city of Jerusalem was built. On this hill formerly
stood the city of the Jebusites, and when David took it from them he
transferred to it his court, and it was called the city of David, or the
holy hill. It was in the southern part of the city. As Zion became the
residence of the court, and was the most important part of the city, the
name was often used to denote the city itself, and is often applied to
the whole of Jerusalem. The phrase 'daughter of Zion' here means Zion
itself, or Jerusalem. The name daughter is given to it by a
personification in accordance with a common custom in Eastern writers,
by which beautiful towns and cities are likened to young females. The
name mother is also applied in the same way. Perhaps the custom arose
from the fact that when a city was built, towns and villages would
spring up round it - and the first would be called the mother-city
(hence, the word metropolis). The expression was also employed as an
image of beauty, from a fancied resemblance between a beautiful town and
a beautiful and well-dressed woman. Thus [Psa
45:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013), the phrase daughter of Tyre,
means Tyre itself; [Psa 137:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#008),
daughter of Babylon, that is, Babylon; [Isa
37:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#022), 'The virgin, the daughter of
Zion;' [Jer 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002); [Isa
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#012); [Jer
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#017); [Num
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#023), [Num
21:32](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#032), (Hebrew); [Jdg
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#026). Is left. נותרה nôtherâh. The
word used here denotes left as a part or remnant is left - not left
entire, or complete, but in a weakened or divided state.

As a cottage - literally, "a shade," or "shelter" - כסכה kesûkkâh, a
temporary habitation erected in vineyards to give shelter to the grape
gatherers, and to those who were uppointed to watch the vineyard to
guard it from depredations; compare the note at [Mat
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#033). The following passage from Mr.
Jowett's 'Christian Researches,' describing what he himself saw, will
throw light on this verse. 'Extensive fields of ripe melons and
cucumbers adorned the sides of the river (the Nile). They grew in such
abundance that the sailors freely helped themselves. Some guard,
however, is placed upon them. Occasionally, but at long and desolate
intervals, we may observe a little hut, made of reeds, just capable of
containing one man; being in fact little more than a fence against a
north wind. In these I have observed, sometimes, a poor old man, perhaps
lame, protecting the property. It exactly illustrates [Isa
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008).' 'Gardens were often probably
unfenced, and formerly, as now, esculent vegetables were planted in some
fertile spot in the open field. A custom prevails in Hindostan, as
travelers inform us, of planting in the commencement of the rainy
season, in the extensive plains, an abundance of melons, cucumbers,
gourds, etc. In the center of the field is an artificial mound with a
hut on the top, just large enough to shelter a person from the storm and
the heat;' Bib. Dic. A.S.U. The sketch in the book will convey a clear
idea of such a cottage. Such a cottage would be designed only for a
temporary habitation. So Jerusalem seemed to be left amidst the
surrounding desolation as a temporary abode, soon to be destroyed.

As a lodge - The word lodge here properly denotes a place for passing
the night, but it means also a temporary abode. It was erected to afford
a shelter to those who guarded the enclosure from thieves, or from
jackals, and small foxes. 'The jackal,' says Hasselquist, 'is a species
of mustela, which is very common in Palestine, especially during the
vintage, and often destroys whole vineyards, and gardens of cucumbers.'

A garden of cucumbers - The word cucumbers here probably includes every
thing of the melon kind, as well as the cucumber. They are in great
request in that region on account of their cooling qualities, and are
produced in great abundance and perfection. These things are
particularly mentioned among the luxuries which the Israelites enjoyed
in Egypt, and for which they sighed when they were in the wilderness.
[Num 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#005) : 'We remember - the
cucumbers and the melons,' etc. The cucumber which is produced in Egypt
and Palestine is large - usually a foot in length, soft, tender, sweet,
and easy of digestion (Gesenius), and being of a cooling nature, was
especially delicious in their hot climate. The meaning here is, that
Jerusalem seemed to be left as a temporary, lonely habitation, soon to
be forsaken and destroyed.

As a besieged city - נצוּרה כעיר ke‛ı̂yr netsôrâh. Lowth. 'As a city
taken by siege.' Noyes. "'So is the delivered city.' This translation
was first proposed by Arnoldi of Marburg. It avoids the incongruity of
comparing a city with a city, and requires no alteration of the text
except a change of the vowel points. According to this translation, the
meaning will be, that all things round about the city lay desolate, like
the withered vines of a cucumber garden around the watchman's hut; in
other words, that the city alone stood safe amidst the ruins caused by
the enemy, like the hut in a gathered garden of cucumber." Noyes.
According to this interpretation, the word נצוּרה netsôrâh is derived
not from צור tsûr, to besiege, to press, to straiten; but from נצר
nâtsar, to preserve, keep, defend; compare [Eze
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#012). The Hebrew will bear this
translation; and the concinnity of the comparison will thus be
preserved. I rather prefer, however, the common interpretation, as being
more obviously the sense of the Hebrew, and as being sufficiently in
accordance with the design of the prophet. The idea then is, that of a
city straitened by a siege, yet standing as a temporary habitation,
while all the country around was lying in ruins. Jerusalem, alone
preserved amidst the desolation spreading throughout the land, will
resemble a temporary lodge in the garden - itself soon to be removed or
destroyed. The essential idea, whatever translation is adopted, is that
of the solitude, loneliness, and temporary continuance of even
Jerusalem, while all around was involved in desolation and ruin.

[Isaiah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 1:9</span></span>

Except ... - It is owing entirely to the mercy of God, that we are not
like Sodom. The prophet traces this not to the goodness of the nation,
not to any power or merit of theirs, but solely to the mercy of God.
This passage the apostle Paul has used in an argument to establish the
doctrine of divine sovereignty in the salvation of people; see the note
at [Rom 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029).

The Lord - Hebrew Yahweh. Note [Isa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002).

Of hosts - צבאות tsebâ'ôth - the word sometimes translated "Sabaoth";
[Rom 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029); [Jam
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#004). The word means literally armies
or military hosts. It is applied, however, to the angels which surround
the throne of God; [Kg1 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#019); [Ch2
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#018); [Psa
103:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#021); and to the stars or
constellations that appear to be marshalled in the sky; [Jer
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#022); [Isa
40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026). This host, or the "host of
heaven," was frequently an object of idolatrous worship; [Deu
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#019); [Deu
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#003); [Kg2
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#016). God is called Yahweh of hosts
because he is at the head of all these armies, as their leader and
commander; he marshals and directs them - as a general does the army
under his command. 'This,' says Gesenius, 'is the most common name of
God in Isaiah, and in Jeremiah, Zechariah, and Malachi. It represents
him as the ruler of the hosts of heaven, that is, the angels and the
stars. Sometimes, but less frequently, we meet with the appellation
Yahweh, God of hosts. Hence, some suppose the expression Yahweh of hosts
to be elliptical. But it is not a correct assertion that Yahweh, as a
proper name, admits of no genitive. But such relations and adjuncts as
depend upon the genitive, often depend upon proper names. So in Arabic,
one is called Rebiah of the poor in reference to his liability.' The
name is given here, because to save any portion of a nation so wicked
implied the exercise of the same power as that by which he controlled
the hosts of heaven.

Remnant - A small part - that which is left. It means here, that God had
spared a portion of the nation, so that they were not entirely
overthrown.

We should have been as Sodom ... - This does not refer to the character
of the people, but to their destiny. If God had not interposed to save
them they would have been overwhelmed entirely as Sodom was; compare
[Gen 19:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024).

[Isaiah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 1:10</span></span>

Hear the word of the Lord - The message of God. Having stated the
calamities under which the nation was groaning, the prophet proceeds to
address the rulers, and to state the cause of all these woes.

Ye rulers of Sodom - The incidental mention Sodom in the previous verse
gives occasion for this beautiful transition, and abrupt and spirited
address. Their character and destiny were almost like those of Sodom,
and the prophet therefore openly addresses the rulers as being called to
preside over a people like those in Sodom. There could have been no more
severe or cutting reproof of their wickedness than to address them as
resembling the people whom God overthrew for their enormous crimes.

[Isaiah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 1:11</span></span>

To what purpose - לי למה lâmâh lı̂y. 'What is it to me; or what profit or
pleasure can I have in them?' God here replies to an objection which
might be urged by the Jews to the representation which had been made of
their guilt. The objection would be, that they were strict in the duties
of their religion, and that they even abounded in offering victims of
sacrifice. God replies in this and the following verses, that all this
would be of no use, and would meet with no acceptance, unless it were
the offering of the heart. He demanded righteousness; and without that,
all external offerings would be vain. The same sentiment often occurs in
the Old Testament.

Hath Jehovah as great delight in burnt-offerings and sacrifices

As in obeying the voice of the Lord?

Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice,

And to hearken than the fat of rams.

[Sa1 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022).

To what purpose shall frankincense be brought unto me from Sabah?

Or the rich aromatic reed from a far country?

Your burnt-offerings are not acceptable,

Nor your sacrifices pleasant unto me.

[Jer 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#020). Blaney.

For I desired mercy and not sacrifice;

And the knowledge of God more than burnt-offerings.

[Hos 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006).

I hate, I despise your solemn feast days,

And I will not smell in your solemn assemblies;

Though ye offer me your burnt-offerings,

And your meat-offerings

I will not accept them;

Neither will I regard the thank-offerings of your fat beasts.

Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs;

For I will not hear the melody of thy viols.

But let judgment run down as waters,

And righteousness as a mighty stream.

[Amo 5:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#021).

Is the multitude - There was no deficiency in the amount of offerings.
It was admitted that they complied in this respect with the requirements
of the law; and that they offered an abundance of sacrifices, so
numerous as to be called a multitude - רב rôb, a vast number. Hypocrites
abound in outward religious observances just in proportion to their
neglect of the spiritual requirements of God's word; compare [Mat
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023).

Your sacrifices - זבחיכב zibechēykeb, from זבח zâbach, to slay;
especially to slay for sacrifice. The word used here denotes any
sacrifice which was made by blood; but is distinguished from the
burnt-offering from the fat, that this was not entirely consumed. It is
applied to the sin-offering, trespass-offering, thank-offering. The word
also stands opposed to the offerings which were made without blood מנחה
minchāh. Any offering that consisted in an animal that was slain came
under this general denomination of sacrifice, [Exo
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#025); [Lev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#008); [Num
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#005).

burnt-offerings - עלות 'olôth, from עלה ‛âlâh, to go up, ascend. It is
applied to a sacrifice that was wholly consumed, or made to ascend on an
altar. It corresponds to the Greek ὁλόκαυστον holokauston, that which is
entirely consumed. Such offerings abounded among the Hebrews. The
burnt-offering was wholly consumed on the altar, excepting the skin and
the blood. The blood was sprinkled round the altar, and the other parts
of the animal which was slain, were laid upon the altar and entirely
burned; see Lev. 1. This was commonly a voluntary offering; and this
shows their zeal to comply with the external forms of religion.

I am full - שׂבעתי s'âba‛etı̂y, I am satiated. The word is usually
applied to food and drink, denoting satisfaction, or satiety. It is used
here with great force, denoting that their offerings had been so
numerous and so incessant, that God was satiated with them. It means
that he was weary, tired, disgusted with them. Thus, in [Job
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#004) : 'I am full - שׂבעתי s'âba‛etı̂y -
of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the day.' [Pro
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#017) :

Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbor's house,

Lest he be weary (Hebrew full) of thee, and hate thee.

Fat ... - They were required to offer, not the lame, or the diseased
[Deu 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#021); [Deu
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#001); [Lev
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#012); [Mal
1:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#007); and God admits here that they
had externally complied with this requirement. The fat was burned on the
altar.

I delight not - That is; I delight; not in them when offered without the
heart; or I delight not in them in comparison with works of
righteousness; see [Amo 5:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#021); Ps.
4:9-13; [Psa 51:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#016).

[Isaiah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 1:12</span></span>

When you come to appear before me - The temple was in Jerusalem, and was
regarded as the habitation, or dwelling-place, of the God of Israel.
Particularly, the most holy place of the temple was deemed the place of
his sacred abode. The Shekinah - from שׁכן shâkan, to dwell - the
visible symbol of his presence, rested on the cover of the ark, and from
this place he was accustomed to commune with his people, and to give
responses to their requests. Hence, 'to appear before God,' Hebrew 'to
be seen before my face,' פני לראות lerâ'ôth pânāy for פני את 'et pânāy,
means to appear in his temple as a worshipper. The phrase occurs in this
sense in the following places: [Exo
34:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#023); [Deu
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#011); [Sa1
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#022); [Psa
42:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#003).

Who hath required this - The Jews were required to appear there to
worship God [Exo 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#017); [Deu
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#016); but it was not required that
they should appear with that spirit and temper. A similar sentiment is
expressed in [Psa 50:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016).

At your hand - From you. The emphasis in this expression is to be laid
on your. 'Who has asked it of you?' It was indeed the duty of the
humble, and the sincere, to tread those courts, but who had required
such hypocrites as they were to do it? God sought the offerings of pure
worshippers, not those of the hypocritical and the profane.

To tread my courts - The courts of the temple were the different areas
or open spaces which surrounded it. None entered the temple itself but
the priests. The people worshipped God in the courts assigned them
around the temple. In one of those courts was the altar of
burnt-offerings; and the sacrifices were all made there; see the notes
at [Mat 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012). To tread his courts was
an expression therefore, equivalent to, to worship. To tread the courts
of the Lord here, has the idea of profanation. Who has required you to
tread those courts with this hollow, heartless service? It is often used
in the sense of treading down, or trampling on, [Kg2
7:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#017); [Dan
8:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#007); [Isa
63:3-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#003).

[Isaiah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 1:13</span></span>

Bring no more - God does not intend absolutely to forbid this kind of
worship, but he expresses his strong abhorrence of the manner in which
it was done. He desired a better state of mind; he preferred purity of
heart to all this external homage.

Vain - Hebrew "offering of vanity" - שׁוא shâv' - offerings which were
hollow, false, deceitful, and hypocritical.

Oblations - מנחת minchath. This word properly denotes a gift, or
present, of any kind [Gen 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#013), and
then especially a present or offering to the Deity, [Gen
4:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#003). It does not denote a bloody
offering, but what is improperly rendered in the Old Testament, a
meat-offering [Lev 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001); [Lev
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#014); [Lev
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#017) - an offering made of flour or
fruits, with oil and frankincense. A small part of it was burned upon
the altar, and the remainder was eaten by Aaron and his sons with salt,
[Lev 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001), [Lev
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#009), [Lev
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#013). The proper translation would
have been meat or flour-offering rather than meat-offering, since the
word meat with us now denotes animal food only.

Incense - More properly frankincense. This is an aromatic or odoriferous
gum, which is obtained from a tree called Thurifera. Its leaves were
like those of a pear-tree. It grew around Mount Lebanon, and in Arabia.
The gum was obtained by making incisions in the bark in dogdays. It was
much used in worship, not only by the Jews, but by the pagan. When
burned, it produced an agreeable odor; and hence, it is called a
sacrifice of sweet smell, an odor acceptable to God; compare [Phi
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018). That which was burned among the
Jews was prepared in a special manner, with a mixture of sweet spices.
It was offered by the priest alone, and it was not lawful to prepare it
in any other way than that prescribed by the law: see [Exo
30:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#034), ...

Is an abomination - Is hateful, or an object of abhorrence; that is, as
it was offered by them, with hollow service, and with hypocritical
hearts.

The new moons - On the appearance of the new moon. in addition to the
daily sacrifices, two bullocks, a ram, and seven sheep, with a
meal-offering, were required to be offered to God, [Num
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#010); [Num
28:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#011). The new moon in the
beginning of the month Tisri (October), was the beginning of their civil
year, and was commanded to be observed as a festival, [Lev
23:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#024). The appearance of the new
moon was announced by the blowing of silver trumpets, [Num
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#010). Hence, the annual festival was
called sometimes, 'the memorial of the blowing of trumpets.' The time of
the appearance of the new moon was not ascertained, as with us, by
astronomical calculation; but persons were stationed, about the time it
was to appear, on elevated places in the vicinity of Jerusalem, and when
it was discovered, the trumpet was sounded. Moses did not command that
this should be observed as a festival except at the beginning of the
year, but it is not improbable that the Jews observed each return of the
new moon as such.

And sabbaths - שׁבת shabbâth, from שׁבת shâbath, "to cease to do
anything"; "to rest from labor." The words used here are all in the
singular number, and should have been rendered 'the new moon, and the
sabbath, and the calling of the assembly;' though used in a collective
sense. The sabbaths here refer not only to the weekly sabbaths, but to
all their days of rest. The word sabbath means properly a day of rest
[Gen 2:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#002); and it was applied not
only to the seventh day, but particularly to the beginning and the close
of their great festivals, which were days of unusual solemnity and
sacredness, [Lev 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#031); 23:24-39.

The calling of assemblies - The solemn convocations or meetings at their
festivals and fasts.

I cannot away with - Hebrew אוּכל לא lo' 'ûkal - I cannot bear, or
endure.

It is iniquity - That is, in the way in which it is conducted. This is a
strong emphatic expression. It is not merely evil, and tending to evil;
but it is iniquity itself. There was no mixture of good.

Even the solemn meeting - The word which is used here - עצרה ‛ătsârâh -
comes from the verb עצר ‛âtsar, which signifies to shut up, or to close;
and is applied to the solemnities which concluded their great feasts, as
being periods of unusual interest and sacredness. It was applied to such
solemnities, because they shut up, or closed the sacred festivals.
Hence, that day was called the great day of the feast, as being a day of
special solemnity and impressiveness; see the note at [Joh
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037); compare Lev. 23:3-36. In the
translation of this word, however, there is a great variety in the
ancient versions. Vulgate, 'Your assemblies are iniquitous.' Septuagint,
'Your new moons, and sabbaths, and great day, I cannot endure; fasting
and idleness.' Chald. Paraph., 'Sacrifice is abominable before me; and
your new moons, and sabbaths, "since you will not forsake your sins, so
that your prayer may be heard in the time of your assembling." Syriac,
'In the beginning of your months, and on the sabbath, you convene an
assembly, but I do not eat that (that is, sacrifices) which has been
Obtained by fraud and violence.' The English translation has, however,
probably expressed the correct sense of the Hebrew.

[Isaiah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 1:14</span></span>

Your appointed feasts - That is, your assemblies convened on regular set
times - מועד mô‛êd, from יעד yâ‛ad, to fix, to appoint. Hengstenberg
(Chris. iii. p. 87) has shown that this word (מועדים mô‛ĕdı̂ym) is
applied in the Scriptures only to the sabbath, passover, pentecost, day
of atonement, and feast of tabernacles. Prof. Alexander, in loc. It is
applied to those festivals, because they were fixed by law to certain
periods of the year. This verse is a very impressive repetition of the
former, as if the soul was full of the subject, and disposed to dwell
upon it.

My soul hateth - I hate. [Psa 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#005).
The nouns נפשׁ nephesh, soul, and רוּח rûach, spirit, are often used to
denote the person himself, and are to be construed as "I." Thus, [Isa
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#009) : 'With my soul have I desired
thee in the night; yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee
early;' that is, 'I myself seek thee; I myself do desire thee.' So the
phrase, 'deliver my soul,' - נפשׁי napheshı̂y - that is, deliver me, [Psa
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#020); [Psa
84:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#003); [Psa
86:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#013); that thy soul may bless me,
[Gen 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#019); his soul shall dwell at
ease, [Psa 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#013); compare [Num
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#006); [Lev
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#029); [Isa
55:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#002); [Job
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#004). So the word spirit: 'Thy
watchfulness hath preserved my spirit' - רוּחי rûchı̂y - [Job
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#012); compare [Psa
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#006); [Kg1
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#005). The expression here is emphatic,
denoting cordial hatred: odi ex animo.

They are a trouble - טרח ṭôrach. In [Deu
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#012), this word denotes a burden, an
oppressive lead that produces weariness in bearing it. It is a strong
expression, denoting that their acts of hypocrisy and sin had become so
numerous, that they became a heavy, oppressive lead.

I am weary to bear them - This is language which is taken from the act
of carrying a burden until a man becomes weary and faint. So, in
accordance with human conceptions, God represents himself as burdened
with their vain oblations, and evil conduct. There could be no more
impressive statement of the evil effects of sin, than that even
Omnipotence was exhausted as with a heavy, oppressive burden.

[Isaiah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 1:15</span></span>

Ye spread forth your hands - This is an expression denoting the act of
supplication. When we ask for help, we naturally stretch out our hands,
as if to receive it. The expression therefore is equivalent to 'when ye
pray, or implore mercy.' Compare [Exo
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#029); [Exo
17:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#011); [Kg1
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#022).

I will hide mine eyes ... - That is, I will not attend to, or regard
your supplications. The Chaldee Paraphrase is, 'When your priests expand
their hands to pray for you.'

Your hands ... - This is given as a reason why he would not hear. The
expression full of blood, denotes crime and guilt of a high order - as,
in murder, the hands would be dripping in blood, and as the stain on the
hands would be proof of guilt. It is probably a figurative expression,
not meaning literally that they were murderers, but that they were given
to rapine and injustice; to the oppression of the poor, the widow, etc.
The sentiment is, that because they indulged in sin, and came, even in
their prayers, with a determination still to indulge it, God would not
hear them. The same sentiment is elsewhere expressed; [Psa
66:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#018) : 'If I regard iniquity in my
heart, the Lord will not hear me;' [Pro
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#009) : 'He that turneth away his ear
from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be abomination;' [Jer
16:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#010); [Zac
7:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#011); [Pro
1:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#028). This is the reason why the
prayers of sinners are not heard - But the truth is abundantly taught in
the Scriptures, that if sinners will forsake their sins, the greatness
of their iniquity is no obstacle to forgiveness; [Isa
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018); [Mat
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028); [Luk
16:11-24](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#011).

[Isaiah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 1:16</span></span>

Wash you - This is, of course, to be understood in a moral sense;
meaning that they should put away their sins. Sin is represented in the
Scriptures as defiling or polluting the soul [Eze
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#031); [Eze
23:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#030); [Hos
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#008); [Hos
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#004); and the removal of it is
represented by the act of washing; [Psa
51:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#002) : 'Wash me thoroughly from mine
iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin;' [Jer
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#014) : 'O Jerusalem, wash thine heart
from wickedness, that thou mayest be saved;' [Job
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#030); [Co1
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011); [Heb
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#022); [Pe2
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#022); [Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005); [Rev
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#014). It is used here in close
connection with the previous verse, where the prophet says that their
hands were flied with blood. He now admonishes them to wash away that
blood, with the implied understanding, that then their prayers would be
heard. It is worthy of remark, also, that the prophet directs them to do
this themselves. He addresses them as moral agents, and as having
ability to do it. This is the uniform manner in which God addresses
sinners in the Bible, requiring them to put away their sins, and to make
themselves a new heart. Compare [Eze
18:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#031).

The evil of your doings - This is a Hebraism, to denote your evil
doings.

From before mine eyes - As God is omniscient, to put them away from
before his eyes, is to put them away altogether. To pardon or forgive
sin, is often expressed by hiding it; [Psa
51:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#009) :

Hide thy face from my sins.

Cease to do evil - Compare [Pe1
3:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#010). The prophet is specifying
what was necessary in order that their prayers might be heard, and that
they might find acceptance with God. What he states here is a universal
truth. If sinners wish to find acceptance with God, they must come
renouncing all sin; resolving to put away everything that God hates,
however dear it may be to the heart. Compare [Mar
9:43-47](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#043).

[Isaiah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 1:17</span></span>

Learn to do well - , To learn here is to become accustomed to, to
practice it. To do well stands opposed to all kinds of evil. "Seek
judgment." The word "judgment" - משׁפט mishpâṭ - here means justice. The
direction refers particularly to magistrates, and it is evident that the
prophet had them particularly in his view in all this discourse. Execute
justice between man and man with impartiality. The word "seek" - דרשׁוּ
dı̂reshû - means to pursue, to search for, as an object to be gained; to
regard, or care for it, as the main thing. Instead of seeking gain, and
bribes, and public favor, they were to make it an object of intense
interest to do justice.

Relieve - - אשׁרוּ 'asherû - literally, make straight, Or right (margin,
righten). The root - אשׁר 'âshar - means to proceed, to walk forward in
a direct line; and bears a relation to ישׁר yâshar, to be straight.
Hence, it often means to be successful or prosperous - to go straight
forward to success. In Piel, which is the form used here, it means to
cause to go straight; and hence, applied to leaders, judges, and guides,
to conduct those under their care in a straight path, anal not in the
devices and crooked Ways of sin; [Pro
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#019) :

Hear thou, my son, and he wise,

And guide אשׁר 'asher, "make straight") thine heart in the way.

The oppressed - Him to whom injustice has been done in regard to his
character, person, or property; compare the notes at [Isa
58:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006).

Judge the fatherless - Do justice to him - vindicate his cause. Take not
advantage of his weak and helpless, condition - his ignorance and want
of experience. This charge was particularly necessary on account of the
facilities which the guardians of orphans have to defraud or oppress,
without danger of detection or punishment. Orphans have no experience.
Parents are their natural protectors; and therefore God especially
charged on their guardians to befriend and do justice to them; [Deu
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#017) : 'Thou shalt not pervert the
judgment of the stranger, nor the fatherless, nor take the widow's
raiment to pledge.'

Plead for - Contend for her rights. Aid her by vindicating her cause.
She is unable to defend herself; she is liable to oppression; and her
rights may be taken away by the crafty and designing. It is remarkable
that God so often insists on this in the Scriptures, and makes it no
small part of religion; [Deu 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#029);
[Deu 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#017); [Exo
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#022) : 'Ye shall not afflict any
widow, or fatherless child.' The ancient views of piety on this subject
are expressed in the language, and in the conduct of Job. Thus, impiety
was said to consist in oppressing the fatherless and widow.

They drive away the donkey of the fatherless,

They take the widow's ox for a pledge.

[Job 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#003).

He evil-entreateth the barren that beareth not,

And doeth not good to the widow.

[Job 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#021).

Job's own conduct was an illustration of the elevated and pure views of
ancient piety:

When the ear heard me, then it blessed me;

And when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me;

Because I delivered the poor that cried,

And the fatherless,

And him that had none to help him.

The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me;

And I caused the widow's heart to leap for joy.

[Job 29:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#011).

See also [Jer 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#006); [Mal
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#005); [Jam
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#027). Hence, God is himself
represented as the vindicator of the rights of the widow and orphan:

A father of the fatherless,

And a judge of the widows,

Is God in his holy habitation.

[Psa 68:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#005).

Leave thy fatherless children, I will preserve them alive;

And let thy widows trust in me.

[Jer 49:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#011).

[Isaiah 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 1:18</span></span>

Come now - This is addressed to the nation of Israel; and the same
exhortation is made to all sinners. It is a solemn act on the part of
God, submitting the claims and principles of his government to reason,
on the supposition that men may see the propriety of his service, and of
his plan.

Let us reason together - ונוכחה venivākechâh from יכח yâkach, not used
in Kal, but in Hiphil; meaning to show, to prove. [Job
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015) : 'Surely I will prove my ways
(righteous) before him;' that is, I will justify my ways before him.
Also to correct, reprove, convince, [Job
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#012); to rebuke, reproach, censure,
[Job 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#025); to punish, [Job
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#017); [Pro
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#012); to judge, decide, [Isa
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003); to do justice, [Isa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004); or to contend, [Job
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#003); [Job
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#021); [Job
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#004). Here it denotes the kind of
contention, or argumentation, which occurs in a court of justice, where
the parties reciprocally state the grounds of their cause. God had been
addressing magistrates particularly, and commanding them to seek
judgment, to relieve the oppressed, to do justice to the orphan and
widow; all of which terms are taken from courts of law. He here
continues the language, and addresses them as accustomed to the
proceedings of courts, and proposes to submit the case as if on trial.
He then proceeds [Isa 1:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018), to
adduce the principles on which he is willing to bestow pardon on them;
and submits the case to them, assured that those principles will commend
themselves to their reason and sober judgment.

Though your sins be as scarlet - The word used here - שׁנים shānı̂ym -
denotes properly a bright red color, much prized by the ancients. The
Arabic verb means to shine, and the name was given to this color, it is
supposed by some, on account of its splendor, or bright appearance. It
is mentioned as a merit of Saul, that he clothed the daughters of Israel
in scarlet, [Sa2 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#024), Our word
scarlet, denoting a bright red, expresses the color intended here. This
color was obtained from the eggs of the coccus ilicis, a small insect
found on the leaves of the oak in Spain, and in the countries east of
the Mediterranean. The cotton cloth was dipped in this color twice; and
the word used to express it means also double-dyed, from the verb שׁנה
shânâh, to repeat. From this double-dying many critics have supposed
that the name given to the color was derived. The interpretation which
derives it from the sense of the Arabic word to shine, however, is the
most probable, as there is no evidence that the double-dying was unique
to this color. It was a more permanent color than that which is
mentioned under the word crimson. White is an emblem of innocence. Of
course sins would be represented by the opposite. Hence, we speak of
crimes as black, or deep-dyed, and of the soul as stained by sin. There
is another idea here. This was a fast, or fixed color. Neither dew, nor
rain, nor washing, nor long usage, would remove it. Hence, it is used to
represent the fixedness and permanency of sins in the heart. No human
means will wash them out. No effort of man, no external rites, no tears,
no sacrifices, no prayers, are of themselves sufficient to take them
away. They are deep fixed in the heart, as the scarlet color was in the
Web of cloth, and an almighty power is needful to remove them.

Shall be as white as snow - That is, the deep, fixed stain, which no
human power could remove, shall be taken away. In other words, sin shall
be pardoned, and the soul be made pure. White, in all ages, has been the
emblem of innocence, or purity; compare [Psa
68:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#014); [Ecc
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#008); [Dan
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009); [Mat
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002); [Mat
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#003); [Rev
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014); [Rev
3:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004); [Rev
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004); [Rev
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009), [Rev
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#013).

Though they be red - The idea here is not materially different from that
expressed in the former part of the verse. It is the Hebrew poetic form
of expressing substantially the same thought in both parts of the
sentence. Perhaps, also, it denotes intensity, by being repeated; see
Introduction, 8.

Like crimson - כתולע katôlâ‛. The difference between scarlet and crimson
is, that the former denotes a deep red; the latter a deco red slightly
tinged with blue. Perhaps this difference, however, is not marked in the
original. The purple or crimson color was obtained commonly from a
shellfish, called murex, or purpura, which abounded chiefly in the sea,
near Tyre; and hence, the Tyrian dye became so celebrated. That,
however, which is designated in this place, was obtained, not from a
shellfish, but a worm (Hebrew: תולע tôlâ‛, snail, or conchylium - the
Helix Janthina of Linnaeus. This color was less permanent than the
scarlet; was of a bluish east; and is commonly in the English Bible
rendered blue. It was employed usually to dye wool, and was used in the
construction of the tabernacle, and in the garments of the high priest.
It was also in great demand by princes and great men, [Jdg
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#026); [Luk
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#019). The prophet has adverted to the
fact that it was employed mainly in dying wool, by what he has added,
'shall be as wool.'

As wool - That is, as wool undyed, or from which the color is removed.
Though your sins appear as deep-stained, and as permanent as the fast
color of crimson in wool, yet they shall be removed - as if that stain
should be taken away from the wool, and it should be restored to its
original whiteness.

[Isaiah 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 1:19</span></span>

If ye be willing - If you submit your wills, and become voluntary in
your obedience to my law.

And obedient - Hebrew If you will hear; that is, my commands.

Ye shall eat ... - That is, the land shall yield its increase; and you
shall be saved from pestilence, war, famine, etc. The productions of the
soil shall no more be devoured by strangers, [Isa
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007); compare the notes at [Isa
65:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#021). This was in accordance with
the promises which God made to their fathers, and the motives to
obedience placed before them, which were drawn from the fact, that they
should possess a land of distinguished fertility, and that obedience
should be attended with eminent national prosperity. Such an appeal was
adapted to the infancy of society, and to the circumstances of the
people. It should be added, however, that with this they connected the
idea, that God would be their God and Protector; and, of course, the
idea that all the blessings resulting from that fact would be theirs;
[Exo 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008) : 'And I am come down to
deliver them out of the band of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out
of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing with milk
and honey;' compare [Exo 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#017); [Exo
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#005); [Deu
28:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001). In accordance with this, the
language of promise in the New Testament is, that of inheriting the
earth, that is, the land, Note, [Mat
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005). The expression here means, that
if they obeyed God they should be under his patronage, and be prospered.
It refers, also, to [Isa 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007), where it
is said, that strangers devoured the land. The promise here is, that if
they were obedient, this calamity should be removed.

[Isaiah 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 1:20</span></span>

But if ye refuse, ye shall be devoured with the sword - Your enemies
shall come in, and lay waste the land. This prediction was fulfilled, in
consequence of their continuing to rebel, when the land was desolated by
Nebuchadnezzar, and the nation was carried captive to Babylon. It
illustrates a general principle of the divine government, that if people
persevere in rebelling against God, they shall be destroyed. The word
devour is applied to the sword, as if it were insatiable for
destruction. Whatever destroys may be figuratively said to devour; see
the notes at [Isa 34:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#005); compare [Isa
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#024); [Lam
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#003); [Eze
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#004); [Joe
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#003); [Rev
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#005) - where fire is said to devour.

The mouth of the Lord - Yahweh Himself. This had been spoken by the
mouth of the Lord, and recorded, [Lev
26:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#033) :

And I will scatter you among the heathen,

And will draw out a sword after you;

And your land shall be desolate

And your cities waste.

On these points God proposed to reason; or rather, perhaps, these
principles are regarded as reasonable, or as commending themselves to
men. They are the great principles of the divine administration, that if
people obey God they shall prosper; if not, they shall be punished. They
commend themselves to people as just and true; and they are seen and
illustrated every where.

[Isaiah 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 1:21</span></span>

How is - This is an expression of deploring, or lamenting. It indicates
that that had occurred which was matter of grief. The prophet had stated
the principles of the divine government; had urged the people to reason
with God; and had affirmed his willingness to pardon. But it was seen
that they would not repent. They were so wicked and perverse, that there
was no hope of their reformation. His mind is full of this subject; he
repeats the charge of their wickedness [Isa
1:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021), and states what must be the
consequences.

The faithful city - Jerusalem. It is represented here under the image of
a wife - once faithful to her husband; once a devoted and attached
partner. Jerusalem was thus once. In former days, it was the seat of the
pure worship of God; the place where his praise was celebrated, and
where his people came to offer sincere devotion. In the Scriptures, the
church is often represented under the image of a wife, to denote the
tenderness and sacredness of the union; [Hos
2:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#019); [Isa
62:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#005); [Isa
54:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#006); [Rev
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009).

An harlot - She has proved to be false, treacherous, unfaithful. The
unfaithfulness of the people of God, particularly their idolatry, is
often represented under the idea of unfaithfulness to the marriage
contract; [Jer 3:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#008); [Jer
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#007); [Jer
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#027); [Jer
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#014); [Eze
16:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#032); [Eze
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#037); [Jos
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#002); [Jos
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#002).

It was full of judgement - It was distinguished for justice and
righteousness.

Lodged in it - This is a figurative expression, meaning that it was
characterized as a righteous city. The word ילין yālı̂yn is from לוּן
lûn, to pass the night, to remain through the night [Gen
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#002); and then to lodge, to dwell;
[Psa 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#013); [Job
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#002); [Job
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#019). In this place it has the sense
of abiding, remaining, continuing permanently. Jerusalem was the home of
justice, where it found protection and safety.

Now murderers - By murderers here are meant probably unjust judges;
people who did not regard the interests of the poor, the widow, and the
orphan; and who therefore, by a strong expression, are characterized as
murderers. They had displaced justice from its home; and had become the
permanent inhabitants of the city; compare the note at [Isa
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015).

[Isaiah 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 1:22</span></span>

Thy silver - The sentiment in this verse, as it is explained by the
following, is, thy princes and people have become corrupt, and polluted.
Silver is used here to denote what should have been more valuable -
virtuous princes.

Dross - This word - סיג sı̂g - means the scoriae, or baser metal, which
is separated from the purer in smelting. It is of little or no value;
and the expression means, that the rulers had become debased and
corrupt, as if pure silver had been converted wholly to dross.

Thy wine - Wine was regarded as the most pure and valuable drink among
the ancients. It is used, therefore, to express that which should have
been most valued and esteemed among them - to wit, their rulers.

Mixed with water - Diluted, made weak. According to Gesenius, the word
rendered "mixed" - מהוּל mâhûl - is from מהל mâhal, the same as מוּל
mûl, to circumcise; and hence, by a figure common with the Arabians, to
adulterate, or dilute wine. The word does not occur in this sense
elsewhere in the Scriptures, but the connection evidently requires it to
be so understood. Wine mixed with water is that which is weakened,
diluted, rendered comparatively useless. So with the rulers and judges.
They had lest the strength and purity of their integrity, by
intermingling those things which tended to weaken and destroy their
virtue, pride, the love of gifts, and bribes, etc. Divested of the
figure, the passage means, that the rulers had become wholly corrupt.

[Isaiah 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 1:23</span></span>

Thy princes ... - This is an explanation of the previous verse. Princes
mean here those attached to the royal family; those who by rank, or
office, had an influence over the people.

Rebellious - Against God. The corruption of a nation commonly begins
with the rulers.

Companions of thieves - That is, they connive at the doings of robbers;
they do not bring them to justice; they are their accomplices, and are
easily bribed to acquit them.

Every one loveth gifts - Every magistrate can be bribed.

Followeth afar rewards - רדף rodēph. This word denotes the act of
pursuing after in order to obtain something; and means here that they
made it an object to obtain rewards by selling or betraying justice They
sell justice to the highest bidder. No more distressing condition of a
people can be conceived than this, where justice could not be secured
between man and man, and where the wicked could oppress the poor, the
widow, and the orphan, as much as they pleased, because they knew they
could bribe the judge.

They judge not - They do not render justice to; [Isa
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017). The Chaldee has well expressed
the sense of a part of this verse: 'They say, each one to his neighbor,
Favour me in my judgment, or do me good in it, and I will recompense you
in your cause.'

The cause of the widow come unto them - Or, rather, come before them.
They would not take up her cause, but rather the cause of those who were
esteemed able to offer a bribe, and from whom a gift might be expected,
if a decision was made in their favor.

[Isaiah 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 1:24</span></span>

Therefore saith the Lord ... - The prophet having stated the guilt of
the nation, proceeds to show the consequences of their crimes; or to
foretell what would happen. The name of God is repeated, to attract
attention; to fill the mind with awe; and to give emphasis to the solemn
sentence which was about to be uttered.

The Lord - אדון 'âdôn. This word properly denotes master, lord, owner.
[Gen 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#009) : "lord over his whole
house." [Kg1 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#024) : "owner of the
hill Samaria." It is applied here to Yahweh, not as a special title, or
as one of the names which he assumes to himself, but as owner,
proprietor, master, ruler of the nation. The word, when applied to God
as one of his special titles, has the form of an ancient plural
termination, אדני 'ădonāy. The root is probably דוּן dôn, to judge,
which in ancient times was also closely connected with the idea of
ruling.

The Lord of hosts - Yahweh - ruling in the hosts of heaven, and
therefore able to accomplish his threatenings; note, [Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009).

The mighty One of Israel - He who had been their defender in the days of
their peril; who had manifested his mighty power in overthrowing their
enemies; and who had shown, therefore, that he was able to inflict
vengeance on them.

Ah - הוי hôy. This is an expression of threatening. It is that which is
used when an affront is offered, and there is a purpose of revenge; see
[Isa 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004).

I will ease me - This refers to what is said in [Isa
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#014), where God is represented as
burdened with their crimes. The Hebrew word is, I will be consoled, or
comforted - that is, by being delivered from my foes - אנחם 'enâchem
from נחם nâcham, in Niphil, to suffer pain, to be grieved; and hence, to
have pity, to show compassion. In Piel, to console or comfort
one's-self; to take revenge. The idea included in the word is that of
grief or distress, either in beholding the sufferings of others, or from
some injury received from others. Hence, in Piel, it denotes to obtain
relief from that distress, either by aiding the distressed object, or by
taking revenge. In both instances, the mind, by a law of its nature,
finds relief. The passion expends itself on its proper object, and the
mind is at ease. It is used here in the latter sense. It is an instance
where God uses the language which people employ to denote passion, and
where they obtain relief by revenge. When applied to God, it is to be
understood in accordance with his nature, as implying simply, that he
would punish them; compare the note at [Isa
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013). It means that he had been pained
and grieved by their crimes; his patience had been put to its utmost
trial; and now he would seek relief from this by inflicting due
punishment on them. An expression explaining this may be seen in [Eze
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#013); 'Then shall mine anger be
accomplished, and I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be
comforted.' Also, [Deu 28:63](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#063) : 'As the
Lord rejoiced over you, to do you good; so the Lord will rejoice over
you, to destroy you.'

Mine adversaries - The enemies to his law and government among the
rebellious Jews. The expression in this verse is a remarkable instance
of God's adapting himself to our apprehension, by using our language.
Instances occur often in the Scriptures where language expressive of
human passions is applied to God; and as human language must be employed
in revelation, it was indispensable. But those expressions are not to be
understood as they are when applied to the passions of mankind. In God,
they are consistent with all that is pure, and glorious, and holy, and
should be so understood. The Chaldee renders this verse, 'I will console
the city of Jerusalem; but woe to the impious, when I shall be revealed
to take vengeance on the enemies of my people.' But this is manifestly a
false interpretation; and shows how reluctant the Jews were to admit the
threatenings against themselves.

[Isaiah 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 1:25</span></span>

And I will turn my hand upon thee - This expression is capable of two
significations. The hand may be stretched out for two purposes, either
to inflict punishment, or to afford help and protection. The phrase here
refers evidently to the latter, to the act of redeeming and restoring
his people, [Isa 1:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#026). The idea may
be thus expressed: 'I will stretch out my hand to punish my enemies [Isa
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024), and will turn my hand upon thee
for protection, and recovery.'

Purge away - This refers to the process of smelting, or purifying metals
in the fire. It means, I will remove all the dross which has accumulated
[Isa 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#022), and will make the silver
pure. This was commonly done by fire; and the idea is, that he would
render his own people pure by those judgments which would destroy his
enemies who were intermingled with them.

Purely - The original word here - כבר kabor - has been commonly
understood to mean, according to purity; that is, effectually or
entirely pure. Thus it is translated by the Septuagint, and by the Latin
Vulgate. But by the Chaldee it is translated, 'I will purify thee as
with the herb borith.' The word may mean lye, alkali, or potash, [Job
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#030); and it may mean also borax - a
substance formed of alkali and boracic acid, much used in purifying
metals. The essential idea is, I will make you effectually, or entirely
pure.

Thy tin - Tin is with us a well-known white metal. But the word used
here does not mean tin. It denotes the stannum of the ancients; a metal
formed of lead mixed with silver ore. Here it means, I will take away
all the impure metal mixed with thee; varying the idea but little from
the former part of the verse.

[Isaiah 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">isa 1:26</span></span>

And I will restore ... - That is, I will give you such judges as the
nation had in former days - in the times of Moses, Joshua, etc. Most of
the charges in this chapter are against the magistrates. The calamities
of the nation are traced to their unfaithfulness and corruption, [Isa
1:17-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017). God now says that he will
remove this cause of their calamity, and give them pure magistrates.

Thy counselors - Thy advisers; that is, those occupying places of trust
and responsibility. When this should be, the prophet does not say. The
Jewish commentators suppose that he refers to the time after the return
from captivity, and to such men as Zerubbabel, Ezra, and Nehemiah; and
to the times of Hyrcanus and Herod, Jerome supposes that the times of
the Messiah are referred to. It is impossible to determine which is the
correct opinion; though, as the Babylonian captivity was the punishment
of those national sins which the prophet was denouncing, it is more
probable that he refers to the time immediately succeeding that
punishment, when the nation would be restored. I am inclined, therefore,
to the opinion, that the prophet had reference solely to the prosperity
of the Jewish nation, under a succession of comparatively virtuous
princes, after the Babylonian captivity.

Thou shalt be called ... - The principal cause of your wickedness and
calamity, that is, your unfaithful rulers being removed and punished,
you shall afterward be distinguished as a city of righteousness.

The faithful city - That is, faithful to Yahweh - faithful in keeping
his laws, and maintaining the rites of his religion as formerly; compare
[Isa 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021).

[Isaiah 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">isa 1:27</span></span>

Zion - See the note at [Isa 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008). The
word Zion here is used to designate the whole Jewish people to whom the
prophet had reference; that is, the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem,
[Isa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001).

Shall be redeemed - The word used here - פדה pâdâh - is employed in two
senses in the Scriptures. It implies always the idea of deliverance, as
from captivity, danger, punishment, slavery, sin. But this idea occurs:

\(1\) sometimes without any reference to a price paid, but simply
denoting to deliver, or to set at liberty; and

\(2\) in other instances the price is specified, and then the word
occurs under the strict and proper sense of redeem; that is, to rescue,
or deliver, by a ransom price.

Instances of the former general sense occur often; as e. q., to deliver
from slavery without mere ion of a price; [Deu
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#008) : 'The Loan loved you, and
redeemed you out of the house of bondmen.' See also [Jer
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#021); [Jer
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#011). The idea of delivering in any
way from danger occurs often; [Job
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#020) : 'In famine he shall redeem thee
from death, and in war from the power of the sword;' [Kg1
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#029) : 'As Jehovah liveth, that hath
redeemed my soul out of all distress.' [Sa1
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#009). But the word often occurs in
connection with the mention of the price, and in this sense the words
rendered redeem are commonly used in the New Testament; see [Exo
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#013); [Num
18:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#015); compare [Gal
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013); [Pe1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#018); [Rev
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009); [Eph
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#017). [Mat
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028); [Ti1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#006). In these last places, the blood
of Christ, or his atoning sacrifice, is mentioned as the price, or the
valuable consideration, by which deliverance from sin is effected;
compare the note at [Isa 43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003). In the
case now before us, however, the word is used in the general sense, to
denote that God would rescue and save his people from the calamities and
judgments to which they were to be subjected on account of their sins.
Though they were to be taken captive for their sins, yet they should
again be delivered and restored to their land. The Septuagint evidently
so understands it: 'Her captivity shall be saved with judgment and with
mercy.' The Chaldee Paraphrase renders it in a manner somewhat similar:
'But Zion, when judgment shall have been accomplished in her, shall be
redeemed; and they who keep the law shall be returned to it in
righteousness.'

With judgment - In a righteous, just manner. That is, God shall evince
his justice in doing it; his justice to a people to whom so many
promises had been made, and his justice in delivering them from long and
grievous oppression. All this would be attended with the displays of
judgment, in effecting their deliverance. This might be evinced

\(1\) in keeping his promises made to their fathers;

\(2\) in delivering an oppressed people from bondage; and

\(3\) in the displays of judgment on the nations necessary in
accomplishing the deliverance of the Jews. This is the common
interpretation.

It may be, however, that the expression does not refer to the character
of God, which is not at all the subject of discourse, but to the
character of the people that should be redeemed. Before, the nation was
corrupt; after the captivity, they would be just. Zion should be
redeemed; and the effect of that redemption would be, that the people
would be reformed, and holy, and just. This does not refer, properly, to
redemption by the Lord Jesus, though it is equally true that that will
be accomplished with justice, that is, in entire consistency with the
character of a just and holy God.

Her converts - This is an unhappy translation. The Hebrew here means
simply, 'they that return of her' (margin); that is, those who return
from captivity. It is implied that all would not return - which was true
- but those who did return, would come back in righteousness.

With righteousness - This refers to the character of those who shall
return. The prediction is, that the character of the nation would be
reformed [Isa 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#026); that it would be
done by means of this very captivity; and that they who returned would
come back with a different character from the nation at the time that
Isaiah wrote. They would be a reformed, righteous people. The character
of the nation was greatly improved after the captivity. Their propensity
to idolatry, in a particular manner, was effectually restrained; and
probably the character of the people after the captivity, for morals and
religion, was not inferior to the best periods of their history before.

[Isaiah 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">isa 1:28</span></span>

And the destruction - Hebrew שׁבר sheber - the breaking, or crushing,
that is, the punishment which was about to come upon them; compare [Lam
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#011); [Lam
3:47](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#047); [Pro
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#018).

Of the transgressors - "Revolters," or those that rebel against God.

And of the sinners - Of all the sinners in the nation, of all kinds and
degrees.

Together - At the same time with the redemption of Zion.

Shall be consumed - יכלוּ yı̂kelû, from כלה kâlâh, to be completed, or
finished; to be consumed, wasted away; to vanish, or disappear. It
denotes complete and entire extinction; or the completing of anything.
It is applied to a cloud of smoke, that entirely dissolves and
disappears:

As the cloud is consumed and vanisheth away:

So he that goeth down to the grave shall come up no more,

[Job 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#009).

But the wicked shall perish,

And the enemies of the Lord shall be as the fat of lambs;

They shall consume,

Into smoke shall they cosume away.

[Psa 37:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#020).

It is applied to time, as vanishing and disappearing [Job
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#006); and to the destruction or
perishing of men; [Jer 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#004); [Eze
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#013). The idea is that of complete and
entire consumption and destruction, so that none shall be left. Applied
to future punishment, it means that the destruction of sinners shall be
total and complete. There shall be no sinner who shall not be destroyed;
and there shall be none destroyed whose destruction shall not be entire
and total. The expression here refers to the heavy calamities which were
about to come upon the guilty nation, but it is as descriptive of the
future punishment that shall come upon the wicked.

[Isaiah 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">isa 1:29</span></span>

For they shall be ashamed - That is, when they see the punishment that
their idolatry has brought upon them, they shall be ashamed of the folly
and degradation of their worship. Moreover, the gods in which they
trusted shall yield them no protection, and shall leave them to the
disgrace and confusion of being forsaken and abandoned.

Of the oaks - Groves, in ancient times, were the favorite places of
idolatrous worship. In the city of Rome, there were thirty-two groves
consecrated to the gods. Those were commonly selected which were on
hills, or high places; and they were usually furnished with temples,
altars, and all the implements of idolatrous worship. Different kinds of
groves were selected for this purpose, by different people. The Druids
of the ancient Celtic nations in Gaul, Britain, and Germany, offered
their worship in groves of oak - hence the name Druid, derived from δρῦς
drus, an oak. Frequent mention is made in the Scriptures of groves and
high places; and the Jews were forbidden to erect them; [Deu
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#021); [Kg1
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#023); [Kg2
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#004); [Eze
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#013); [Eze
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#016), [Eze
16:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#039); [Exo
34:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#013); [Jdg
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#007); [Kg1
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#019); [Isa
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#008); [Mic
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#014). When, therefore, it is said
here, that they should be ashamed of the oaks, it means that they should
be ashamed of their idolatrous worship, to which they were much
addicted, and into which, under their wicked kings, they easily fell.

Their calamities were coming upon them mainly for this idolatry. It is
not certainly known what species of tree is intended by the word
translated oaks. The Septuagint has rendered it by the word "idols" -
ἀπὸ τῶν εἰδώλων αὐτῶν apo tōn eidōlōn autōn. The Chaldee, 'ye shall be
confounded by the groves of idols.' The Syriac version also has idols.
Most critics concur in supposing that it means, not the oak, but the
terebinth or turpentine tree - a species of fir. This tree is the
Pistacia Terebinthus of Linnaeus, or the common turpentine tree, whose
resin or juice is the China or Cyprus turpentine, used in medicine. The
tree grows to a great age, and is common in Palestine. The terebinth -
now called in Palestine the but'm-tree - 'is not an evergreen, as is
often represented; but its small, leathered, lancet-shaped leaves fall
in the autumn, and are renewed in the spring.

The flowers are small, and are followed by small oval berries, hanging
in clusters from two to five inches long, resembling much the clusters
of the vine when the grapes are just set. From incisions in the trunk
there is said to flow a sort of transparent balsam, constituting a very
pure and fine species of turpentine, with an agreeable odor like citron
or jessamine, and a mild taste, and hardening gradually into a
transparent gum. The tree is found also in Asia Minor, Greece, Italy,
the south of France, and in the north of Africa, and is described as not
usually rising to the height of more than twenty feet.' Robinson's Bib.
Researches, iii. 15, 16. It produces the nuts called the pistachio nuts.
They have a pleasant, unctuous taste, resembling that of almonds, and
they yield in abundance a sweet and pleasant oil. The best Venice
turpentine, which, when it can be obtained pure, is superior to all the
rest of its kind, is the produce of this tree. The picture in the book
will give you an idea of the appearance of the terebinth. The Hebrew
word אילים 'ēylı̂ym, from איל 'eyl, or more commonly אלה 'ēlâh, seems to
be used sometimes as the Greek δρῦς drus is, to denote any large tree,
whether evergreen or not; and especially any large tree, or cluster of
trees, where the worship of idols was celebrated.

Which ye have desired - The Jews, until the captivity at Babylon, as all
their history shows, easily relapsed into idolatry. The meaning of the
prophet is, that the punishment at Babylon would be so long and so
severe as to make them ashamed of this, and turn them from it.

Shall be confounded - Another word meaning to be ashamed.

For the gardens - The places planted with trees, etc., in which
idolatrous worship was practiced. 'In the language of the Hebrews, every
place where plants and trees were cultivated with greater care than in
the open field, was called a garden. The idea of such an enclosure was
certainly borrowed from the garden of Eden, which the bountiful Creator
planted for the reception of his favorite creature. The garden of
Hesperides, in Eastern fables, was protected by an enormous serpent; and
the gardens of Adonis, among the Greeks, may be traced to the same
origin, for the terms horti Adenides, the gardens of Adonis, were used
by the ancients to signify gardens of pleasure, which corresponds with
the name of Paradise, or the garden of Eden, as horti Adonis answers to
the garden of the Lord. Besides, the gardens of primitive nations were
commonly, if not in every instance, devoted to religious purposes. In
these shady retreats were celebrated, for a long succession of ages, the
rites of pagan superstition.' - Paxton. These groves or gardens were
furnished with the temple of the god that was worshipped, and with
altars, and with everything necessary for this species of worship. They
were usually, also, made as shady and dark as possible, to inspire the
worshippers with religious awe and reverence on their entrance; compare
the note at [Isa 66:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#017).

[Isaiah 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">isa 1:30</span></span>

For ye ... - The mention of the tree in the previous verse, gives the
prophet occasion for the beautiful image in this. They had desired the
oak, and they should be like it. That, when the frost came, was divested
of its beauty, and its leaves faded, and fell; so should their beauty
and privileges and happiness, as a people, fade away at the anger of
God.

A garden that hath no water - That is therefore withered and parched up;
where nothing would flourish, but where all would be desolation - a most
striking image of the approaching desolation of the Jewish nation. In
Eastern countries this image would be more striking than with us. In
these hot regions, a constant supply of water is necessary for the
cultivation, and even for the very existence and preservation of a
garden. Should it lack water for a few days, everything in it would be
burned up with neat and totally destroyed. In all gardens, therefore, in
those regions; there must be a constant supply of water, either from
some neighboring river, or from some fountain or reservoir within it. To
secure such a fountain became an object of indispensable importance, not
only for the coolness and pleasantness of the garden, but for the very
existence of the vegetation. Dr. Russell, in his Natural History of
Aleppo, says, that 'all the gardens of Aleppo are on the banks of the
river that runs by that city, or on the sides of the rill that supplies
their aqueduct;' and all the rest of the country he represents as
perfectly burned up in the summer months, the gardens only retaining
their verdure, on account of the moistness of their situation.

[Isaiah 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">isa 1:31</span></span>

And the strong - Those who have been thought to be strong, on whom the
people relied for protection and defense - their rulers, princes, and
the commanders of their armies.

As tow - The coarse or broken part of flax, or hemp. It means here that
which shall be easily and quickly kindled and rapidly consumed. As tow
burns and is destroyed at the touch of fire, so shall the rulers of the
people be consumed by the approaching calamities.

And the maker of it - This is an unhappy translation. The word פעלו
po‛ălô may be indeed a participle, and be rendered 'its maker,' but it
is more commonly a noun, and means his work, or his action. This is its
plain meaning here. So the Latin Vulgate, the Septuagint, and the
Chaldee. It means, that as a spark enkindles tow, so the works or deeds
of a wicked nation shall be the occasion or cause of their destruction.
The ambition of one man is the cause of his ruin; the sensuality of a
second is the cause of his; the avarice of a third is the cause of his.
These passions, insatiable and ungratified, shall be the occasion of the
deep and eternal sorrows of hell. So it means here, that the crimes and
hypocrisy of the nation would be the real cause of all the calamities
that would come upon them as a people.

Shall both burn together - The spark and the flame from the kindled flax
mingle, and make one fire. So the people and their works would be
enkindled and destroyed together. They would burn so rapidly, that
nothing could extinguish them. The meaning is, that the nation would be
punished; and that all their works of idolatry and monuments of sin
would be the occasion of their punishment, and would perish at the same
time. The "principle" involved in this passage teaches us the following
things:

\(1\) That the wicked, however mighty, shall be destroyed.

\(2\) That their works will be the "cause" of their ruin - a cause
necessarily leading to it.

\(3\) That the works of the wicked - all that they do and all on which
they depend - shall be destroyed.

\(4\) That this destruction shall be final. Nothing shall stay the
flame. No tears of penitence, no power of men or devils, shall "put out"
the fires which the works of the wicked shall enkindle.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 2](isa002)

</div>
