<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa051)  [Next](isa053.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 52](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 52:0</span></span>

This chapter is intimately connected with the preceding, and, with that,
constitutes one connected portion (see the analysis of Isa. 51) This
portion, however, extends only to [Isa
52:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013.md) of this chapter, where there
commences a prophecy extending through [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001.md), relating solely to the
Messiah, and constituting the most important and interesting part of the
Old Testament. In this chapter, the object is to console the pious part
of the Jewish community. The general topic is, the promise of a rich
blessing, first at the deliverance from the captivity at Babylon, and
then, in a more complete sense, at the coming of the Messiah. The
chapter comprises the following topics:

1\. Jerusalem, long in bondage, is called on to arise and shake herself
from the dust, and to put on her beautiful garments [Isa
52:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001.md). She is addressed in accordance
with language that is common in Isaiah, and the other prophets, as a
female sitting on the ground, covered with dust, and mourning over her
desolations.

2\. Yahweh expressly promises to deliver his people from their captivity
and bondage [Isa 52:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#003.md). In stating
this, he says [Isa 52:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#003.md), that they had
sold themselves for nothing, and should be redeemed without money; he
appeals to the fact that be had delivered them from Egyptian oppression
in former years, and that he was as able to deliver them now [Isa
52:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#004.md); and he says [Isa
52:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#005.md), that he would have compassion
on them now that they were suffering under their grievous bondage, and
would furnish them with the most ample demonstration that he alone was
God.

3\. The prophet, in vision, sees the messenger on the mountains that
comes to proclaim restoration to Zion [Isa
52:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007.md). He speaks of the beauty of the
feet of him who bears the glad message [Isa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007.md); and says that when that
messenger is seen bearing the glad tidings,' the watchman' should join
in the exultation [Isa 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#008.md).

4\. Jerusalem, and all the waste and desolate regions of Judea, are
called on to break out into singing at the glad and glorious events
which would occur when the people of God should be again restored [Isa
52:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#009.md).

5\. In view of all this, the people are called on to depart from
Babylon, and to return to their own land [Isa
52:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011.md). They were to go out pure.
They were not to contaminate themselves with the polluted objects of
idolatry. They were about to bear back again to Jerusalem the
consecrated vessels of the house of Yahweh, and they should be clean and
holy. They should not go out with haste, as if driven out, but they
would go defended by Yahweh, and conducted by him to their own land.

6\. At [Isa 52:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013.md), the subject and the
scene changes. The eye of the prophet becomes fixed on that greater
future event to which the deliverance from Babylon was preparatory, and
the whole attention becomes absorbed in the person, the manner of life,
and the work of the Messiah. This part of the chapter [Isa
52:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013.md), is an essential part of the
prophecy which is continued through [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001.md), and should by no means have
been separated from it. In this portion of the prophecy, all reference
to the captivity at Babylon ceases; and the eye of the prophet is fixed,
without vacillating, on the person of the Redeemer. In no other portion
of the Old Testament is there so clear and sublime a description of the
Messiah as is furnished here; and no other portion demands so profoundly
and prayerfully the attention of those who would understand the great
mystery of redeeming mercy and love.

[Isaiah 52:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 52:1</span></span>

Awake, awake - (See the notes at [Isa
51:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009).md). This address to Jerusalem is
intimately connected with the closing verses of the preceding chapter.
Jerusalem is there represented as down-trodden in the dust before her
enemies. Here she is described under the image of a female that had been
clad in the habiliments of mourning, and she is now called on to arise
from this condition, and to put on the garments that would be indicative
of gladness and of joy. The idea is, that the time had come now in which
she was to be delivered from her long captivity, and was to be restored
to her former prosperity and splendor.

Put on thy strength - Hebrew, 'Clothe thyself with thy strength.' The
idea is, exert thyself, be strong, bold, confident; arise from thy
dejection, and become courageous as one does when he is about to engage
in an enterprise that promises success, and that demands effort.

Put on thy beautiful garments - Jerusalem is here addressed, as she
often is, as a female (see the note at [Isa
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008).md). She was to lay aside the
garments expressive of grief and of captivity, and deck herself with
those which were appropriate to a state of prosperity.

The uncircumcised and the unclean - The idea is, that those only should
enter Jerusalem and dwell there who would be worshippers of the true
God. The uncircumcised are emblems of the impure, the unconverted, and
the idolatrous; and the meaning is, that in future times the church
would be pure and holy. It cannot mean that no uncircumcised man or
idolater would ever again enter the city of Jerusalem, for this would
not be true. It was a fact that Antiochus and his armies, and Titus and
his army entered Jerusalem, and undoubtedly hosts of others did also who
were not circumcised. But this refers to the future times, when the
church of God would be pure. Its members would, in the main, be
possessors of the true religion, and would adorn it. Probably,
therefore, the view of the prophet extended to the purer and happier
times under the Messiah, when the church should be characteristically
and eminently holy, and when, as a great law of that church, none should
be admitted, who did not profess that they were converted.

[Isaiah 52:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 52:2</span></span>

Shake thyself from the dust - To sit on the ground, to sit in the dust,
is an expression descriptive of mourning [Job
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#013.md). Jerusalem is here called on to
arise and shake off the dust, as indicating that the days of her grief
were ended, and that she was about to be restored to her former beauty
and splendor.

Arise and sit down - There is an incongruity in this expression in our
translation, which does not occur in the original. The idea in the
Hebrew is not that which seems to be implied in this expression to arise
and sit down in the same place, but it means to arise from the dust, and
sit in a more elevated, or honorable place. She had been represented as
sitting on the earth, where her loose flowing robes would be supposed to
become covered with dust. She is here called on to arise from that
humble condition, and to occupy the divan, or a chair of dignity and
honor. Lowth renders this, 'Ascend thy lofty seat,' and supposes it
means that she was to occupy a throne, or an elevated seat of honor, and
he quotes oriental customs to justify this interpretation. Noyes renders
it, 'Arise and sit erect.' The Chaldee renders it, 'Rise, sit upon the
throne of thy glory.' The following quotation, from Jowett's Christian
Researches, will explain the custom which is here alluded to: 'It is no
uncommon thing to see an individual, or group of persons, even when very
well dressed, sitting with their feet drawn under them, upon the bare
earth, passing whole hours in idle conversation.

Europeans would require a chair, but the natives here prefer the ground.
In the heat of summer and autumn, it is pleasant to them to while away
their time in this manner, under the shade of a tree. Richly adorned
females, as well as men, may often be seen thus amusing themselves. As
may naturally be expected, with whatever care they may, at first sitting
down, choose their place, yet the flowing dress by degrees gathers up
the dust; as this occurs, they, from time to time, arise, adjust
themselves, shake off the dust, and then sit down again. The captive
daughter of Zion, therefore, brought down to the dust of suffering and
oppression, is commanded to arise and shake herself from that dust, and
then, with grace, and dignity, and composure, and security, to sit down;
to take, as it were, again her seat and her rank, amid the company of
the nations of the earth, which had before afflicted her, and trampled
her to the earth.'

Loose thyself from the bands of thy neck - Jerusalem had been a captive,
and confined as a prisoner. She is now called on to cast off these
chains from her neck, and to be again at liberty. In captivity, chains
or bands were attached to various parts of the body. They were usually
affixed to the wrists or ankles, but it would seem also that sometimes
collars were affixed to theneck. The idea is, that the Jews, who had
been so long held captive, were about to be released, and restored to
their own land.

[Isaiah 52:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 52:3</span></span>

Ye have sold yourselves for nought - You became captives and prisoners
without any price being paid for you. You cost nothing to those who made
you prisoners. The idea is, that as they who had made them prisoners had
done so without paying any price for them, it was equitable that they
should be released in the same manner. When their captors had paid
nothing for them, God would suffer nothing to be paid for them in turn;
and they should be released, as they had been sold, without a price paid
for them. Perhaps God intends here to reproach them for selling
themselves in this manner without any compensation of any kind, and to
show them the folly of it; but, at the same time, he intends to assure
them that no price would be paid for their ransom.

Ye shall be redeemed - You shall be delivered from your long and painful
captivity without any price being paid to the Babylonians. This was to
be a remarkable proof of the power of God. Men do not usually give up
captives and slaves, in whatever way they may have taken them, without
demanding a price or ransom. But here God says that he designs to effect
their deliverance without any such price being demanded or paid, and
that as they had gone into captivity unpurchased, so they should return
unpurchased. Accordingly he so overruled events as completely to effect
this. The Babylonians, perhaps, in no way could have been induced to
surrender them. God, therefore, designed to raise up Cyrus, a mild,
just, and equitable prince; and to dispose him to suffer the exiles to
depart, and to aid them in their return to their own land. In this way,
they were rescued without money and without price, by the interposition
of another.

[Isaiah 52:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 52:4</span></span>

For thus saith the Lord God - In order to show them that he could redeem
them without money, God reminds them of what had been done in former
times. The numerous captives in Egypt, whose services were so valuable
to the Egyptians, and whom the Egyptians were so unwilling to suffer to
depart, he had rescued by his own power, and had delivered for ever from
that bondage. The idea here is, that with the same ease he could rescue
the captives in Babylon, and restore them to their own land without a
price.

My people went down - That is, Jacob and his sons. The phrase 'went
down,' is applied to a journey to Egypt, because Judea was a mountainous
and elevated country compared with Egypt, and a journey there was in
fact a descent to a more level and lower country.

To sojourn there - Not to dwell there permanently, but to remain there
only for a time. They went in fact only to remain until the severity of
the famine should have passed by, and until they could return with
safety to the land of Canaan.

And the Assyrians oppressed them without cause - A considerable variety
has existed in the interpretation of this passage. The Septuagint
renders it, 'And to the Assyrians they were carried by force.' Some have
supposed that this refers to the oppressions that they experienced in
Egypt, and that the name 'Assyrian' is here given to Pharaoh. So
Forerius and Cajetan understand it. They suppose that the name, 'the
Assyrian,' became, in the apprehension of the Jews, the common name of
that which was proud, oppressive, and haughty, and might therefore be
used to designate Pharaoh. But there are insuperable objections to this.
For the name 'the Assyrian' is not elsewhere given to Pharaoh in the
Scriptures, nor can it be supposed to be given to him but with great
impropriety. It is not true that Pharaoh was an Assyrian; nor is it true
that the Israelites were oppressed by the Assyrians while they remained
in Egypt. Others have supposed that this refers to Nebuchadnezzar and
the Chaldeans in general, and that the name 'the Assyrian' is given them
in a large and general sense, as ruling over that which constituted the
empire of Assyria, and that the prophet here refers to the calamities
which they were suffering in Babylon. But the objection to this is not
the less decisive.

It is true that Babylon was formerly a part or province of Assyria, and
true also that in the time of the Jewish captivity it was the capital of
the kingdom of which the former empire of Assyria became a subject
province. But the name Babylonian, in the Scriptures, is kept distinct
from that of Assyrian, and they are not used interchangeably. Nor does
the connection of the passage require us to understand it in this sense.
The whole passage is in a high degree elliptical, and something must be
supplied to make out the sense. The general design of it is, to show
that God would certainly deliver the Jews from the captivity at Babylon
without money. For this purpose, the prophet appeals to the former
instances of his interposition when deliverance had been effected in
that way. A paraphrase of the passage, and a filling up of the parts
which are omitted in the brief and abrupt manner of the prophet, will
show the sense. 'Ye have been sold for nought, and ye shall be ransomed
without price.

As a proof that I can do it, and will do it, remember that my people
went down formerly to Egypt, and designed to sojourn there for a little
time, and that they were there reduced to slavery, and oppressed by
Pharaoh, but that I ransomed them without money, and brought them forth
by my own power. Remember, further, how often the Assyrian has oppressed
them also, without cause. Remember the history of Sennacherib,
Tiglath-pileser, and Salmaneser, and how they have laid the land waste,
and remember also how I have delivered it from these oppressions. With
the same certainty, and the same ease, I can deliver the people from the
captivity at Babylon.' The prophet, therefore, refers to different
periods and events; and the idea is, that God had delivered them when
they had been oppressed alike by the Egyptian, and by the Assyrians, and
that he who had so often interposed would also rescue them from their
oppression in Babylon.

[Isaiah 52:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 52:5</span></span>

Now, therefore, what have I here? - In Babylon, referring to the
captivity of the Jews there. The idea is, that a state of things existed
there which demanded his interposition as really as it did when his
people had been oppressed by the Egyptians, or by the Assyrian. His
people had been taken away for nought; they were subject to cruel
oppressions; and his own name was continually blasphemed. In this state
of things, it is inferred, that he would certainly come to their rescue,
and that his own perfections as well as their welfare demanded that he
should interpose to redeem them. The phrase, 'what have I here?' is
equivalent to saying, what shall I do? what am I properly called on to
do? or what reason is there now in Babylon for my interposition to
rescue my people? It is implied, that such was the state of things, that
God felt that there was something that demanded his interposition.

That my people is taken away for nought - This was one thing existing in
Babylon that demanded his interposition. His people had been made
captive by the Chaldeans, and were now suffering under their
oppressions. This had been done 'for nought;' that is, it had been done
without any just claim. It was on their part a mere act of gross and
severe oppression, and this demanded the interposition of a righteous
God.

They that rule over them make them to howl - Lowth renders this, 'They
that are lords over them make their boast of it.' Noyes renders it, 'And
their tyrants exult.' The Septuagint renders it, 'My people are taken
away for nought: wonder ye, and raise a mournful cry' (ὀλολύζετε
ololuzete). Jerome renders it, 'Their lords act unjustly, and they
therefore howl when they are delivered to torments.' Aben Ezra supposes
that by 'their lords' here, or those who rule over them, are meant the
rulers of the Jewish people, and that the idea is, that they lament and
howl over the calamities and oppressions of the people. But it is
probable, after all, that our translators have given the true sense of
the text, and that the idea is, that they were suffering such grievous
oppressions in Babylon as to make them lift up the cry of lamentation
and of grief. This was a reason why God should interpose as he had done
in former times, and bring deliverance.

And my name continually every day is blasphemed - That is, in Babylon.
The proud and oppressive Babylonians delight to add to the sorrows of
the exiles by reproaching the name of their God, and by saying that he
was unable to defend them and their city from ruin. This is the third
reason why God would interpose to rescue them. The three reasons in this
verse are, that they had been taken away for nought; that they were
suffering grievous and painful oppression; and that the name of God was
reproached. On all these accounts he felt that he had something to do in
Babylon, and that his interposition was demanded.

[Isaiah 52:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 52:6</span></span>

Therefore my people shall know my name - The idea in this verse is, that
his people should have such exhibitions of his power as to furnish to
them demonstration that he was God.

[Isaiah 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 52:7</span></span>

How beautiful upon the mountains - This passage is applied by Paul to
the ministers of the gospel (see [Rom
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015).md). The meaning here seems to be
this: Isaiah was describing the certain return of the Jews to their own
land. He sees in vision the heralds announcing their return to Jerusalem
running on the distant hills. A herald bearing good news is a beautiful
object; and he says that his feet are beautiful; that is, his running is
beautiful. He came to declare that the long and painful captivity was
closed, and that the holy city and its temple were again to rise with
splendor, and that peace and plenty and joy were to be spread over the
land. Such a messenger coming with haste, the prophet says, would be a
beautiful object. Some have supposed (see Campbell on the Gospels, Diss.
v. p. 11, Section 3, 4), that the idea here is, that the feet of
messengers when they traveled in the dust were naturally offensive and
disgusting, but that the messenger of peace and prosperity to those who
had been oppressed and afflicted by the ravages of war, was so charming
as to transform a most disagreeable into a pleasing object.

But I cannot see any such allusion here. It is true that the feet of
those who had traveled far in dry and dusty roads would present a
spectacle offensive to the beholder; and it is true also, as Dr.
Campbell suggests, that the consideration that they who were coming were
messengers of peace and safety would convert deformity into beauty, and
make us behold with delight this indication of their embassy. But it
seems to me that this passage has much higher beauty. The idea in the
mind of the prophet is not, that the messenger is so near that the
sordid appearance of his feet could be seen. The beholder is supposed to
be standing amidst the ruins of the desolated city, and the messenger is
seen running on the distant hills. The long anticipated herald
announcing that these ruins are to rise, at length appears. Seen on the
distant hills, running rapidly, he is a beautiful object. It is his
feet, his running, his haste, that attracts attention; an indication
that he bears a message of joy, and that the nation is about to be
restored. Nahum, who is supposed to have lived after Isaiah, has
evidently copied from him this beautiful image:

Behold upon the mountains the feet of the joyful messenger,

Of him that announceth peace;

Celebrate, O Judah, thy festivals; perform thy vows;

For no more shall pass through thee the wicked one;

He is utterly cut off.

[Nah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#015.md)

That publisheth peace - This declaration is general, that the coming of
such a messenger would be attended with joy. The particular and special
idea here is, that it would be a joyful announcement that this captivity
was ended, and that Zion was about to be restored.

That bringeth good tidings of good - He announces that which is good or
which is a joyful message.

That saith unto Zion, thy God reigneth - That is, thy God has delivered
the people from their captivity, and is about to reign again in Zion.
This was applied at first to the return from the captivity. Paul, as has
been already observed, applies it to the ministers of the gospel. That
is, it is language which will well express the nature of the message
which the ministers of the gospel bear to their fellow-men. The sense is
here, that the coming of a messenger bringing good news is universally
agreeable to people. And it the coming of a messenger announcing that
peace is made, is pleasant; or if the coming of such a messenger
declaring that the captivity at Babylon was ended, was delightful, how
much more so should be the coming of the herald announcing that man may
be at peace with his Maker?

[Isaiah 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 52:8</span></span>

Thy watchmen - This language is taken from the custom of placing
watchmen on the walls of a city, or on elevated towers, who could see if
an enemy approached, and who of course would be the first to discern a
messenger at a distance who was coming to announce good news. The idea
is, that there would be as great joy at the announcement of the return
of the exiles, as if they who were stationed on the wall should see the
long-expected herald on the distant hills, coming to announce that they
were about to return, and that the city and temple were about to be
rebuilt. It was originally applicable to the return from Babylon. But it
contains also the general truth that they who are appointed to watch
over Zion and its interests, will rejoice at all the tokens of God's
favor to his people, and especially when he comes to bless them after
long times of darkness, depression, and calamity. It is by no means,
therefore, departing from the spirit of this passage, to apply it to the
joy of the ministers of religion in the visits of divine mercy to a
church and people. 'Shall lift up the voice.' That is, with rejoicing.

With the voice together shall they sing - They shall mingle their
praises and thanksgivings. The idea is, that all who are appointed to
guard Zion, should feel a common interest in her welfare, and rejoice
when the Lord comes to visit and bless his people. The Hebrew here is
more abrupt and emphatic than our common translation would make it. It
is literally, 'The voice of thy watchmen! They lift up the voice
together; they sing' - as if the prophet suddenly heard a shout. It is
the exultling shout of the watchmen of Zion; and it comes as one voice,
with no discord, no jarring.

For they shall see eye to eye - Lowth renders this, 'For face to face
shall they see.' Noyes, 'For with their own eyes shall they behold.'
Jerome renders it, Oculo ad oculum - 'Eye to eye.' The Septuagint
renders it, Ὀφθαλμοὶ πρός ὀφθαλμοὺς, κ.τ.λ. Ophthalmoi pros ophthalmous,
etc. 'Eyes shall look to eyes when the Lord shall have mercy upon Zion.'
Interpreters have been divided in regard to its meaning. The sense may
be, either that they shall see face to face, that is, distinctly,
clearly, as when one is near another; or it may mean that they shall be
united - they shall contemplate the same object, or look steadily at the
same thing. Rosenmuller, Gesenius, Forerius, Junius. and some others,
understand it in the former sense. So the Chaldee, 'For they shall see
with their own eyes the great things which the Lord will do when he
shall bring back his own glory to Zion.' The phrase in Hebrew occurs in
no other place, except in [Num 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#014.md),
which our translators have rendered, 'For thou, Lord, art seen face to
face.' Hebrew, 'Eye to eye;' that is, near, openly, manifestly, without
any veil or interposing medium.

The expression, 'face to face,' meaning openly, plainly, manifestly, as
one sees who is close to another, occurs frequently in the Bible (see
[Gen 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#030.md); [Exo
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#011.md); [Deu
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#004.md); [Deu
34:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#010.md); [Jdg
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#022.md); [Pro
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#019.md); [Eze
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#035.md); [Act
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#016.md); [Co1
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012.md); [Jo2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#012.md); [Jo3
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#014).md). So the phrase, 'mouth to
mouth,' occurs in a similar sense [Num
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#008.md). And there can be but little
doubt, it seems to me, that this is the sense here, and that the prophet
means to say, that the great and marvelous doings of Yahweh would be
seen openly and manifestly, and that the watchmen would thence have
occasion to rejoice. Another reason for this opinion, besides the fact
that it accords with the common usage, is, that the phrase, 'to see eye
to eye,' in the sense of being united and harmonious, is not very
intelligible. It is not easy to form an image or conception of the
watchman in this attitude as denoting harmony. To look into the eyes of
each other does not of necessity denote harmony, for people oftentimes
do this for other purposes. The idea therefore is, that when Yahweh
should bring back and bless his people, the watchmen would have a full
and glorious exhibition of his mercy and goodness, and the result would
be, that they would greatly rejoice, and unitedly celebrate his name.
According to this interpretation, it does not mean that the ministers of
religion would have the same precise views, or embrace the same
doctrines, however true this may be, or however desirable in itself, but
that they would have an open, clear, and bright manifestation of the
presence of God, and would lift up their voices together with exultation
and praise.

When the Lord shall bring again Zion - Zion here denotes the people who
dwelt in Jerusalem; and the idea is, when the Lord shall again restore
them to their own land. It is not a departure from the sense of the
passage, however, to apply it in a more general manner, and to use it as
demonstrating that any signal interposition of God in favor of his
people should be the occasion of joy, and shall lead the ministers of
religion to exult in God, and to praise his name.

[Isaiah 52:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 52:9</span></span>

Break forth into joy - Jerusalem, at the time here referred to, was
lying waste and in ruins. This call on the waste places of Jerusalem to
break out into expressions of praise, is in accordance with a style
which frequently occurs in Isaiah, and in other sacred writers, by which
inanimate objects are called on to manifest their joy (see the notes at
[Isa 14:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#007.md); [Isa
42:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#011).md).

For the Lord hath comforted his people - That is, he does comfort his
people, and redeem them. This is seen by the prophet in vision, and to
his view it is represented as if it were passing before his eyes.

He hath redeemed Jerusalem - On the meaning of the word 'redeemed,' see
the notes at [Isa 43:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#001.md). The idea
here is, that Yahweh was about to restore his people from their long
captivity, and again to cause Jerusalem to be rebuilt.

[Isaiah 52:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 52:10</span></span>

The Lord hath made bare his holy arm - That is, in delivering his people
from bondage. This metaphor is taken from warriors, who made bare the
arm for battle; and the sense is, that God had come to the rescue of his
people as a warrior, and that his interpositions would be seen and
recognized and acknowledged by all the nations. The metaphor is derived
from the manner in which the Orientals dressed. The following extract
from Jowett's Christian Researches will explain the language: 'The loose
sleeve of the Arab shirt, as well as that of the outer garment, leaves
the arm so completely free, that in an instant the left hand passing up
the right arm makes it bare; and this is done when a person, a soldier,
for example, about to strike with the sword, intends to give the arm
full play. The image represents Yahweh as suddenly prepared to inflict
some tremendous, yet righteous judgment, so effectual "that all the ends
of the earth shall see the salvation of God."' The phrase 'holy arm,'
seems to mean that God would be engaged in a holy and just cause. It
would not be an arm of conquest, or of oppression; but it would be made
bare in a holy cause, and all its inflictions would be righteous.

And all the ends of the earth - For an explanation of the phrase 'the
ends of the earth,' see the notes at [Isa
40:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#028.md). The meaning here is, that the
deliverance of his people referred to would be so remarkable as to be
conspicuous to all the world. The most distant nations would see it, and
would be constrained to recognize his hand. It was fulfilled in the
rescue of the nation from the captivity at Babylon. The conquest of
Babylon was an event that was so momentous in its consequences, as to be
known to all the kingdoms of the earth; and the proclamation of Cyrus
[Ezr 1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001.md), and the consequent
restoration of his people to their own land, were calculated to make the
name of Yahweh known to all nations.

[Isaiah 52:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 52:11</span></span>

Depart ye, depart ye - This is a direct address to the exiles in their
captivity. The same command occurs in [Isa
48:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#020) (see the notes on that place.md).
It is repeated here for the sake of emphasis; and the urgency of the
command implies that there was some delay likely to be apprehended on
the part of the exiles themselves. The fact seems to have been, that
though the captivity was at first attended with every circumstance
suited to give pain, and though they were subjected to many privations
and sorrows in Babylon (see [Psa
137:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001).md), yet that many of them became
strongly attached to a residence there, and were strongly indisposed to
return. They were there seventy years. Most of those who were made
captive would have died before the close of the exile. Their children,
who constituted the generation to whom the command to return would be
addressed, would have known the land of their fathers only by report.

It was a distant land; and was to be reached only by a long and perilous
journey across a pathless desert. They had been born in Babylon. It was
their home; and there were the graves of their parents arid kindred.
Some had been advanced to posts of office and honor: many, it is
probable, had lands, and friends, and property in Babylon. The
consequence would, therefore, be, that there would be strong reluctance
on their part to leave the country of their exile, and to encounter the
perils and trials incident to a return to their own land. It is not
improbable, also, that many of them may have formed improper connections
and attachments in that distant land, and that they would be unwilling
to relinquish them, and return to the land of their fathers. It was
necessary, therefore, that the most urgent commands should be addressed
to them, and the strongest motives presented to them, to induce them to
return to the country of their fathers. And after all, it is evident
that but comparatively a small portion of the exile Jews ever were
prevailed on to leave Babylon, and to adventure upon the perilous
journey of a return to Zion.

Touch no unclean thing - Separate yourselves wholly from an idolatrous
nation, and preserve yourselves pure. The apostle Paul [Co2
6:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#017.md) has applied this to
Christians, and uses it as expressing the obligation to come out from
the world, and to be separate from all its influences. Babylon is
regarded by the apostle as not an unapt emblem of the world, and the
command to come out from her as not an improper expression of the
obligation to the friends of the Redeemer to be separate from all that
is evil. John [Rev 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004.md) has applied
this passage also to denote the duty of true Christians to separate
themselves from the mystical Babylon - the papal community - and not to
be partaker of her sins. The passage is applied in both these instances,
because Babylon, in Scripture language, is regarded as emblematic of
whatever is oppressive, proud, arrogant, persecuting, impure, and
abominable.

That bear the vessels of the Lord - That bear again to your own land the
sacred vessels of the sanctuary. It is to be remembered that when the
Jews were taken to Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar carried there all the sacred
utensils of the temple, and that they were used in their festivals as
common vessels in Babylon [Ch2 36:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#018.md);
[Dan 5:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#002.md). These vessels Cyrus
commanded to be again restored, when the exiles returned to their own
land [Ezr 1:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#007.md). They whose office it
was to carry them, were the priests and Levites [Num
1:50](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#050.md); [Num
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#015.md); and the command here pertains
particularly to them. They were required to be holy; to feel the
importance of their office, and to be separate from all that is evil.
The passage has no original reference to ministers of the gospel, but
the principle is implied that they who are appointed to serve God as his
ministers in any way should be pure and holy.

[Isaiah 52:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 52:12</span></span>

For ye shall not go out with haste - As if driven out, or compelled to
flee. You shall not go from Babylon as your fathers went from Egypt, in
a rapid flight, and in a confused and tumultuous manner (see [Deu
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#003).md). The idea here is, that they
should have time to prepare themselves to go out, and to become fit to
bear the vessels of the Lord. It was a fact that when they left Babylon
they did it with the utmost deliberation, and had ample time to make any
preparation that was necessary.

For the Lord will go before you - Yahweh will conduct you, as a general
advances at the head of an army. The figure here is taken from the march
of an army, and the image is that of Yahweh as the leader or head of the
host in the march through the desert between Babylon and Jerusalem (see
the notes at [Isa 40:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003).md).

And the God of Israel will be your rereward - Margin, 'Gather you up.'
The Hebrew word used here (אסף 'âsaph) means properly to collect, to
gather together, as fruits, etc. It is then applied to the act of
bringing up the rear of an army; and means to be a rear-ward, or guard,
agmen claudere - as collecting, and bringing together the stragglers,
and defending the army in its march, from an attack in the rear. The
Septuagint renders it, 'The God of Israel is he who collects you' (ὁ
ἐπισυνάγων ὑμᾶς ho episunagōn humas), that is, brings up the rear. The
Chaldee, 'The God of Israel will collect together your captivity.' Here
the chapter should have closed, for here closes the account of the
return of the exiles from Babylon. The mind of the prophet seems here to
leave the captive Jews on their way to their own land, with Yahweh going
at their head, and guarding the rear of the returning band, and to have
passed to the contemplation of him of whose coming all these events were
preliminary and introductory - the Messiah. Perhaps the rationale of
this apparent transition is this.

It is undoubtedly the doctrine of the Bible that he who was revealed as
the guide of his people in ancient times, and who appeared under various
names, as 'the angel of Yahweh,' 'the angel of the covenant,' etc., was
he who afterward became incarnate - the Saviour of the world. So the
prophet seems to have regarded him; and here fixing his attention on the
Yahweh who was thus to guide his people and be their defense, by an easy
transition the mind is carried forward to the time when he would be
incarnate, and would die for people. Leaving, therefore, so to speak,
the contemplation of him as conducting his people across the barren
wastes which separated Babylon from Judea, the mind is, by no unnatural
transition, carried forward to the time when he would become a man of
sorrows, and would redeem and save the world. According to this
supposition, it is the same glorious Being whom Isaiah sees as the
protector of his people, and almost in the same instant as the man of
sorrows; and the contemplation of him as the suffering Messiah becomes
so absorbing and intense, that he abruptly closes the description of him
as the guide of the exiles to their own land.

He sees him as a sufferer. He sees the manner and the design of his
death. He contemplates the certain result of that humiliation and death
in the spread of the true religion, and in the extension of his kingdom
among men. Henceforward, therefore, to the end of Isaiah, we meet with
no reference, if we except in a very fcw instances, to the condition of
the exiles in Babylon, or to their return to their own land. The mind of
the prophet is absorbed in describing the glories of the Messiah, and
the certain spread of his gospel around the globe.

[Isaiah 52:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 52:13</span></span>

Notes on [Isa 52:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013.md) and [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001.md)

The most important portion of Isaiah, and of the Old Testament,
commences here, and here should have been the beginning of a new
chapter. It is the description of the suffering Messiah, and is
continued to the close of the next chapter. As the closing verses of
this chapter are connected with the following chapter, and as it is of
great importance to have just views of the design of this portion of
Isaiah, it is proper in this place to give an analysis of this part of
the prophecy. And as no other part of the Bible has excited so much the
attention of the friends and foes of Christianity; as so various and
conflicting views have prevailed in regard to its meaning: and as the
proper interpretation of the passage must have an important bearing on
the controversy with Jews and infidels, and on the practical views of
Christians, I shall be justified in going into an examination of its
meaning at considerably greater length than has been deemed necessary in
other portions of the prophecy. It may be remarked in general:

\(1\) That if the common interpretation of the passage, as describing a
suffering Saviour, be correct, then it settles the controversy with the
Jews, and demonstrates that their notions of the Messiah are false.

\(2\) If this was written at the time when it is claimed by Christians
to have been written, then it settles the controversy with infidels. The
description is so particular and minute; the correspondence with the
life, the character, and the death of the Lord Jesus, is so complete,
that it could not have been the result of conjecture or accident. At the
same time, it is a correspondence which could not have been brought
about by an impostor who meant to avail himself of this ancient prophecy
to promote his designs, for a large portion of the circumstances are
such as did not depend on himself, but grew out of the feelings and
purposes of others. On the supposition that this had been found as an
ancient prophecy, it would have been impossible for any impostor so to
have shaped the course of events as to have made his character and life
appear to be a fulfillment of it. And unless the infidel could either
make it out that this prophecy was not in existence, or that, being in
existence, it was possible for a deceiver to create an exact coincidence
between it and his life and character and death, then, in all honesty,
he should admit that it was given by inspiration, and that the Bible is
true.

\(3\) A correct exposition of this will be of inestimable value in
giving to the Christian just views of the atonement, and of the whole
doctrine of redemption. Probably in no portion of the Bible of the same
length, not even in the New Testament, is there to be found so clear an
exhibition of the purpose for which the Saviour died. I shall endeavor,
therefore, to prepare the way for an exposition of the passage, by a
consideration of several points that are necessary to a correct
understanding of it.

Section 1. Evidence that It was Written Before

The Birth of Jesus of Nazareth

On this point there will be, and can be, no dispute among Jews and
Christians. The general argument to prove this, is the same as that
which demonstrates that Isaiah wrote at all before that time. For a view
of this, the reader is referred to the Introduction. But this general
argument may be presented in a more specific form, and includes the
following particulars:

\(1\) It is quoted in the New Testament as part of the prophetic
writings then well known (see [Mat
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#017.md); [Joh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#038.md); [Act
8:28-35](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#028.md); [Rom
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#016.md); [Pe1
2:21-25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021).md). That the passage was in
existence at the time when the New Testament was written, is manifest
from these quotations. So far as the argument with the infidel is
concerned, it is immaterial whether it was written 700 years before the
events took place, or only fifty, or ten. It would still be prophecy,
and it would still be incumbent on him to show how it came to be so
accurately accomplished.

\(2\) It is quoted and translated by writers who undoubtedly lived
before the Christian era. Thus, it is found in the Septuagint, and in
the Chaldee - both of which can be demonstrated to have been made before
Christ was born.

\(3\) There is not the slightest evidence that it has been interpolated
or corrupted, or changed so as to adapt it to the Lord Jesus. It is the
same in all copies, and in all versions.

\(4\) It has never even been pretended that it has been introduced for
the purpose of furnishing an argument for the truth of Christianity. No
infidel has ever pretended that it does not stand on the same footing as
any other portion of Isaiah.

\(5\) It is such a passage as Jews would not have forged. It is opposed
to all their prevailing notions of the Messiah. They have anticipated a
magnificent temporal prince and a conqueror: and one of the main reasons
why they have rejected the Lord Jesus has been, that he was obscure in
his origin, poor, despised, and put to death; in other words, because be
has corresponded so entirely with the description here. No passage of
the Old Testament has ever given them greater perplexity than this, and
it is morally certain that if the Jews had ever forged a pretended
prophecy of the Messiah, it would not have been in the language of this
portion of Isaiah. They would have described him as the magnificent
successor of David and Solomon; as a mighty prince and a warrior; as the
head of universal empire, and would have said that by his victorious
arms he would subdue the earth to himself, and would make Jerusalem the
capital of the world. They never would have described him as despised
and rejected by people, and as making his grave with the wicked in his
death.

\(6\) Christians could not have forged and interpolated this. The Jews
have always jealously guarded their own Scriptures; and nothing would
have so certainly excited their attention as an attempt to interpolate a
passage like this, furnishing at once an irrefragable argument against
their opinions of the Messiah, and so obviously applicable to Jesus of
Nazareth. It is, moreover, true, that no Jewish writer has ever
pretended that the passage has either been forged, or changed in any
way, so as to accommodate it to the opinions of Christians respecting
the Messiah. These remarks may seem to be unnecessary, and this argument
useless, to those who have examined the authenticity of the sacred
writings. They are of use only in the argument with the enemies of
Christianity. For, if this passage was written at the time when it is
supposed to have been, and if it had reference to the Lord Jesus, then
it demonstrates that Isaiah was inspired, and furnishes an argument for
the truth of revelation which is irrefragable. It is incumbent on the
unbeliever to destroy all the alleged proofs that it was written by
Isaiah, or, as an honest man, he should admit the truth of inspiration
and of prophecy, and yield his heart to the influence of the truth of
the Bible. In general, it may be observed, that an attempt to destroy
the credibility of this portion of Isaiah as having been written several
hundred years before the Christian era, would destroy the credibility of
all the ancient writings; and that we have as much evidence that this is
the production of Isaiah, as we have of the credibility or the
authenticity of the writings of Homer or Herodotus.

Section 2. History of the Interpretation of the Passage by the Jews

In order to a clear understanding of the passage, it is proper to give a
summary view of the modes of interpretation which have prevailed in
regard to it both among Jews and Christians. For this historical view, I
am indebted mainly to Hengstenberg, Chris. i. p. 484ff. The several
opinions which have prevailed among the Jewish expositors are the
following:

There is the fullest evidence that the passage was applied by the early
Jews, both before and after the birth of Jesus, to the Messiah, until
they were pressed by its application to Jesus of Nazareth, and were
compelled ill self-defense to adopt some other mode of interpretation;
and even after that, it is evident, also, that not a few of the better
and more pious portion of the Jewish nation still continued to regard it
as descriptive of the Messiah. So obvious is the application to the
Messiah, so clear and full is the description, that many of them have
adopted the opinion that there would be two Messiahs, one a suffering
Messiah, and the other a glorious and triumphant prince and conqueror.
The Old Testament plainly foretold that the Messiah would be 'God and
man; exalted and debased; master and servant; priest and victim; prince
and subject; involved in death, and yet a victor over death; rich and
poor; a king, a conqueror, glorious; a man of griefs, exposed to
infirmities, unknown, and in a state of abjection and humiliation.'
(Calmet.) All these apparently contradictory qualities bad their
fulfillment in the person of Jesus of Nazareth; but they were the source
of great difficulty to the Jews, and have led to the great variety of
opinions which have prevailed among them in regard to him.

In the Lord Jesus they harmonize; but when the Jews resolved to reject
him, they were at once thrown into endless embarrassment in regard to
the character, coming, and work of him whom they had so long expected.
The following extract from Calmet (Dictionary) will explain some of the
modern prevailing views of him, and is neeessary to a clear
understanding of the grounds which have been taken in the interpretation
of this prophecy: 'Some of them, as the famous Hillel, who lived,
according to the Jews, before Christ, maintain that the Messiah was
already come in the person of Hezekiah; others, that the belief of the
coming of the Messiah is no article of faith. Buxtorf says, that the
greater part of the modern rabbis believe that the Messiah has been come
a good while, but keeps himself concealed in some part of the world or
other, and will not manifest himself, because of the sins of the Jews.
Jarchi affirms, that the Hebrews believe that the Messiah was born on
the day of the last destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans. Some assign
him the terrestrial paradise for his habitation; others the city of
Rome, where, according to the Talmudists, he keeps himself concealed
among the leprous and infirm, at the gate of the city, expecting Elias
to come and manifest him.

A great number believe that he is yet to come, but they are strangely
divided about the time and the circumstances of his coming. Some expect
him at the end of 6000 years. Kimchi, who lived in the twelfth century,
believed that the coming of the Messiah was very near. Some have fixed
the time of the end of their misfortunes to a.d. 1492, others to 1598,
others to 1600, others yet later. Last of all, tired out with these
uncertainties, they have pronounced an anathema against any who shall
pretend to calculate the time of the coming of the Messiah.'

It is capable, however, of clear demonstration, that the ancient Jews,
before the birth of Jesus, were not thus embarrassed in the
interpretation of their own prophets. The following extracts from their
writings will show that the opinion early prevailed that the passage
before us had reference to the Messiah, and that they had to some extent
right views of him. Even by the later Jewish interpreters who give a
different exposition of the prophecy, it is admitted that it was
formerly referred to the Messiah. This is admitted by Aben Ezra, Jarchi,
Abarbanel, and Moses Nachmanides. Among the testimonies of the ancient
Jews are the following: The Chaldee Paraphrast, Jonathan, expressly
refers it to the Messiah. Thus, in [Isa
52:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013.md), he renders the first member,
Behold, my servant the Messiah shall prosper.' Thus, in the Medrasch
Tanchuma (an old commentary on the Pentateuch), on the words 'Behold, my
servant shall prosper,' it is remarked, This is the king Messiah, who is
high, and lifted up, and very exalted, higher than Abraham, exalted
above Moses, higher than the ministering angels.' Similar is the
language of rabbi Moses Haddarschan on [Gen
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003.md) : 'Yahweh spake: Messiah, my
righteous one, those who are concealed with thee, will be such that
their sins will bring a heavy yoke upon thee. The Messiah answered: Lord
of the world, I cheerfully take upon myself those plagues and sorrows.
Immediately, therefore, the Messiah took upon himself, out of love, all
torments and sufferings, as it is written in [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001.md), "He was abused and
oppressed."' Many other passages may be seen collected by Hengstenberg,
Chris. i. 485, 486.

But this interpretation was abandoned by the Jewish interpreters when
the passage was urged against them by Christians as demonstrating that
Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah, and when they could not reconcile it
with their prevailing notions that the Messiah was to be a magnificent
temporal prince. Gesenius asserts that 'the later Jews, no doubt,
relinquished this interpretation in consequence of their controversy
with Christians.' The Jews early formed the opinion that the Messiah was
to be a king like David and Solomon, and was to be distinguished as a
conqueror. They, therefore looked exclusively at the passages of the Old
Testament which spoke of his exaltation, and they were rendered averse
to applying a passage like this to him, which spoke of his poverty,
rejection, humiliation, and death. They did not or would not, understand
how passages apparently so contradictory, could be applied to the same
individual; and they therefore fixed their attention on those which
predicted his exaltation and majesty, and rejected the idea that the
Messiah would be a sufferer. So long as they applied this portion of
Isaiah to the Messiah, they could not deny that there was a remarkable
correspondence between it and Jesus of Nazareth, and they were unable to
meet the force of the argument thence derived in favor of his claims to
the Messiahsip. It became necessary, therefore, for the Jews to seek
some other explanation of the passage, and to deny that it had reference
to the Messiah. Accordingly, the great effort of the Jewish interpreters
has been to ascertain to whom the passage can be made, with any show of
probability, to apply. The great mass agree that it is not to be applied
to the Messiah, and this is now the prevailing opinion among them.

Among the more modern Jewish expositors who agree that the passage is
not to be applied to the Messiah, the following opinions have prevailed:

1\. The most commonly received opinion is, that it refers to the Jewish
people. This is the opinion of Jarchi, Aben Ezra, Kimchi, Abarbancl, and
Lipmann. According to them, the prophecy describes the condition of the
Jews in their present calamity and exile; the firmness with which they
endure it for the honor of God, and resist every temptation to forsake
his law and worship; and the prosperity honor and glory which they shall
obtain in the time of their redemption. In [Isa
53:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001.md), the pagan are regarded as
speaking, and making an humble and penitential confession that they have
hitherto mistaken the people of God, and unjustly despised them on
account of their sufferings, since it now appears front their exaltation
that those sufferings have not been inflicted on them on account of
their sins.

2\. Others take the appellation, 'salvation of Yahweh,' in the passage,
to mean, the pious portion of the nation taken collectively, and
regarded as making a kind of vicarious satisfaction for the ungodly.
This class of interpreters among the Jews, however, has been small. They
refer it to those among them who endure much affliction and suffering,
but more especially to those who are publicly put to death. They mention
particularly rabbi Akiba as one who suffered martyrdom in this manner.
This interpretation retains, indeed, the essential idea of substitution
Which runs through the passage, and it is not improbable that it is on
this account that it has found so little favor with the modern Jews,
since they reject with abhorrence the whole doctrine of vicarious
sufferings as designed to make an atonement for others.

3\. A few others among the Jews make the passage refer to an individual.
Abarbanel, besides supposing that it refers to the Jewish people in
general, suggests also that it may refer particularly to Isaiah. rabbi
Saddias Haggaon explained the whole as referring to Jeremiah. Still the
passage is so plain in its general meaning, the reference to the Messiah
is so obvious, that the rabbis have not been able, with all their
ingenuity, to propose an interpretation that shall be entirely
satisfactory to their nation. It has probably been the means of the
conversion of more Jews from the errors of their system to Christianity,
than any other portion of their Scriptures. We know that, as it was
explained and applied by Philip, it was the means of the conversion of
the Ethiopian eunuch [Act 8:27-40](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#027.md). And
so Jo. Isaac Levita, a learned Jew, says it was the means of first
leading him to the Christian religion. 'I frankly confess,' says he,
'that this chapter first conducted me to the Christian faith. For more
than a thousand times I read this chapter, and accurately compared it
with many translations, I found that it contained a hundred more
mysteries respecting Christ, than are found in any version.' Many
similar instances occur, says Hengstenberg, in the reports of
Missionaries among the Jews.

Section 3. History of the Interpretation of the Passage by Christians

For seventeen centuries the view which was taken of this passage was
uniform. By all the fathers of the Christian church it was regarded as
having an indisputable reference to Christ. In their arguments with the
Jews, it was quoted as containing a full refutation of their opinions
respecting the Messiah, and as demonstrating that Jesus of Nazareth was
he who had been so long announced by the prophets as 'he who was to
come.' In their arguments with infidels, it was a strong proof to which
they appealed of the truth of revelation; and in their homilies and
expositions it was referred uniformly to the Lord Jesus. If we except
Grotius, who supposed that it referred to Jeremiah, who, he says (note
at [Isa 52:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013).md), was figura Christi -
the type of the Messiah - it was not until the last quarter of the
sixteenth century that this interpretation began to be called in
question. The reason why the uniform exposition of the Christian church
was abandoned then by any was, that it could no longer be retained
consistently with the notions which prevailed, especially in Germany, of
the Bible. The grand principle which began to prevail in the
interpretation of the Bible was, that all which is there recorded is to
be accounted for on natural principles. But if this passage refers to
the Messiah, it harmonizes so exactly with the life and character of the
Redeemer, and it is so entirely removed from the possible range of mere
conjecture, that it cannot be accounted for except on the supposition of
supernatural revelation. Many professed Christian interpreters,
therefore, have sought other ways of explaining it, and have diligently
inquired to whom it referred. As a specimen of the manner in which the
exposition of the Bible has been conducted in Germany, we may just refer
to the opinions which have prevailed in the interpretation of this, the
plainest and most splendid of all the prophecies pertaining to the
Messiah.

1\. Comparatively the greatest number of the non-Messianic interpreters
make the whole Jewish people the subject. A large number of German
expositors, whose names may be seen in Hengstenberg's Christol. i. 494,
have adopted this view. The only difference between this interpretation
and that adopted by the later Jews is, that the German critics suppose
it refers to the Jews in the Babylonian exile, while the Jews suppose
that it refers to their nation suffering in their present exile.

2\. It was held by Eckermann that it refers to the Jewish nation in the
abstract, in opposition to its individual members. In other words, it
seems to have been held that the nation in the abstract was guilty and
was suffering, while the individual members were innocent, and escaped
suffering and punishment.

3\. It has been held that it refers to the pious part of the Jewish
people, as contrasted with the ungodly. This opinion was defended by
Paulus. His view is the following: The pious part of the Jewish people
were carried into captivity with the ungodly, not on account of their
own sins, but the sins of the latter. The ungodly inferred that the hope
of the pious that Yahweh would help them was in vain, but as the exile
came to an end, and the pious returned, they saw that they had erred,
and that their hope was wellgrounded. They deeply lament, therefore,
that they have not long ago done penance.

4\. One author has maintained that the Jewish priesthood is the subject
of the prophecy, but in this he stands alone.

5\. It has been maintained by others that the prophets collectively are
referred to in the passage. This was at first the opinion of
Rosenmuller, but was abandoned by him, and was then defended by De
Wette, and is maintained by Gesenius.

6\. Others have referred it to some individual. Thus Grotius supposes
that Jeremiah is meant. Augusti supposed that Uzziah was intended.
Others that Hezekiah was meant; and others that Isaiah here referred to
himself; and others that it refers to some unknown prophet slain by the
Jews in their exile; and others that it refers to the Maccabees!

These strange and absurd opinions are specimens of the unhappy manner of
exposition which has prevailed among the German neologists; and they are
specimens, too, of the reluctance of the human mind to embrace the truth
as it is in Jesus, and of its proneness to the wildest aberrations,
where mere human reason is suffered to take the reins in the
interpretation of the Bible. Perhaps there is scarcely to be found an
instance of interpretation that is more suited to humble us in regard to
the proneness of people to err, than in these modes of explaining this
beautiful portion of Isaiah. And there is not to be found anywhere a
more striking proof of the reluctance of the human mind to contemplate
the sufferings and death of the Redeemer of the world, or to embrace the
great and glorious truth that people can be saved only by the vicarious
sacrifice of the Son of God.

Section 4. Proof that it Refers to the Messiah

More ample proof of this will be furnished in the exposition of the
passage itself, than can now be given. But still, it may not be improper
to refer to a few of the considerations which go to demonstrate that the
prophet here refers to the Lord Jesus Christ.

I. He refers to an individual, and not to a people, or a nation. It is
not either to the collective body of the Jewish people, or to the pious
portion of the Jewish people, or to the collective body of the prophets.
This is evident on the slightest examination of the passage. The prophet
speaks of the 'servant of Yahweh;' and the whole representation is that
of an individual, and not of any collective body of people. Thus his
visage was marred, and his form was disfigured: he was as a tender
plant; he was despised; he was rejected; he was smitten, wounded, put to
death; he made his grave with the wicked and with the rich. Of what
collective body of people could this be said? How absurd to apply this
to a nation, or to any portion of a nation! It cannot be applied (A) to
the whole people. In [Isa 53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003.md), the
subject is called 'a man,' an appellation which cannot be given to a
nation.

Nor is there an instance in all the sacred writings where there can be
found such an extended allegory as this would be, on the supposition
that this refers to the Jewish people. Besides, with what possible
propriety can it be said of a nation that it has borne the griefs and
carried the sorrows of others; that it was stricken for the
transgression of the people of God; that it was made an offering for
sin; and that it made intercession for the sin of the transgressors? If
this refers to a nation, then all settled views of interpretation are at
an end. The circumstances which are usually supposed to mark individual
existence may in all other circumstances in like manner be supposed to
mean nations, and we shall have no longer any way-marks in guiding us in
the interpretation of the plainest writings. Nor (B) can it refer to the
pious portion of the Jewish people taken collectively. For the subject
of the prophecy suffers voluntarily; he himself innocent, bears the sins
of others [Isa 53:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004.md), [Isa
53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009.md); his sufferings are the efficient
cause of the righteousness of his people [Isa
53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011.md); and he suffers quietly and
patiently, without allowing himself to be provoked to bitterness against
the authors of his sufferings. Of all these four marks, not one belongs
to the people of Israel. For

\(a\) they went not voluntarily into the Babylonian exile, but were
carried there by violence.

\(b\) They did not suffer innocently, but suffered for their sins.

\(c\) The sufferings of the Jews can in no sense be represented as the
cause of the righteousness of others.

\(d\) Nor did the Jews evince that patience and devotedness to the will
of God which is here attributed to the subject of this prophecy.

How can it be said that they were led like a lamb to the slaughter, that
they did not open the mouth to complain, when even the noblest and best
of them poured out their sadness in complaints and lamentations? Compare
[Jer 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#007.md) ff; [Jer
15:10-21](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#010.md); [Psa
137:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#008). Nor (C.md) can it refer to the
prophets taken collectively, as Gesenius supposes. On this it is
sufficient to ask, Where did such a collection of the prophets ever
exist? When did they suffer together? What evidence is there that they
were in exile? Where and when did they take upon themselves the sins of
the people, or suffer for them, or make their grave with the wicked and
the rich in their death, or see of the travail of the soul, and become
the means of the justification of many? All that has been said in favor
of this is so entirely the work of conjecture, and is so manifestly
designed to evade the obvious reference to the Messiah, that it is
necessary to refer to it only as a specimen of the manner of
interpretation which has prevailed, and which still prevails in the
explanation of the sacred Scriptures. But if the passage does not refer
either to the collective Jewish people, or to the pious portion of them,
or to the prophets regarded as a collective body, then it must refer to
an individual, and the only question is whether, it refers to the
Messiah, or to some individual of the Jewish nation. As a simple and
satisfactory argument that it refers to some individual, an appeal might
be made to the common sense of the mass of people. Not one in a million
- and he not unless he had some favorite hypothesis to defend - would
ever suppose, on reading the passage, that it could have any reference
to a collection of people of any kind. But the common sense of the mass
of people is generally the best criterion of the meaning of any written
document, and the best interpreter of the Bible.

II\. If it refers to an individual, it must refer to the Messiah. It
cannot refer to Isaiah, or Jeremiah, or Uzziah, or Akiba, for the
following, among other reasons:

\(a\) The advocates of this theory have not been able to agree on any
individual to whom it can be applied. Grotius suggested Jeremiah, some
others Uzziah, or Isaiah, and some of the Jews Akiba. But each of these
theories has been confined to the single interpreter who suggested it,
and has been rejected by all the rest of the world. What better proof
could there be that there is not even plausibility in the statement?
What stronger demonstration that it is a theory got up on purpose to
avoid the reference to the Messiah?

\(b\) None of the individuals named had any claim to the statements here
made respecting the individual sufferer. Did kings shut their months at
them, and stand in awe of them? Did Jeremiah sprinkle many nations? Did
Uzziah bear the griefs and the sorrows of people? Did Yahweh lay on
Isaiah the iniquity of all people? Did either of them make their grave
with the wicked and the rich in their death? But if it cannot be shown
to have reference to any other individual, then the fair inference is,
that it refers to the Messiah.

III\. The argument that it refers to the Messiah has all the force of
tradition in its favor. We have seen that the Jews, in more ancient
times, referred this prophecy to the Messiah. This fact proves that such
is the obvious reference. When their minds were not prejudiced and
blinded by their hatred of Jesus of Nazareth, and their opposition to
his claims; when they were looking forward with deep anxiety to the
coming of a deliverer, they applied this passage to him. And though
there were embarrassments in their minds, and they were not well able to
explain how this was consistent with what is elsewhere stated of his
exalted nature, yet such was its obvious reference to the Messiah, that
they did not dare to call it in question. Such was the fact in the
Christian church for seventeen hundred years. It was the unbroken and
the unvarying voice of interpretation. Now this proves, not indeed that
it is necessarily the true interpretation, for that is to be settled on
other grounds than mere tradition, but that it is the exposition which
the language naturally conveys. The unvarying sense affixed to any
written document for seventeen hundred years, is likely to be the true
sense. And especially is this so, if the document in question has been
in the hands of the learned and the unlearned; the high and the low; the
rich and the poor; the bond and the free; and if they concur in giving
to it the same interpretation, such an interpretation cannot easily or
readily be set aside.

IV\. The quotations in the New Testament prove that it refers to the
Messiah. They go to demonstrate at the same time two points; first, that
such was the prevailing mode of interpretation at that time, otherwise
the passage would not have been quoted as proof that Jesus was the
Messiah; and secondly, that such is the correct mode of interpretation.
The places where it is quoted are the following:

1\. In [Joh 12:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#037.md), 'But though he
had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him;
that the saying of Esaias the prophet might be fulfilled which he spake,
Lord, who hath believed our report? And to whom hath the arm of the Lord
been revealed?' In this passage, [Isa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001.md) is quoted to explain the unbelief
of the Jewish people in the time of the Saviour, with the formula ἵνα
πληρωθῆ hina plērōthē - 'that it might be fulfilled,' the usual formula
in quoting a passage from the Old Testament which is fulfilled in the
New. No one can doubt that John meant to be understood as affirming that
the passage in Isaiah had a designed applicability to the person and the
times of the Redeemer. The same passage is quoted by Paul in [Rom
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#016.md) : 'But they have not all obeyed
the gospel. For Esaias saith, Lord, who hath believed our report?'

2\. The passage in [Luk 22:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#037.md) is still
more decisive. 'For I say unto you, That this that is written must yet
be accomplished me, And he was reckoned among the transgressors: for the
things concerning me have an end,' that is, a completion, a fulfillment.
Here [Isa 52:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#012.md) is expressly and
directly applied by the Saviour himself to his own sufferings and death.
No one can doubt that he meant to say that it had original reference to
him, and would be fulfilled in him. The same passage is applied, and in
the same sense, by Mark [Mar 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#028.md), to
the sufferings and death of the Redeemer.

3\. In [Act 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#035.md), [Isa
53:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007.md) is applied by Philip the
evangelist to the Redeemer; and is explained as having a reference to
him.

4\. In [Mat 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#017.md), the declaration of
Isaiah [Isa 53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004.md), 'Himself took our
infirmities, and bore our sicknesses,' is applied expressly to the
Messiah. These passages, directly quoting Isaiah, and applying them to
the Messiah, demonstrate that in view of the writers of the New
Testament, and of the Saviour himself, Isaiah had reference to the
Messiah. To those who admit the inspiration and the divine authority of
the New Testament, these proofs are sufficient demonstration of the
position.

V. This view is enforced by another consideration. It is, that not only
is the passage expressly quoted in the New Testament, but it is alluded
to in connection with the death of the Redeemer as an atoning sacrifice
for sin, in such a manner as to show that it was regarded by the sacred
writers as having reference to the Messiah. It is sufficient here to
refer to the following places: [Mar
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#012.md); [Joh
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005.md); [Rom
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025.md); [Co1
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#003.md); [Co2
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021.md); [Pe1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019.md); [Pe1
2:21-25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021.md). A careful examination of
these passages would convince anyone, that the writers of the New
Testament were accustomed to regard the passage in Isaiah as having
undoubted reference to the Messiah, and that this was so universally the
interpretation of the passage in their times, as to make it proper
simply to refer to it without formally quoting it. It may be added here,
that it accords with the current and uniform statement in the New
Testament about the design of the death of the Redeemer.

VI\. One other argument may be here referred to, which I propose to
state more at length when the exposition of the fifty-third chapter
shall have been made. It arises from the exact correspondence between
the passage and the events in the life, the sufferings, and the death of
the Redeemer - a correspondence so minute that it cannot he the result
of accident; so much depending on external circumstances and on the
agency of others, that it could not have been Produced by the effort of
an impostor; and so unique that it can be found in no other person but
the Messiah. We shall he better able to appreciate the force of this
argument when we have the correct exposition of the passage before us.

To the view which has thus been taken of the design of this portion of
Isaiah, there occurs one objection, often made by infidels, which I deem
it important here to notice. It is, that the transactions here referred
to are represented as past, and that it must be supposed to refer to
some event which had occurred before the time when this was written.
This ground has also been taken by Gesenius in proof that it cannot
refer to tile Messiah: 'The suffering, contempt, and death,' says he,
'of the servant of God, are here represented throughout as past, since
all in [Isa 53:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001.md), is in the
praeter. Only the glorification is future, and is represented in the
future tense.' In reply to this, we may observe:

1\. That the transactions referred to are not all represented as past.
The glorification of the person referred to is described in the future
tense, and of course as a future event [Isa
52:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013.md); [Isa
53:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011.md). It may be added also here,
that those who will examine the Hebrew, will perceive that not
everything in regard to his sufferings is represented as past (see [Isa
53:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007.md), [Isa
53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010).md). But,

2\. The true answer to this objection is to be found in a correct view
of the nature of prophecy; and the objection has been supposed to have
force only because the true character of prophecy has not been
apprehended. It is a feature of the true nature of prophecy that the
prophet is placed in vision in the midst of the scenes which he
describes as future. He describes the events as if they were actually
passing before his eyes. See this view of prophecy explained in the
Introduction, Section 7. According to this, Isaiah is to be regarded as
placed in vision amidst the scenes which he describes. He looks on the
suffering Redeemer. He describes his humiliation, his rejection, his
trial, his death, and the feelings of those who rejected him, as if it
actually occurred before his eyes. He sees him now rejected by people
and put to death; but he also casts his eye into the future and sees him
exalted, and his religion spreading into all the world. Though,
therefore, the events which he describes were to occur several hundred
years afterward, yet they are portrayed, as his other prophecies are, as
passing before his eyes, and as events which he was permitted in vision
to see.

Analysis

In [Isa 52:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013.md), Yahweh speaks of his
servant the Messiah, and describes the state of his humiliation, and of
his subsequent exaltation. These verses contain, in fact, an epitome of
what is enlarged upon in the next chapter. The sum of it is, that his
servant should be, on the whole, prospered and exalted [Isa
52:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013.md); yet he would he subjected to
the deepest trial and humiliation [Isa
52:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#014.md); but as the result of this, he
would redeem the nations of the earth, and their kings and rulers would
regard him with profound reverence [Isa
52:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#015.md). A display of the divine
perfections would accompany the work of the servant of Yahweh such as
they had never beheld, and they would be called on to contemplate
wonders of which they had not before heard.

[Isa 53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001.md) contains a more minute
explanation and statement of what is said in general in [Isa
52:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013.md). For convenience, it may be
regarded as divided into the following portions:

I. An expression of amazement and lamentation at the fact that so few
had embraced the annunciation respecting the Messiah, and had been
properly affected by the important statements respecting his sufferings,
his death, and his glorification [Isa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001.md).

II\. A description of his rejection, his sufferings, his death [Isa
53:2-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002.md). Here the prophet describes
the scene as actually passing before his eyes. He speaks as if he
himself were one of the Jewish nation who had rejected him, and who had
procured his death. He describes the misapprehension under which it was
done, and the depth of the sorrow to which the Messiah was subjected,
and the design which Yahweh had in view in these sufferings.

1\. His appearance and rejection are described [Isa
53:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002.md). He is as a shrub that grows in
a parched soil without beauty; he is a man of sorrows, instead of being,
as they expected, a magnificent prince; he has disappointed their
expectations, and there is nothing that corresponded with their
anticipations, and nothing, therefore, which should lead them to desire
him.

2\. The design for which he endured his sorrows is stated [Isa
53:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004.md). He was thought by the people
to be justly put to death, and they judged that God had judicially
smitten and afflicted him [Isa 53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004.md).
But this was not the cause. It was because he had borne the sorrows of
the nation, and was wounded for their sins [Isa
53:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004.md). They had all gone astray, but
Yahweh had caused to meet on him the iniquity of all.

3\. The manner of his sufferings is described [Isa
53:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007.md). He was patient as a lamb; was
taken from prison, and cut off.

4\. The manner of his burial is described [Isa
53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009.md). It was with the rich. The reason
why his grave was thus distinguished from that of malefactors was, that
in fact he had done no evil. God, therefore, took care that that fact
should he marked even in his burial, and though he died with
malefactors, yet, as the purpose of the atonement did not require
ignominy after death, he should not he buried with them.

5\. The design for which all this was done is stated [Isa
53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010.md). It was that his soul might be
made an offering for sin, and that it was thus well-pleasing or
acceptable to God that he should suffer and die.

III\. The result of his sufferings and humiliation is described [Isa
53:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010.md).

1\. He would see a numerous spiritual posterity, and be abundantly
satisfied for all his pains and sorrows [Isa
53:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010.md).

2\. By the knowledge of him, a great number would be justified and saved
[Isa 53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011.md).

3\. He would be greatly honored, and proceed to the spiritual conquest
of all the world [Isa 53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012.md).

[Isa 52:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013.md)

Behold, my servant - The word 'behold.' indicates here that a new object
is pointed out to view, and that it is one that claims attention on
account of its importance. It is designed to direct the mind to the
Messiah. The point of view which is here taken, is between his
humiliation and his glorification. He sees him as having been humbled
and rejected [Isa 52:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#014.md); [Isa
53:2-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002.md); about to be exalted and
honored [Isa 52:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013.md); [Isa
53:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010.md). The word 'servant' refers to
the Messiah. Compare the notes at [Isa
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005.md), where the word 'servant' is
applied also to the Messiah. It means that he would be employed in doing
the will of God, and that he would submit to him as a servant does to
the law of his master.

Shall deal prudently - Margin, 'Prosper.' The word שׂכל s'âkal, is used
in a twofold signification. It means either to act wisely, or to be
prosperous. In this latter sense it is used in [Jos
1:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#007.md); [Kg2
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#007.md); [Jer
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#021.md); [Pro
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#008.md). It is not easy to determine what
is the meaning here. Jerome renders it, intelligent - 'Shall be wise or
prudent.' The Septuagint renders it, Συνήσει ὁ παῖς μοῦ Sunēsei ho pais
mou - 'My servant shall be intelligent.' The Chaldee renders it, 'Behold
my servant the Messiah shall prosper' (יצלח yatslach). The Syriac
retains the Hebrew word. Jun. and Tremell. render it, 'Shall prosper;'
Castellio, 'Shall be wise.' Lowth renders it, 'Shall prosper;' and in
this Gesenius and Noyes concur. Hengstenberg proposes to unite the two
meanings, and to render it, 'He shall reign well,' as indicative of the
prosperous and wise government of the Messiah. It seems to me that the
parallelism requires us to understand this not of his personal wisdom
and prudence, but of the success of his enterprise. This verse contains
a summary statement of what would occur under the Messiah. The general
proposition is, that he would be ultimately successful, and to this the
prophet comes [Isa 53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012.md). He here sees
him in affliction, humble, rejected, and despised. But he says that this
was not always to be. He would be ultimately exalted. It is on this that
he fixes the eye, and it is this which cheers and sustains the prophet
in the contemplation of the sufferings of the Messiah.

He shall be exalted - In this part of the verse, the prophet combines
the verbs which denote elevation or exaltation. The idea is, that he
would be exalted to the highest pitch of honor. The word 'exalted,' with
us, is often synonymous with praise; but here it means, he shall be
elevated (נשׂא nâs'â'), or lifted up. The reference here is,
undoubtedly, to the fact that the Redeemer would be greatly honored on
earth as the Prince and Saviour of the world [Isa
53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012.md), and that in view of the
universe he would be elevated to the highest conceivable rank. This is
described in the New Testament by his being placed 'at the right hand of
God' [Mar 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#019.md); by the fact that
'angels and authorities and powers are made subject unto him' [Pe1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#022.md); by the fact that God has 'set
him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all
principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is
named' [Eph 1:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020.md); and by the fact
that he will return in great glory to judge the world Matt. 25. The idea
is, that as he was the most despised among people, so he would yet be
the most honored; as he had voluntarily assumed the lowest place for the
redemption of people, so he would be exalted to the highest place to
which human nature could be elevated.

[Isa 52:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#014.md)

As many were astonished at thee - This verse is closely connected with
the following, and they should be read together. The sense is, 'as many
were shocked at him - his form was so disfigured, and his visage so
marred - so he shall sprinkle many nations.' That is, the one fact would
correspond with the other. The astonishment would be remarkable; the
humiliation would be wonderful, and suited to attract the deepest
attention; and so his success and his triumph would correspond with the
depth of his humiliation and sufferings. As he had in his humiliation
been subjected to the lowest condition, so that all despised him; so
hereafter the highest possible reverence would be shown him. Kings and
nobles would shut their mouths in his presence, and show him the
profoundest veneration. A change of person here occurs which is not
uncommon in the Hebrew poets. In [Isa
52:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013.md), Yahweh speaks of the Messiah in
the third person; here he changes the form of the address, and speaks of
him in the second person.

In the following verse the mode of address is again changed, and he
speaks of him again in the third person. Lowth, however, proposes to
read this in the third person, 'As many were astonished at him,' on the
authority of two ancient Hebrew manuscripts, and of the Syriac and
Chaldee. But the authority is not sufficient to justify a change in the
text, nor is it necessary. In the word rendered 'astonished' (שׁממוּ
shâmmû), the primary idea is that of being struck dumb, or put to
silence from sudden astonishment. Whether the astonishment is from
admiration or abhorrence is to be determined by the connection. In the
latter sense, it is used in [Jer
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#016.md); [Jer
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#008.md). Here it evidently refers to the
fact that he was disfigured, and destitute of apparent beauty and
attractiveness from his abject condition and his sufferings. They were
struck with amazement that one so abject, and that had so little that
was attractive, should presume to lay claim to the character of the
Messiah. This idea is more fully expressed in the following chapter.
Here it is stated in general that his appearance was such as to excite
universal astonishment, and probably to produce universal disgust. They
saw no beauty or comeliness in him (see [Isa
53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002).md). This expression should also be
regarded as standing in contrast with what is added in [Isa
52:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#015.md). Here it is said they were
amazed, astonished, silent, at his appearance of poverty and his
humiliation; there it is said, 'kings should shut their mouths at him,'
that is, they would be so deeply impressed with his majesty and glory
that they would remain in perfect silence - the silence not of contempt,
but of profound veneration.

His visage - מראהוּ mare'ēhû. This word denotes properly sight, seeing,
view; then that which is seen; then appearance, form, looks [Exo
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#017.md); [Eze
1:16-28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#016.md); [Dan
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#018.md). Here it means, his appearance,
his looks. It does not necessarily refer to his face, but to his general
appearance. It was so disfigured by distress as to retain scarcely the
appearance of a man.

Was so marred - (משׁחת mishechath). This word properly means
destruction. Here it means defaced, destroyed, disfigured. There was a
disfiguration, or defacement of his aspect, more than that of man.

More than any man - (מאישׁ mē'iysh). This may either mean, more than any
other man, or that he no longer retained the appearance of a man. It
probably means the latter - that his visage was so disfigured that it
was no longer the aspect of a man. Castellio renders it, Ut non jam sit
homo, non sit unus de humano genere.

And his form - (תארו to'ărô). This word denotes a form or a figure of
the body [Sa1 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#014.md). Here it denotes
the figure, or the appearance, referring not to the countenance, but to
the general aspect of the body.

More than the sons of men - So as to seem not to belong to people, or to
be one of the human family. All this evidently refers to the
disfiguration which arises from excessive grief and calamity. It means
that he was broken down and distressed; that his great sorrows had left
their marks on his frame so as to destroy the beautiful symmetry and
proportions of the human form. We speak of being crushed with grief; of
being borne down with pain; of being laden with sorrow. And we all know
the effect of long-continued grief in marring the beauty of the human
countenance, and in bowing down the frame. Deep emotion depicts itself
on the face, and produces a permanent impression there. The highest
beauty fades under long-continued trials, though at first it may seem to
be set off to advantage. The rose leaves the cheek, the luster forsakes
the eye, vigor departs from the frame, its erect form is bowed, and the
countenance, once brilliant and beautiful, becomes marked with the deep
furrows of care and anxiety.

Such seems to be the idea here. It is not indeed said that the sufferer
before this had been distinguished for any extraordinary beauty - though
this may not be improperly supposed - but that excessive grief had
almost obliterated the traces of intelligence from the face, and
destroyed the aspect of man. How well this applies to the Lord Jesus,
needs not to be said. We have, indeed, no positive information in regard
to his personal appearance. We are not told that he was distinguished
for manliness of form, or beauty of countenance. But it is certainly no
improbable supposition that when God prepared for him a body [Heb
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005.md) in which the divinity should
dwell incarnate, the human form would be rendered as fit as it could be
for the indwelling of the celestial inhabitant. And it is no
unwarrantable supposition that perfect truth, benevolence, and purity,
should depict themselves on the countenance of the Redeemer; as they
will be manifested in the very aspect wherever they exist - and render
him the most beautiful of human beings - for the expression of these
principles and feelings in the countenance constitutes beauty (compare
the notes at [Isa 53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002).md). Nor is it an
improbable supposition, that this beauty was marred by his
long-continued and inexpressibly deep sorrows, and that he was so worn
down and crushed by the sufferings which he endured as scarcely to have
retained the aspect of a man.

[Isa 52:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#015.md)

So - (כן kên). This word corresponds to 'as' (כאשׁר ka'ăsher) in the
former verse. 'In like manner as many were astonished or shocked at thee
- so shall he sprinkle many nations.' The one is to be in some respects
commensurate with the other. The comparison seems to consist of two
points:

1\. In regard to the numbers. Many would be shocked: many would be
sprinkled by him. Large numbers would be amazed at the fact of his
sorrows; and numbers correspondently large would be sprinkled by him.

2\. In the effects. Many would be struck dumb with amazement at his
appearance; and, in like manner, many would be struck dumb with
veneration or respect. He would be regarded on the one hand as having
scarce the form of a man; on the other, even kings would be silent
before him from profound reverence and awe.

Shall he sprinkle many nations - The word rendered here 'sprinkle' (יזה
yazzeh) has been very variously rendered. Jerome renders it, Asperget -
'Shall sprinkle.' The Septuagint, 'So shall many nations express
admiration (θαυμάσονται thaumasontai) at him.' The Chaldee, 'So shall he
scatter,' or dissipate (יבדר yebaddar) 'many people.' The Syriac renders
it, 'Thus shall he purify,' cleanse, make expiation for 'many nations.'
The Syriac verb used here means to purify, to cleanse, to make holy;
and, in aph., to expiate; and the idea of the translator evidently was,
that he would purify by making expiation. See the Syriac word used in
[Luk 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#017.md); [Act
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#009.md); [Act
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#018.md); [Heb
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#022.md); [Heb
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#004.md). Castellio renders it as Jerome
does; and Jun. and Tremell., 'He shall sprinkle many nations with
stupor.' Interpreters have also varied in the sense which they have
given to this word. Its usual and proper meaning is to sprinkle, and so
it has been here commonly interpreted. But Martini, Rosenmuller, and
Gesenius suppose that it is derived from an Arabic word meaning to leap,
to spring, to spring up, to leap for joy, to exult; and that the idea
here is, that he should cause many nations to exult, or leap for joy.
Parallel places, says Gesenius, occur in [Isa
49:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006.md); [Isa
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#005.md). Against the common
interpretation, 'to sprinkle,' he objects:

1\. That the verb could not be construed without the accusative, and
that if it means that he would sprinkle with blood, the word blood would
be specified.

2\. That the connection is opposed to the idea of sprinkling, and that
the antithesis requires some word that shall correspond with שׁמם
shāmam, 'shall be astonished,' and that the phrase 'they shall be
joyful,' or 'he shall cause them to exult with joy,' denotes such
antithesis.

To this it may be replied, that the usual, the universal signification
of the word (נזה nāzâh) in the Old Testament is to sprinkle. The word
occurs only in the following places, and is in all instances translated
'sprinkle' [Exo 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#021.md); [Lev
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#009.md); [Lev
6:6-17](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#006.md), [Lev
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#027.md); [Lev
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#011.md), [Lev
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#030.md); [Lev
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#007.md), [Lev
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#016.md), [Lev
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#027.md), [Lev
14:51](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#051.md); [Lev
16:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#014.md), [Lev
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#019.md); [Num
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#007.md); [Num
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#004.md), [Num
19:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#018.md), [Num
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#021.md); [Kg2
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#033.md); [Isa
63:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#003.md). It is properly applicable to the
act of sprinkling blood, or water; and then comes to be used in the
sense of cleansing by the blood that makes expiation for sin, or of
cleansing by water as an emblem of purifying. In [Eze
36:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025.md), the practice of sprinkling with
consecrated water is referred to as synonymous with purifying - though a
different word from this is used (זרק zâraq), 'and I will sprinkle clean
water upon you, and ye shall be clean.' If the word used here means 'to
sprinkle,' it is used in one of the following significations:

1\. To sprinkle with blood, in allusion to the Levitical rite of
sprinkling the blood of the sacrifice, meaning that in that way sin
would be expiated and removed [Lev
14:51](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#051.md); [Lev
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#014.md); [Heb
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#019.md); [Heb
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#022.md); or,

2\. By an allusion to the custom of sprinkling with water as emblematic
of purity, or cleansing [Num 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#007.md); [Num
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#018.md); [Eze
36:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025.md). If used in the former sense, it
means, that the Redeemer would make expiation for sin, and that his
blood of purifying would be sprinkled on the nations.

If in the latter, as is most probable, then it means that he would
purify them, as objects were cleansed by the sprinkling of water. If in
either sense, it means substantially the same thing - that the Redeemer
would purify, or cleanse many nations, that is, from their sins, and
make them holy. Still there is a difficulty in the passage which does
not seem to be solved. This difficulty has been thus expressed by Taylor
(Concord.): 'It seems here to have a special meaning, which is not
exactly collected from the other places where this word is used. The
antithesis points to regard, esteem, admiration. So shall he sprinkle,
engage the esteem and admiration of many nations. But how to deduce this
from the sense of the word I know not.' It was to meet this difficulty
that Martini, Rosenmuller, and Gesenius, propose the sense of leaping,
exulting, filling with joy, from the Arabic. But that signification does
not accord with the uniform Hebrew usage, and probably the sense of
purifying is to be retained. It may be remarked that whichever of the
above senses is assigned, it furnishes no argument for the practice of
sprinkling in baptism. It refers to the fact of his purifying or
cleansing the nations, and not to the ordinance of Christian baptism;
nor should it be used as an argument in reference to the mode in which
that should be administered.

The kings shall shut their mouths at him - Or rather, kings. It does not
refer to any particular kings; but the idea is, that he would be honored
by kings. To shut the mouths here indicates veneration and admiration.
See [Job 29:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#009.md), where reverence or
respect is indicated in the same way:

The princes refrained talking,

And laid their hand upon their mouth:

The nobles held their peace,

And their tongue cleaved to the roof of their mouth.

See also [Mic 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#016.md); compare [Job
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#016.md); [Psa
107:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#042.md).

For that which had not been told them - In this part of the verse a
reason is given for the veneration which kings would evince. It is, that
they should receive intelligence of this wonderful exaltation of the
messenger of God which had not before been made known to them as it had
been to the Jews. Or, in other words, the great mystery of the
incarnation and redemption would contain truths and wonders which they
had not contemplated elsewhere. No such events would have occurred
within the range of their observation; and the wonders of redemption
would stand by themselves as unparalleled in all that they had heard or
seen. What is here predicted has been fulfilled. The mystery of the
incarnation and the atonement; the sufferings and the death of the
Redeemer; his exaltation and his glory, are events which are
unparalleled in the history of the world. They are events suited in
their nature to excite the profoundest admiration, and to induce kings
and nobles to lay their hand on their mouth in token of veneration. No
monarch on earth could have evinced such condescension as did the Son of
God; none has been elevated to so high a rank in the universe as the
Redeemer. That the Son of God should become a man; that his visage
should be so disfigured by grief as to have scarcely the aspect of a
human being; that he should suffer and die as he did; and that he should
be exalted as he is over this whole world, and have the most elevated
place in the universe at the right hand of God, are all events suited to
excite the profoundest admiration.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 53](isa053.md)

</div>
