<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa005)  [Next](isa007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 6:0</span></span>

This chapter [Isa 6:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001) contains a
very sublime description of the manifestation of Yahweh to Isaiah, and
of a solemn commission to him to declare his purposes to the Jews. It
has been supposed by many to be a solemn "inauguration" to the prophetic
office, and to have been the "first" of his prophecies. But this
supposition is not to be considered as just. It is evident [Isa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001) that he prophesied "before" the
death of Uzziah, and there is reason to suppose that the order of "time"
is observed in the previous chapters; see the Introduction, Section 2.
The most probable supposition of the occasion of this prophecy, is this,
that the people were extremely guilty; that they were strongly
indisposed to listen to the message of the prophet, and that he was,
therefore, favored with this extraordinary commission in order to give
his message more success and higher authority in the minds of the
people. It is a new commission to make his message as impressive as
possible - as if it came direct from the lips of the Almighty. The Jews
say, that for this pretension that he had seen Yahweh, he was sawn
asunder by "Manasseh." And to this fact Paul has been supposed to refer
in [Heb 11:37](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#037), where he says of those
who had been eminent in faith, 'they were sawn asunder;' see the
Introduction, Section 2.

This vision is expressed in the language appropriate to Eastern
monarchs. God is represented as sitting on a "throne," and attended by
ministers, here called seraphim. His throne is elevated, and the posture
of sitting denotes dignity and majesty. The language of the description
is taken from the temple. The image is that of God sitting in the most
holy place. Surrounding him are seen the seraphim, and the cloud filling
the temple. Isaiah is represented as without the temple, near the altar.
The great altar of sacrifice stood directly in front of the temple, so
that if the doors of the temple had been open, and the veil separating
the holy from the most holy place had been withdrawn, he would have had
a distinct view of the mercy-seat. That veil between is supposed to be
withdrawn, and he is permitted directly to contemplate the sacred and
solemn manifestation made in the immediate dwelling-place of God. The
chapter comprises, properly, three parts.

I. The vision, [Isa 6:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001). Yahweh is
seen upon a throne, clad in the manner of an ancient monarch, with a
robe and a train which filled the whole temple. He sits as a king, and
is adorned in the robes of royalty, [Isa
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001). He is encompassed with
ministering spirits - with the seraphim, in the manner of a magnificent
king, [Isa 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002). They are seen, by the
prophet, to be solemnly engaged in his worship, and to stand in the
attitude of the most profound veneration, [Isa
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003). So awful and sublime was the
worship, that even the posts of the temple were moved; the whole sacred
edifice trembled at the presence of God, and at the voice of those who
were engaged in his praise; and the whole temple was filled with the
symbol of the divine presence and majesty, [Isa
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#004).

II\. The "effect on the prophet," [Isa
6:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#005). He was overcome with a sense of
his unworthiness, and felt that he could not live. He had seen Yahweh,
and he felt that he was a ruined man, [Isa
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#005). Yet one of the seraphim flew to
the altar, and bore thence a live coal, and touched his lips, and
assured him that his sin was taken away, and that he was pardoned, [Isa
6:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#006).

III\. The "commission of the prophet," [Isa
6:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#008). God inquires who will go for
him to the people, and bear his message, and the prophet expresses his
readiness to do it, [Isa 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#008). The
nature of the message is stated, [Isa
6:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009). The "duration" - the state of
things which he predicted would follow from this - is asked, and the
answer is returned, [Isa 6:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#011). It
was to be until utter desolation should spread over the land, and the
mass of the nation was cut off, and all were destroyed, except the small
portion which it was necessary to preserve, in order to prevent the
nation from becoming wholly extinct.

[Isaiah 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 6:1</span></span>

In the year - This naturally denotes a period after the death of Uzziah,
though in the same year. The mention of the time was evidently made when
the prophecy was composed, and it is to be presumed that the death of
Uzziah had occurred at the time when the prophet saw this vision. If so,
it is clear that this was not the first of his prophecies, for he saw
his visions 'in the days of Uzziah;' [Isa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001). The Chaldee, however, reads this:
'in the year when Uzziah was smitten with the leprosy;' and most of the
Jewish commentators so understand it; [Ch2
26:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#019). The rabbis say that the
meaning is, that he then became "civilly" dead, by ceasing to exercise
his functions as a king, and that he was cut off as a leprous man from
all connection with the people, and from all authority; see the
Introduction, Section 3. This is, doubtless, true; but still, the more
natural signification is, that this occurred in the year in which he
actually died.

I saw - That is, he saw in a "vision;" see the Introduction, Section 7.
(4). A similar vision is described by Micaiah; [Kg1
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#019); see also [Amo
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#001); [Amo
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#001); [Amo
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#001); [Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013), ...

The Lord - In the original here the word is not יהוה yehovâh but אדני
'ădonāy; see the notes at [Isa 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024).
Here it is applied to Yahweh; see also [Psa
114:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#007), where it is also so applied;
and see [Isa 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007), and [Job
28:28](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#028), where Yahweh calls himself
"Adonai." The word does not itself denote essential divinity; but it is
often applied to God. In some MSS., however, of Kennicott and DeRossi,
the word Yahweh is found. We may make two remarks here.

\(1\) That Isaiah evidently meant to say that it was Yahweh who appeared
to him. He is expressly so called in [Isa
6:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#005), [Isa
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#011).

\(2\) It is equally clear, from the New Testament, that Isaiah saw the
messiah. John quotes the words in this chapter, [Isa
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010), as applicable to Jesus Christ,
and then adds [Joh 12:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#041), 'these
things said Esaias when he saw his glory, and spake of him.'

An inspired man has thus settled this as referring to the Messiah, and
thus had established the propriety of applying to him the name Yahweh,
that is, has affirmed that the Lord Jesus is divine. Jerome says, that
this vision was designed to represent the doctrine of the Trinity. In
[Joh 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018), it is said, 'No man hath
seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the
Father, he hath declared him.' In [Exo
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020), God says, 'Thou canst not see
my face, for there shall no man see me and live;' see also [Ti1
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016). These passages may be reconciled
with what is here said by Isaiah, in the following manner:

\(1\) Isaiah does not say that he saw the Divine Essence; and all that
his words fairly imply, is, that he saw a manifestation, or vision of
Yahweh - some striking symbolic representation of him.

\(2\) It was the manifestation of Yahweh in the person of the Messiah,
of the 'only begotten Son who hath revealed or declared him,' that he
saw Such manifestations of God have been made often, and all that the
declaration of Isaiah implies, of necessity, is, that he had a vision of
God incarnate seated in glory, from whom he now received a new
commission to go out and proclaim the truth to that wicked and
rebellious generation.

Sitting upon a throne - God is thus often represented as a king, sitting
on a throne; [Kg1 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#019); [Eze
43:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#007); [Jer
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#012).

High and lifted up - That is, the "throne;" an indication of state and
majesty. "And his train." The word "train" שׁוּליו shûlāyv, properly
signifies the skirt of a garment, or a robe; [Exo
28:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#033). Here it is evidently
designed as a representation of a large, flowing robe, that filled all
the most holy part of the temple. The Orientals regarded such large
robes as indicative of grandeur and state. The Messiah was seen seated
on a throne as a king; clothed in a large, loose, flowing robe, in the
manner of oriental monarchs, and surrounded by his ministers. The design
of this magnificent vision was not only to impress the prophet with a
sense of the holiness of God, but also to give additional weight to his
commission, as having been derived immediately from the divine majesty;
compare [Isa 6:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009). It is remarkable
that Isaiah attempts no representation of Yahweh himself. He mentions
his robes; the throne; the seraphim; but mentions no form or appearance
of God himself. In this there is great sublimity. There is enough
mentioned to fill the mind with awe; there is enough concealed to
impress as deeply with a sense of the divine majesty. It is remarkable,
also, that it is not the "usual" appearance of God in the temple to
which he refers. That was the "Shekinah," or visible symbol of God. That
was on the mercy-seat, this was on a throne; that was a cloud, of this
no form is mentioned; over that the cherubim stretched forth their
wings, over this stood the seraphim; that had no clothing, this was clad
in a full flowing robe.

Filled the temple - Probably, the most holy place only is intended. The
large, full, magnificent robe seemed to fill up the entire holy of
holies. Some have supposed that this vision was represented as appearing
in the "heavens." But the expression here evidently implies, that it was
seen in the "temple" at Jerusalem.

[Isaiah 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 6:2</span></span>

Above it - Either above the throne, or above him. The Septuagint renders
it, 'Round about him' - κύκλῳ αὐτοῦ kuklō autou. The Chaldee, 'The holy
ministers stood on high in his presence.'

The seraphims - The verb שׂרף s'âraph, from which this word is derived,
is uniformly translated "to burn," and is used frequently; see "Taylor."
The noun שׂרף s'ârâph denotes, according to Bochart, the "chersydros," a
serpent that lives in lakes and moist places; but when those places are
dried up, it becomes a land serpent, and then its bite is very fierce,
and is attended with a most dreadful inflammation all over the body.
Rabbi Solomon says, that 'serpents are called seraphim because they burn
people with the poison of their teeth,' perhaps because the idea of
"heat and poison" were connected. The word is applied to the fiery
flying serpents which bit the children of Israel, and in imitation of
which a brass serpent was erected on a pole by Moses. It is translated
'a fiery serpent' in [Num 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#008); [Isa
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#029); [Isa
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#006). In Deut; [Deu
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#015); [Num
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#006), it is rendered 'fiery,' and in
the passage before us, "seraphims."

The word שׂרפה s'erêphâh often occurs in the sense of "burning;" [Deu
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#023); [Ch2
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#014); [Ch2
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#019), ... The Septuagint renders it
"seraphim," σεραφὶμ serafim; so the Vulgate and the Syriac. The Chaldee,
'his holy ministers.' Probably it is now impossible to tell why this
name was given to the representations that appeared to Isaiah. Perhaps
it may have been from their "burning" ardor and zeal in the service of
God; perhaps from the "rapidity" of their motion in his service -
derived from the rapid motion of the serpent. Gesenius supposes that the
name was derived from a signification of the word denoting "noble or
excellent," and that it was on this account applied to princes, and to
celestial beings. Kimchi says, that the name was given with reference to
their bright, shining appearance; compare [Eze
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#013); [Kg2
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#002); [Kg2
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#017). The word is applied to celestial
beings no where else, except in this chapter. There is no reason to
think that the seraphim described here partook of the "form of" the
serpent, as the representation seems to be rather that of a man. Thus
each one [Isa 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002) is represented as
covering his "face" and his "feet" with his wings - a description that
does not pertain to the serpentine form. God is usually represented as
surrounded or encompassed by heavenly beings, as his ministers; [Psa
104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004); [Dan
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010); [Kg1
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#019); [Psa
68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017); [Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022). The idea is one of special
magnificence and grandeur. It is derived especially from the customs of
monarchs, particularly Eastern monarchs, who had numerous princes and
nobles to attend them, and to give magnificence to their court.

Each one had six wings - "Wings" are emblematic of the "rapidity" of
their movement; the number here, perhaps, denoting their celerity and
readiness to do the will of God.

With twain he covered his face - This is designed, doubtless, to denote
the "reverence and awe" inspired by the immediate presence of God;
compare [Amo 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#009), [Amo
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#010). The Chaldee adds, 'He covered
his face so that he could not see.' To cover the face in this manner is
the natural expression of reverence; compare the note at [Isa
52:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#015). And if the pure and holy
seraphim evinced such reverence in the presence of Yahweh, with what
profouond awe and veneration should we, polluted and sinful creatures,
presume to draw near to him! Assuredly "their" position should reprove
our presumption when we rush thoughtlessly and irreverently into his
presence, and should teach us to bow with lowly veneration and deep
humility; compare [Rev 4:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#009).

He covered his feet - In a similar description of the cherubim in [Eze
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#011), it is said tha they covered
"their bodies." In Isaiah, the expression clearly denotes not the feet
only, but the lower extremities. This was also an expression of
reverence drawn from our conceptions of propriety. The seraphim stood
covered, or as if "concealing themselves" as much as possible, in token
of their nothingness and unworthiness in the presence of the Holy One.

He did fly - He was quick to execute the commands of God. It may be
observed, also, that among the ancients, "Mercury," the messenger of
Jupiter, was always represented with wings. Milton has copied this
description of the seraphim:

'A seraph winged: six wings he wore to shade

His lineaments divine; the pair that clad

Each shoulder broad, came mantling o'er his breast

With regal ornament; the middle pair

Girt like a starry zone his waist, and round

Skirted his loins and thighs with downy gold,

And colors dipt in heaven; the third his feet

Shadowed from either heel with feathered mail,

Sky-tinctured grain.'

Par. Lost, Book v.

[Isaiah 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 6:3</span></span>

And one cried to another - Hebrew 'This cried to this.' That is, they
cried to each other in alternate responses. One cried 'holy;' the second
repeated it; then the third; and then they probably united in the grand
chorus, 'Full is all the earth of his glory.' This was an ancient mode
of singing or recitative among the Hebrews; see [Exo
15:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020), where Miriam is represented
as going before in the dance with a timbrel, and the other females as
following her, and "answering," or responding to her, [Psa
136:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#001); compare Lowth, "on the Sacred
Poetry of the Hebrews," Lect. xix.

Holy, holy, holy - The "repetition" of a name, or of an expression,
three times, was quite common among the Jews. Thus, in [Jer
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004), the Jews are represented by the
prophet as saying, 'the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the
temple of the Lord, are these. Thus, [Jer
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#029) : 'O earth, earth, earth, hear
the word of the Lord;' [Eze 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#027) : 'I
will overturn, overturn, overturn;' see also [Sa1
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#023) : 'O my son Absalom! my son, my
son;' see also the repetition of the form of benediction among the Jews,
[Num 6:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#024) :

Jehovah bless thee and keep thee;

Jehovah make his face to shine upon thee,

And be gracious unto thee;

Jehovah lift up his countenance upon thee,

And give thee peace.

In like manner, the number "seven" is used by the Hebrews to denote a
great, indefinite number; then a full or complete number; and then
perfectness, completion. Thus, in [Rev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004); [Rev
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001); [Rev
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#005), the phrase, 'the seven spirits of
God,' occurs as applicable to the Holy Spirit, denoting his fullness,
completeness, perfection. The Hebrews usually expressed the superlative
degree by the repetition of a word. Thus, [Gen
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#010) : 'The vale of Siddim, pits,
pits of of clay,' that is, was full of pits; see Nordheimer's "Heb.
Gram." Section 822-824. The form was used, therefore, among the Jews, to
denote "emphasis;" and the expression means in itself no more than
'thrice holy;' that is, supremely holy. Most commentators, however, have
supposed that there is here a reference to the doctrine of the Trinity.
It is not probable that the Jews so understood it; but applying to the
expressions the fuller revelations of the New Testament, it cannot be
doubted that the words will express that. Assuming that that doctrine is
true, it cannot be doubted, think, that the seraphs laid the foundation
of their praise in that doctrine. That there was a distinct reference to
the second person of the Trinity, is clear from what John says, [Joh
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#041). No "argument" can be drawn
directly from this in favor of the doctrine of the Trinity, for the
repetition of such phrases thrice in other places, is merely "emphatic,"
denoting the superlative degree. But when the doctrine is "proved" from
other places, it may be presumed that the heavenly beings were apprized
of it, and that the foundation of their ascriptions of praise was laid
in that. The Chaldee has rendered this, 'Holy in the highest heavens,
the house of his majesty; holy upon the earth, the work of his power;
holy forever, and ever, and ever, is the Lord of hosts.' The whole
expression is a most sublime ascription of praise to the living God, and
should teach us in what manner to approach him.

The Lord of hosts - see the note at [Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009).

The whole earth - Margin, 'The earth is the fulness of his glory.' All
things which he has made on the earth express his glory. His wisdom and
goodness, his power and holiness, are seen every where. The whole earth,
with all its mountains, seas, streams, trees, animals, and people, lay
the foundation of his praise. In accordance with this, the Psalmist, in
a most beautiful composition, calls upon all things to praise him; see
[Psa 148:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001).

Praise the Lord from the earth,

Ye dragons, and all deeps:

Fire and hail; snow and vapors;

Stormy wind fulfilling his word:

Mountains, and all hills;

Fruitful trees, and all cedars;

Beasts, and all cattle;

Creeping things, and flying fowl.

[Isaiah 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 6:4</span></span>

And the posts of the door - Margin, 'Thresholds.' There is some
difficulty in the Hebrew here, but the meaning of the expression is
sufficiently apparent. It means that there was a tremour, or concussion,
as if by awe, or by the sound attending the cry. It is evidently a
poetic expression.

The house - The temple.

Was filled with smoke - There is here, doubtless, a reference to "the
cloud" that is so often mentioned in the Old Testament as the visible
symbol of the Divinity; see the note at [Isa
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005). A similar appearance is recorded
when Solomon dedicated the temple; [Kg1
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#010); [Ch2
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#013); [Eze
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#004).

[Isaiah 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 6:5</span></span>

Wo is me! - That is, I am filled with overwhelming convictions of my own
unworthiness, with alarm that I have seen Yahweh.

For I am undone - Margin, 'Cut off.' Chaldee, 'I have sinned.'
Septuagint, 'I am miserable, I am pierced through.' Syriac, 'I am struck
dumb.' The Hebrew word may sometimes have this meaning, but it also
means "to be destroyed, to be ruined, to perish;" see [Hos
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#015); [Zep
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#002); [Hos
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#006); [Isa
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001). This is probably the meaning
here, 'I shall be ruined, or destroyed.' The reason of this, he
immediately states.

A man of unclean lips - This expression evidently denotes that he was a
"sinner," and especially that he was unworthy either to join in the
praise of a God so holy, or to deliver a message in his name. The
vision; the profound worship of the seraphim; and the attendant majesty
and glory, had deeply impressed him with a sense of the holiness of God,
and of his own unfitness either to join in worship so holy, or to
deliver the message of so pure a God. A similar effect is recorded in
reference to Abraham; [Gen 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#027); see
also [Exo 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#010), [Exo
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#012); [Jer
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#006). A deep consciousness of guilt, in
view of the holiness and majesty of God, is also described by Job:

I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear

But now mine eye seeth thee.

Wherefore I abhor myself,

And repent in dust and ashes.

[Job 42:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#005).

An effect also remarkably similar is described in reference to the
apostle Peter, [Luk 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#008) : "When Simon
Peter saw it (the miracle which Jesus had performed), he fell down at
Jesus' knees, saying, 'Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord. '"

A people of unclean lips - A people who are unworthy to celebrate the
praises of a God so pure and exalted.

Mine eyes have seen - In [Exo 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020),
it is said: 'Thou canst not see my face, for there shall no man see me
and live;' compare [Joh 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018); [Ti1
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016). Perhaps it was in recollection
of this, that Isaiah said he was undone. It is not, however, to be
understood that the prophet saw Yahweh Himself, but only the "symbol" of
His presence. It was for this expression, according to the tradition of
the Jews, that Manasseh took occasion to put the prophet to death; see
the Introduction, Section 2.

The Lord of hosts - Yahweh of hosts. John applies this to the Lord
Jesus, and this proves that he is divine; see [Joh
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#041).

[Isaiah 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 6:6</span></span>

Then flew - Isaiah is represented as standing out of the temple; the
seraphim as in it.

Having a live coal - The Vulgate renders this, 'A stone.' This is,
probably, the original meaning of the word; see [Kg1
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#006). It at first denoted a hot stone
which was used to roast meat upon. It may also mean a coal, from its
resemblance to such a stone.

From off the altar - The altar of burnt-offering. This stood in the
court of the priests, in front of the temple; see the notes at [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012). The fire on this altar was at
first kindled by the Lord, [Lev 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024),
and was kept continually burning; [Lev
6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#012).

[Isaiah 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 6:7</span></span>

And he laid it upon my mouth - Margin, 'And he caused it to touch my
mouth.' This is the more correct rendering. It was a slight, momentary
touch, sufficient merely to be a "sign or token" that he was cleansed.

Thine iniquity is taken away - That is, whatever obstacle there existed
to your communicating the message of God to this people, arising from
your own consciousness of unworthiness, is taken away. You are
commissioned to bear that message, and your own consciousness of guilt
should not be a hinderance. To understand this, it should be remembered
that "fire," among the orientals, has been always regarded as an emblem
of "purifying." Thus the Sabeans, the followers or Zoroaster in Persia,
worshipped "fire," as the emblem of a pure divinity; see [Mal
3:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#002); compare [Mat
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002). Every minister of the gospel,
though conscious of personal unworthiness and unfitness, should yet go
freely and cheerfully to his work, if he has evidence that he is called
and commissioned by God. "Is purged." Is purified, is removed - תכפר
tekupâr from כפר kâphar, "to cover, to overlay;" then to make an
atonement for, to expiate, to cover sin, to pardon it, to affect or to
procure forgiveness; and then to purify in general, to make whole;
compare the note at [Isa 43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003). This
does not mean, that the fire from the altar had any physical effect to
purify him from sin, but that it was "emblematic" of such a purifying;
and probably, also, the fact that it was taken from the altar of
sacrifice, was to him an indication that he was pardoned through the
"atonement," or expiation there made. The Jews expected pardon in no
other mode than by sacrifice; and the offering on their altar pointed to
the great sacrifice which was to be made on the cross for the sins of
human beings. There is here a beautiful "union" of the truths respecting
sacrifice. The great doctrine is presented that it is only by sacrifice
that sin can be pardoned; and the Messiah, the sacrifice himself, is
exhibited as issuing the commission to Isaiah to go and declare his
message to people.

[Isaiah 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 6:8</span></span>

The voice of the Lord - Hebrew: "The voice of Yahweh." He had before
been addressed by one of the seraphim.

Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? - The change of number here,
from the singular to the plural, is very remarkable. Jerome, on this
place, says that it indicates the 'sacrament' of the Trinity. The
Septuagint renders it, 'whom shall I send, and who will go to this
people?' The Chaldee, 'whom shall I send to prophesy, and who will go to
teach?' The Syriac, 'whom shall I send, and who will go?' The Arabic has
followed the Septuagint. The use of the plural pronouns "we and us," as
applicable to God, occurs several times in the Old Testament. Thus, [Gen
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026) : 'And God said, Let us make man
in our image;' [Gen 11:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#006) : 'And
Jehovah said, Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language.'
Such a use of the name of God in the plural is very common, but it is
not clear that there is a reference to the doctrine of the Trinity. In
some cases, it is evident that it cannot have such a reference, and that
no "argument" can be drawn from the use of that plural form in favor of
such a doctrine.

Thus, in [Isa 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#004), the expression 'a
cruel lord,' is in the Hebrew in the plural, yet evidently denoting but
one. The expression translated 'the most Holy One,' or 'the Holy,' is in
the plural in [Pro 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#010); [Pro
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#003). In [Sa1
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#013), [Sa1
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#016), the plural form is applied to a
"household god," or an image; and the plural form is applied to God in
[Job 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#025), 'my Makers' (Hebrew); [Ecc
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#001), 'thy Creators' (Heb,); [Psa
121:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#005), 'Yahweh is thy keepers'
(Hebrew); see also [Isa 54:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#005); [Isa
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#002); [Isa
43:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#005); [Isa
62:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#005). This is called by grammarians
pluralis excellentice, or the plural form indicating majesty or honor.
It is, in all countries, used in reference to kings and princes; and as
God often represents himself as a "king" in the Scriptures, and speaks
in the language that was usually applied to kings in oriental countries,
no argument can be drawn from expressions like these in defense of the
doctrine of the Trinity. There are unanswerable arguments enough in
support of that doctrine, without resorting to those which are of
doubtful authority.

That there are clearer intimations of the doctrines of the Trinity, than
that contained in this and similar texts, is indubitable; but we must
not set aside the early and somewhat obscure intimations of a doctrine,
simply because it comes afterward to be exhibited with more fulness.
Such is the plan of revelation; and, instead of despising early
announcements, or deeming them useless, because better "proofs" of the
doctrine in question can be found, we ought to admire the wisdom and
goodness of God in this gradual development of truth. The same interest
belongs to the work of thus tracing the rise and progress of truth in
the Bible, as belongs to that of him who traces rivers to their fountain
head, and proves that, far up amid mountains all but inaccessible, rises
the tiny stream, on whose broad waters, as it nears the sea, navies
float in proud array. No more visible, in its earlier outflowings, is
this doctrine of the Trinity; yet by and by it is the element on which
Christianity doats, and in which it lives and moves. Thus we see the
unity and harmony of revelation in 11 ages; the doctrine is the same;
the degree of manifestation only is different. The necessity of
preserving and exhibiting this unity, gives to these early intimations
an unspeakable importance; though some, through an excess of candor,
would abandon them to the enemy. This text, and its parallels, [Gen
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026); [Gen
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#022); [Gen
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#007), exhibit the Trinity in
Revelation's dawn indistinctly - partially disclosed - revealing only a
"plurality" of persons. As the light increases, the "three" persons are
seen moving under the lifting shadows, until, in the New Testament,
baptism is commanded in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit;
and the existence and functions of each person are clearly unfolded.

The problem is, to account for the use of the plural number in these
passages, consistently with the unity of God. The doctrine of the
Trinity seems to furnish an easy and beautiful solution; but this
solution has been rejected, not by Unitarians only, but by Trinitarians
not a few. Various hypotheses have been offered: as, that in the
creation of man [Gen 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026), God
associated with himself the heavens and the earth; or, that he consulted
with angels; or, meant simply to indicate the importance of the work;
or, perhaps, to supply a lesson of deliberation! These crudities are by
most, however, long ago abandoned as untenable; and the solution most
generally approved by such as reject that of the Trinity, is that
furnished by an appeal to the "style of majesty." Oriental princes, it
is alleged, from the most ancient times, used the plural number in
publishing their decrees; and such is the style of royalty to this day.
But, unfortunately for this theory, there is no evidence whatever that
ancient potentates employed this style. "The use of the plural number by
kings and princes, is quite a modern invention." The Bible does not
furnish any example of it. Nor is there any evidence that God himself,
on especially solemn occasions, keeping out of sight, of course, the
text in question, used such style; there is abundant evidence to the
contrary, the singular number being used by Yahweh in the most sublime
and awful declarations.

Besides this strange use of the plural number on the part of God
himself, plural names (אלהים 'elohı̂ym, אדנים 'ădônâyı̂m) are frequently
given to him by the writers of the Bible; the instances in which these
names occur in the singular form, are the exceptions. The name usually
rendered "God" in the English Bible, is almost invariably plural - אלהים
'elohı̂ym, Gods. That these plural forms are used of idols, as well as of
the true God, is admitted; but as the special names of the true God
came, in process of time, to be applied to idols, so would the special
"form" of these names, and to tell us that these forms "are" so applied,
is quite beside the question. We wish to know why, originally, such
forms were applied to the "true" God; and it is no answer to tell us
they are also applied to idols. 'There is nothing more wonderful in the
name being so used in the plural form, than in its being so used at all.

The same principle which accounts for the name God being given to pagan
deities at all, will equally well account for its being given to them in
the particular form in which it is applied to the true God.' -
"Wardlaw." This is pointed and decisive; and renders it needless to
speculate here on the mode in which the name, or the plural form of it,
came to be transferred to false gods, or great men. On this point, see
Dr. John Pye Smith's "Scripture testimony to the Messiah." It is further
remarkable, that these plural appellatives are, for the most part
combined with verbs and adjectives in the singular number; as, 'Gods
(he) created,' [Gen 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001); and with
plural adjuncts but rarely. Now, the ordinary rule of grammar might have
been followed invariably, as well as in these few instances, or the
departures from it might have been but few in number. That this is not
the case, implies the existence of some very cogent reason, and cannot
be regarded as the result, merely, of accident.

To account for the use of these plural names, our author has recourse to
what is called the pluralis majestaticus, or excellentiae, according to
which, nouns of dignity and majesty, in Hebrew, are said to be used in
the plural form. But the existence of this pluralis majestaticus has
never been proved. Its defense is now abandoned by the most skillful
grammarians. Ewald repudiates it. And it is not a little remarkable,
that some of the examples most relied on for proof of this "dignified
plural," are found, on examination, to possess nothing of the dignity,
while more exact scholarship has reduced their plurality also. The
examples alluded to, are, [Exo 21:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#029),
[Exo 21:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#034); [Exo
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#010), [Exo
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#013); [Isa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003); where the supposed plural form
denotes the owner of oxen, of sheep, and of asses! - fit parties,
doubtless, to be honored with the pluralis majestaticus. In truth,
leaving out of view the plural appellatives applied to the Deity, that
is, the appellatives in question, and which, therefore, cannot be
adduced, there is no evidence whatever of this pretended rule. Had any
rule of the kind existed, we should, without doubt, have found it
exemplified, when kings, princes, nobles, generals, priests, and
prophets figure on the sacred pages. That the pluralis excellentiae is
not applied to them, is sufficient proof of its nonexistence; and should
dispose rational and candid inquirers to acquiesce in the solution of
the grammatical anomalies we have been considering, that is furnished by
the doctrine of Trinity in Unity - the solution which, to say the least
of it, is beset with fewest difficulties.

The language here idicates the "design" for which this vision was shown
to Isaiah. It was to commission him to exhibit truth that would be
extremely unpleasant to the nation, and that would have the certain
effect of hardening their hearts. In view of the nature and effect of
this message, God is represented as inquiring who would be willing to
undertake it? Who had courage enough to do it? Who would risk his life?
And it indicates, perhaps, that there were "few" in the nation who would
be willing to do it, and that it was attended with self-denial and
danger.

Here am I - This shows at once his confidence in God, and his zeal. He
had been qualified for it by the extraordinary commission, and he was
now ready to bear the message to his countrymen. In this attitude "we"
should stand, prompt to deliver "any" message that God shall entrust to
our hands, and to engage in "any" service that he calls on us to
perform.

[Isaiah 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 6:9</span></span>

And he said ... - The expressions which follow are those which denote
hardness of heart and blindness of mind. They would hear the words of
the prophet, but they would not understand him. They were so obstinately
bent on iniquity that they would neither believe nor regard him. This
shows the spirit with which ministers must deliver the message of God.
It is their business to deliver the message, though they should know
that it will neither be understood nor believed.

Hear ye indeed - Hebrew 'In hearing, hear.' This is a mode of expressing
emphasis. This passage is quoted in [Mat
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#014); see thenote at that place.

[Isaiah 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 6:10</span></span>

Make the heart - The word "heart" here is used in the sense of the
"mind" - to denote all their mental powers. It is commonly used in this
sense in the Scriptures.

Fat - Gross, heavy, dull, stupid. That is, go and proclaim such "truth"
to them as shall have this effect - as shall irritate, provoke, enrage
them; truth, whose delivery shall be attended, in their gross and
corrupt hearts, with this blinding and infatuating influence the effect
would be produced by the corrupt state of their hearts, not by any
native tendency of the truth, and still less by any direct divine
influence. 'Go, and proclaim truth to a corrupt and sensual people, and
the result will be that they will not hear; they are so wicked that they
will not attend to it; they will become even more hardened; yet go, and
though certain of producing this effect, still proclaim it;' see this
passage explained in the notes at [Joh
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#040).

Their ears heavy - Dull, stupid, insensible.

And shut their eyes - The word used here means "to spread over," and
then to close. It denotes here the state of mind which is more and more
indisposed to attend to the truth.

And be healed - Be restored from the malady of sin; be recovered and
pardoned. Sin is often represented as a painful, loathsome malady, and
forgiveness as restoration from such a malady; [Isa
30:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#026); Ps. 103; [Psa
41:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#003); [Ch2
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#014); [Jer
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#022); [Jer
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#014). We may learn here,

\(1\) That the effect of truth is often to irritate people and make them
more wicked.

\(2\) The truth must, nevertheless, be proclaimed.

This effect is not the fault of the truth; and it is often well that the
heart should be known, and the true effect should be seen.

[Isaiah 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 6:11</span></span>

How long - The prophet did not dare to pray that this effect should not
follow. He asked merely therefore "how long" this state of things must
continue; how long this message was to be delivered, and how long it
should be attended with these painful effects.

Until the cities ... - They will remain perverse and obstinate until the
land is completely destroyed by divine judgments. Still the truth is to
be proclaimed, though it is known it will have no effect in reforming
the nation. This refers, doubtless, to the destruction that was
accomplished by the Babylonians.

The houses without man - This is strong language, denoting the certain
and widespread desolation that should come upon the nation.

[Isaiah 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 6:12</span></span>

And the Lord have removed ... - The land shall be given up to
desolation. The men - the strength of the nation - shall be taken to a
distant land.

And there be a great forsaking - A great desolation; the cities and
dwellings shall be abandoned by the inhabitants; compare [Isa
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#002); [Jer
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#029); [Zep
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#004).

[Isaiah 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 6:13</span></span>

But yet ... - The main idea in this verse is plain, though there is much
difficulty in the explanation of the particular phrases. The leading
thought is, that the land should not be "utterly" and finally abandoned.
There would be the remains of life - as in an oak or terebinth tree when
the tree has fallen; compare the notes at [Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001).

A tenth - That is, a tenth of the inhabitants, or a very small part.
Amidst the general desolation, a small part should be preserved. This
was accomplished in the time of the captivity of the Jews by
Nebuchadnezzar. We are not to suppose that "literally" a tenth part of
the nation would remain; but a part that should bear somewhat the same
proportion to the entire nation, in strength and resources, that a tenth
does to the whole. Accordingly, in the captivity by the Babylonians we
are told [Kg2 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#012), that 'the captain
of the guard left the poor of the land to be vinedressers and farmers;'
compare [Kg2 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#014), where it is said,
that 'Nebuchadnezzar carried away all Jerusalem, and all the princes,
and all the mighty men of valor, even ten thousand captives, and all the
craftsmen and smiths, none remained save the poorer sort of the people
of the land.' Over this remnant, Nebuchadnezzar made Gedaliah king; [Kg2
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#022).

And it shall return - This expression can be explained by the history.
The prophet mentions the "return," but he has omitted the fact that this
remnant should go away; and hence, all the difficulty which has been
experienced in explaining this. The history informs us, [Kg2
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#026), that this remnant, this tenth
part, 'arose and came to Egypt, for they were afraid of the Chaldees.' A
part also of the nation was scattered in Moab and Edom, and among the
Ammonites; [Jer 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#002). By connecting
this idea with the prophecy, there is no difficulty in explaining it. It
was of the return from Egypt that the prophet here speaks; compare [Jer
42:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#004). After this flight to Egypt
they returned again to Judea, together with those who were scattered in
Moab, and the neighboring regions; [Jer
40:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#011). This renmant thus collected
was what the prophet referred to as "returning" after it had been
scattered in Egypt, and Moab, and Edom, and among the Ammonites.

And shall be eaten - This is an unhappy translation. It has arisen from
the difficulty of making sense of the passage, by not taking into
consideration the circumstances just adverted to. The word translated
'eaten' means to feed, to graze, to consume by grazing to consume by
fire, to consume or destroy in any way, to remove. "Gesenius" on the
word בער bâ‛ar. Here it means that this remnant shall be for
"destruction;" that judgments and punishments shall follow them after
their return front Egypt and Moab. Even this remnant shall be the object
of divine displeasure, and shall feel the weight of his indignation; see
[Jer 43:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#001); 44.

As a teil-tree - The word "teil" means the "linden," though there is no
evidence that the linden is denoted here. The word used here - אלה 'êlâh
- is translated "elm" in [Hos 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#013),
but generally "oak:" [Gen 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#004); [Jdg
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#011), [Jdg
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#019); [Sa2
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#009), [Sa2
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#014). It is here distinguished from
the אלון 'allôn "oak." It probably denotes the "terebinth," or
turpentine tree, for a description of which, see the notes at [Isa
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#029).

Whose substance - Margin, 'Stock' or 'Stem.' The margin is the more
correct translation. The word usually denotes the upright shaft, stem,
or stock of a tree. It means here, whose "vitality" shall remain; that
is, they do not entirely die.

When they cast their leaves - The words 'their leaves' are not in the
original, and should not be in the translation. The Hebrew means, 'in
their falling' - or when they fall. As the evergreen did "not" cast its
leaves, the reference is to the falling of the "body" of the tree. The
idea is, that when the tree should fall and decay, still the life of the
tree would remain. In the root there would be life. It would send up new
"shoots," and thus a new tree would be produced; see the notes at [Isa
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002); [Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001). This was particularly the case
with the terebinth, as it is with the fir, the chestnut, the oak, the
willow, etc.; see [Job 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#007). The idea
is, that it would be so with the Jews. Though desolate, and though one
judgment would follow another, and though even the renmant would be
punished, yet the race would not be extinguished. It would spring up
again, and survive. This was the case in the captivity of Babylon; and
again the case in the destruction of Jerusalem; and in all their
persecutions and trials since, the same has always occurred. They
survive; and though scattered in all nations, they still live as
demonstrative of the truth of the divine predictions; Deut 28.

The holy seed - The few remaining Jews. They shall not be utterly
destroyed, but shall be like the life remaining in the root of the tree.
No prophecy, perhaps, has been more remarkably fulfilled than that in
this verse. Though the cities be waste and the land be desolate, it is
not from the poverty of the soil that the fields are abandoned by the
plow, nor from any diminution of its ancient and natural fertility, that
the land has rested for so many generations. Judea was not forced only
by artificial means, or from local and temporary causes, into a
luxuriant cultivation, such as a barren country might have been,
concerning which it would not have needed a prophet to tell that, if
once devastated and abandoned it would ultimately revert to its original
sterility. Phenicia at all times held a far different rank among the
richest countries of the world; and it was not a bleak and sterile
portion of the earth, nor a land which even many ages of desolation and
neglect could impoverish, that God gave in possession and by covenant to
the seed of Abraham. No longer cultivated as a garden, but left like a
wilderness, Judea is indeed greatly changed from what it was; all that
human ingenuity and labor did devise, erect, or cultivate, people have
laid waste and desolate; all the "plenteous goods" with which it was
enriched, adorned, and blessed, have fallen like seared and withered
leaves when their greenness is gone; and stripped of its "ancient
splendor," it is left "as an oak whose leaf fadeth," but its inherent
sources of fertility are not dried up; the natural richness of the soil
is unblighted; "the substance is in it," strong as that of the tell tree
or the solid oak, which retain their substance when they east their
leaves.

And as the leafless oak waits throughout winter for the genial warmth of
returning spring, to be clothed with renewed foilage, so the once
glorious land of Judea is yet full of latent vigor, or of vegetative
power, strong as ever, ready to shoot forth, even "better than at the
beginning," whenever the sun of heaven shall shine on it again, and "the
holy seed" be prepared for being finally" the substance thereof." "The
substance that is in it" - which alone has here to be proved - is, in
few words, thus described by an enemy: "The land in the plains is fat
and loamy, and exhibits every sign of the greatest fecundity. Were
nature assisted by art, the fruits of the most distant countries might
be produced within the distance of twenty leagues." "Galilee," says
Malte Brun, "would be a paradise, were it inhabited by an industrious
people, under an enlightened government."'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 7](isa007)

</div>
