<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa041)  [Next](isa043) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 42](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 42:0</span></span>

This chapter is a continuation of the same general subject which was
presented in the two previous chapters. It is to be regarded (see the
analysis of Isa. 40) as addressed to the exile Jews in Babylon, and near
the close of their captivity, and the general object is to induce them
to repose confidence in God, and to assure them of deliverance. The
primary purpose of these chapters, therefore, is, to direct the
attention to him who was to be raised up front the east, to rescue them
from their bondage, that is, Cyrus. But in doing this, the mind of the
prophet, by the laws of prophetic suggestion (see the Introduction to
Isaiah, Section 7, III. 3), is also led to a far greater deliverer, and
so entirely, and intently at times, as to lose sight altogether of
Cyrus; and the restoration of the Jews to their own land is forgotten in
the sublimer contemplation of the redemption of the world. In the
previous chapters, the attention of the prophet had been particularly
directed to Cyrus, with an occasional reference to the Messiah. In the
commencement of this chapter, he seems to have lost sight of Cyrus
altogether, and to have fixed the attention wholly on the future Messiah
(see the notes at [Isa 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001)). The
chapter is, as I apprehend, occupied mainly, or entirely, with a
description of the character and work of the Messiah. The evidence of
this will be adduced in the notes at the chapter itself. The design for
which the Messiah is introduced is to convince the Jews that God was
their protector, and that it was his purpose that the long-promised
Prince and Saviour should yet arise from their restored and recovered
nation. Of course, if this was to occur, their national existence would
be preserved. There is, therefore, in the chapter, a reference to their
return to their own land, though the main scope relates to the Messiah.

The chapter may be regarded as divided into two portions. In the first
[Isa 42:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001), the prophet describes the
Messiah. Yahweh is introduced as speaking, and in [Isa
42:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001) he describes his character. He
is the servant of Yahweh, endowed with the fullness of the Divine
Spirit; meek, and lowly, and gentle, and kind; unobtrusive and noiseless
in his movements, and yet securing the conquest of truth. Yahweh then
[Isa 42:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#005), addresses the Messiah
himself directly, and states the object for which he had appointed him,
to be a light to the Gentiles, to open the eyes of the blind, and to be
the pledge of the covenant between him and his people. In [Isa
42:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#008), Yahweh turns to the people for
whom the prophecy was given, and awakens their attention to the subject,
reminds them of the predictions which had been made, and says that the
fulfillment of this prophecy, like all former predictions, would
demonstrate his superiority over idols, and show that he was the true
God.

The second part of the chapter Isa. 42:10-25, consists mainly of a call
on the world, and especially on the exile Jews, to rejoice in view of
the truth here announced. This general call contains the following
portions or parts:

\(1\) In the exordium [Isa 42:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#010)
Yahweh calls on the inhabitants of all the earth to praise and glorify
his name, and makes his appeal to those who are upon the sea, to the
inhabitants of the isles, to the wilderness and solitary places, to the
villages and the inhabitants of the rock, as all having occasion to
rejoice on account of this glorious event.

\(2\) In [Isa 42:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#013), Yahweh speaks
particularly of the deliverance of his people and of the certainty of
its being accomplished. He had long delayed to interpose; but now he
would come forth in his strength, and annihilate his foes and redeem his
people, and make darkness light before them, while all the worshippers
of idols should be left without defense or aid.

\(3\) The people of Israel are new addressed directly, and their
character and duty presented [Isa
42:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#018). They are addressed as a
people blind and deaf, and are admonished to rouse themselves, and to
strive to attain to true knowledge. Notwithstanding all that God had
done for them, and all his gracious interposition, they had hardened
their hearts, and shut their eyes, and had steeled themselves against
every good impression. For this God had punished them. He had given them
as a spoil to their enemies, and overwhelmed them in grievous and
long-continued calamities. They were now called on to attend to his
instructions and promises, and henceforward be an obedient people.

[Isaiah 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 42:1</span></span>

Behold - This word is designed to call attention to the person that is
immediately referred to. It is an intimation that the subject is of
importance, and should command their regard.

My servant - This phrase denotes properly anyone who acknowledges or
worships God; anyone who is regarded as serving or obeying him. It is a
term which may be applied to anyone who is esteemed to be a pious man,
or who is obedient to the commands of God, and is often applied to the
people of God [Gen 50:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#017); [Ch1
6:49](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#049); [Ch2
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#009); [Dan
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#020); [Dan
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#002); [Tit
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001); [Jam
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001); [Pe1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#016); [Rev
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003); [Rev
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#003). The word 'servant' may be
applied either to Isaiah, Cyrus, or the Messiah; and the question to
whom it refers here is to be decided, not by the mere use of the term,
but by the connection, and by the characteristics which are ascribed to
him who is here designated as the 'servant' of Yahweh. There have been
no less than five different views in regard to the personage here
referred to; and as in the interpretation of the whole prophecy in this
chapter, everything depends on this question, it is of importance
briefly to examine the opinions which have been entertained.

I. One has been that it refers to the Jewish people. The translators of
the Septuagint evidently so regarded it. They render it, Ἰακώβ ὁ παῖς
μοῦ, κ.τ.λ. Iakōb ho pais mou, etc. - 'Jacob is my servant, I will
uphold him; Israel is my chosen one, my soul hath embraced him.' Jarchi
also so interprets the passage, but so modifies it as to understand by
it 'the righteous in Israel;' and among the moderns, Rosenmuller,
Paulus, and some others adopt this interpretation. The principal reason
alleged for this interpretation is, that the phrase 'servant of Yahweh,'
is used elsewhere in a collective sense, and applied to the Jewish
people. Rosenmuller appeals particularly to [Isa
41:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#008); to [Isa
42:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#019), and to [Isa
44:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#021); [Isa
45:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#004); [Isa
48:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#020); and argues that it is to be
presumed that the prophet used the phrase in a uniform manner, and must
therefore be supposed here also to refer to the Jewish people. But the
objections are insuperable.

1\. In [Isa 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#006), the servant of
Yahweh here referred to, is plainly distinguished from the people, where
God says, 'I will give thee for a covenant of (with) the people.'

2\. The description which the prophet gives here of the character of the
'servant' of Yahweh, as meek, mild, gentle, quiet, and humble [Isa
42:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#002), is remarkably unlike the
character which the prophet elsewhere gives of the people, and is as
remarkably like the character which is everywhere given of the Messiah.

3\. It was not true of the Jewish people that they were appointed, as is
here said of the 'servant' of God [Isa
42:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#007), to 'open the blind eyes, and to
bring the prisoners out of prison.' This is evidently applicable only to
a teacher, a deliverer, or a guide; and in no sense can it be applied to
the collected Jewish people.

II\. A second opinion has been, that by the 'servant of Yahweh' Cyrus
was intended. Many of the Jewish interpreters have adopted this view,
and not a few of the German critics. The principal argument for this
opinion is, that what precedes, and what follows, relates particularly
to Cyrus; and an appeal is made particularly to [Isa
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001), where he is called the Anointed,
and to [Isa 44:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#028), where he is called
the Shepherd. But to this view also, the objections are obvious.

1\. The name 'servant of Yahweh,' is, it is believed, nowhere given to
Cyrus.

2\. The description here by no means agrees with Cyrus. That he was
distinguished for justice and equity is admitted (see the note at [Isa
41:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#002)), but the expressions used here,
that God would 'put his Spirit upon him, that he should not cry, nor
lift up his voice, so that it should be heard in the streets,' is one
that is by no means applicable to a man whose life was spent mainly in
the tumults of war, and in the pomp and carnage of battle and conquest.
How can this description be applied to a man who trod down nations, and
subdued kings, and who shed rivers of blood?

III\. Others suppose that the prophet refers to himself. Among the Jews,
Aben Ezra, and among others, Grottoes and Doderlin held this opinion.
The only reason for this is, that in [Isa
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#003), the name 'servant' of Yahweh is
given to Isaiah. But the objections to this are plain, and insuperable.

1\. Nothing can be urged, as we have seen, from the mere use of the word
'servant.'

2\. It is inconceivable that a humble prophet like Isaiah should have
applied to himself a description expressive of so much importance as is
here attributed to the servant of God. How could the establishment of a
new covenant with the people of God, and the conversion of the pagan
nations [Isa 42:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#006), be ascribed to
Isaiah? And in what sense is it true that he was appointed to open the
eyes of the blind, and to lead the prisoners from the prison?

IV\. A fourth opinion, which it may be proper just to notice, is that
which is advocated by Gesenius, that the phrase here refers to the
prophets taken collectively. But this opinion is one that scarce
deserves a serious refutation. For,

1\. The name 'servant of Yahweh,' is never given to any collection of
the prophets.

2\. Any such collection of the prophets is a mere creature of the fancy.
When did they exist? Who composed the collection? And how could the name
servant designate them?

3\. Of what collection of people could it be imagined that the
description here given could be applied, that such a collection should
not strive, nor cry; that it should be a covenant of the people, and
that it should be the means of the conversion of the Gentile world?

V. The fifth opinion, therefore is, that it refers to the Messiah; and
the direct arguments in favor of this, independent of the fact that it
is applicable to no other one, are so strong as to put it beyond debate.
A few of them may be referred to.

1\. This is the interpretation of the Chaldee Paraphrase, which has
retained the exposition of the ancient and early Jews. 'Behold my
servant, the Messiah (משׁיתא עבדי ‛abeddı̂y meshı̂ythâ') I will cause him
to come near; my chosen.'

2\. There are such applications of the passage in the New Testament to
the Lord Jesus, as to leave no room to doubt that, in view of the sacred
writers, the passage had this reference. Thus, in [Luk
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#032), he is spoken of as 'a light to
lighten the Gentiles' (compare [Isa
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#006)). In [Act
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#018), Paul speaks of him as given to
the Gentiles,' to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to
light' (compare [Isa 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#007)). In [Mat
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017), God says of the Redeemer, 'This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased,' - language remarkably
similar to the passage before us [Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001), where he says, 'mine elect, in
whom my soul delighteth.' And the whole inquiry is put to rest by the
fact that Matthew [Mat 12:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#017)
expressly and directly applies the passage to the Lord Jesus, and says
that it was fulfilled in him.

3\. It may be added, that the entire description is one that is exactly
and entirely applicable to the Lord Jesus. It is as applicable as if it
had been made after he had appeared among people, and as if it were the
language of biography, and not of prophecy. It is an exceedingly
beautiful and tender description of the Son of God; nor can there be any
objection to its application to him, except what arises from a general
purpose not to apply any part of the Old Testament to him, if it can be
avoided. I shall regard the passage, therefore, as applicable to him,
and him alone; and suppose that the design of the Spirit here in
introducing this reference to the Messiah is, to comfort the hearts of
the exile Jews with the assurance that they must be restored to their
own land, because it was from them that the Messiah was to proceed, and
from them that the true religion was to be spread around the world.

Whom I uphold - whom I sustain, or protect; that is, who is the object
of my affection and care. In [Mat
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017), the expression is, 'in whom I am
well pleased.' And so in [Mat 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#018),
it is rendered, 'my servant, whom I have chosen.'

Mine elect - My chosen one; or the one whom I have selected to
accomplish my great purposes. It implies that God had designated or
appointed him for the purpose. In [Mat
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#018), it is rendered 'my beloved.' It
implies that he was the object of the divine favor, and that God had
chosen or appointed him to perform the work of a Messiah.

In whom my soul delighteth - This language is applied the Lord Jesus in
[Mat 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017); [Mat
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#018). God regarded him as qualified
for his work: he approved of what he did; he was well pleased with all
his words, and thoughts, and plans. The word 'soul' here, is equivalent
to I myself - in whom I delight.

I have put my Spirit upon him - (Compare [Joh
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034)): 'For God giveth not the Spirit
by measure unto him.' The Lord Jesus was divine, yet as Mediator he is
everywhere represented as 'the anointed' of God, or as endowed with the
influences of the Holy Spirit (compare the note at [Isa
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)). See also [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001), where the Messiah says of
himself, 'The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because be hath
anointed me' (compare [Luk 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#018)).
Before he entered upon his public ministry, the Spirit of God descended
on him at his baptism [Mat 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017), and
in all his work he showed that he was endowed abundantly with that
Spirit.

He shall bring forth judgment - The word 'judgment' (משׁפט mishpâṭ) is
used in a great variety of significations. It properly means judgment,
that is, the act of judging [Lev
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#015); the place of judgment [Ecc
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#016); a cause, or suit before a judge
[Num 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#005); a sentence of a judge [Kg1
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#028); and thence guilt or crime, for
which one is judged [Jer 51:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#009). It also
means right, rectitude, justice; a law, or statute; a claim, privilege,
or due; also manner, custom, or fashion; or an ordinance, or
institution. Here it is used, probably, in the sense of the order or
institution that would be introduced under the Messiah; and it means
that he would set up or establish the true religion among the Gentiles.

To the Gentiles - This is one of the many declarations which occur in
Isaiah, that the Messiah would extend the true religion to pagan
nations, and that they should be brought to participate in its
privileges.

[Isaiah 42:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 42:2</span></span>

He shall not cry - He will not make a clamor or noise; he will not be
boisterous, in the manner of a man of strife and contention.

Nor lift up - That is, his voice.

Nor cause his voice to be heard in the street - He shall not t use loud
and angry words, as they do who are engaged in conflict, but all his
teaching shall be gentle, humble, and mild. How well this agrees with
the character of the Lord Jesus it is not necessary to pause to show. He
was uniformly unostentatious, modest, and retiring. He did not even
desire that his deeds should be blazoned abroad, but sought to be
withdrawn from the world, and to pursue his humble path in perfect
peace.

[Isaiah 42:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 42:3</span></span>

A bruised reed - The word 'reed' means the cane or calamus which grows
up in marshy or wet places ([Isa 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#006);
see the note at [Isa 43:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#024)). The word,
therefore, literally denotes that which is fragile, weak, easily waved
by the wind, or broken down; and stands in contrast with a lofty and
firm tree (compare [Mat 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#007)): 'What
went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind?'
The word here, therefore, may be applied to people who are conscious of
feebleness and sin; that are moved and broken by calamity; that feel
that they have no strength to bear up against the ills of life. The word
'bruised' (רצוּץ râtsûts) means that which is broken or crushed, but not
entirely broken off. As used here, it may denote those who are in
themselves naturally feeble, and who have been crushed or broken down by
a sense of sin, by calamity, or by affliction. We speak familiarly of
crushing or breaking down by trials; and the phrase here is intensive
and emphatic, denoting those who are at best like a reed - feeble and
fragile; and who, in addition to that, have been broken and oppressed by
a sense of their sins, or by calamity.

Shall he not break - Shall he not break off. He will not carry on the
work of destruction, and entirely crush or break it. And the idea is,
that he will not make those already broken down with a sense of sin and
with calamity, more wretched. He will not deepen their afflictions, or
augment their trials, or multiply their sorrows. The sense is, that he
will have an affectionate regard for the broken-hearted, the humble, the
penitent, and the afflicted. Luther has well expressed this: 'He does
not cast away, nor crush, nor condemn the wounded in conscience, those
who are terrified in view of their sins; the weak in faith and practice,
but watches over and cherishes them, makes them whole, and
affectionately embraces them.' The expression is parallel to that which
occurs in [Isa 61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001), where it is said
of the Messiah, 'He hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted;' and to
the declaration in [Isa 50:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004), where it
is said, 'that I should know how to speak a word in season to him that
is weary.'

The smoking flax - The word used here denotes flax, and then a wick that
is made of it. The word rendered 'smoking' (כהה kēhâh) means that which
is weak, small, thin, feeble; then that which is just ready to go out,
or to be extinguished; and the phrase refers literally to the expiring
wick of a lamp, when the oil is almost consumed, and when it shines with
a feeble and dying luster. It may denote here the condition of one who
is feeble and disheartened, and whose love to God seems almost ready to
expire. And the promise that he will not extinguish or quench that,
means that he would cherish, feed, and cultivate it; he would supply it
with grace, as with oil to cherish the dying flame, and cause it to be
enkindled, and to rise with a high and steady brilliancy. The whole
passage is descriptive of the Redeemer, who nourishes the most feeble
piety in the hearts of his people, and who will not suffer true religion
in the soul ever to become wholly extinct. It may seem as if the
slightest breath of misfortune or opposition would extinguish it
forever; it may be like the dying flame that hangs on the point of the
wick, but if there be true religion it will not be extinguished, but
will be enkindled to a pure and glowing flame, and it will yet rise
high, and burn brightly.

He shall bring forth judgment - (See [Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001)). The word 'judgment' here
evidently denotes the true religion; the laws, institutions, and
appointments of God.

Unto truth - Matthew [Mat 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029)
renders this, 'unto victory.' The meaning in Isaiah is, that he shall
establish his religion according to truth; he shall faithfully announce
the true precepts of religion, and secure their ascendency among
mankind. It shall overcome all falsehood, and all idolatry, and shall
obtain a final triumph in all nations. Thus explained, it is clear that
Matthew has retained the general idea of the passage, though he has not
quoted it literally.

[Isaiah 42:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 42:4</span></span>

He shall not fail - He shall not be weak, feeble, or disheartened.
However much there may be that shall tend to discourage, yet his purpose
is fixed, and he will pursue it with steadiness and ardor until the
great work shall be fully accomplished. There may be an allusion in the
Hebrew word here (יכהה yı̂kheh) to that which is applied to the flax (כהה
kēhâh); and the idea may be that he shall not become in his purposes
like the smoking, flickering, dying flame of a lamp. There shall never
be any indication, even amidst all embarrassments, that it is his
intention to abandon his plan of extending the true religion through all
the world. Such also should be the fixed and determined purposes of his
people. Their zeal should never fail; their ardor should never grow
languid.

Nor be discouraged - Margin, 'Broken.' The Hebrew word ירוּץ yârûts may
be derived either from רצץ râtsats, to break, to break in pieces; or
from רוץ rûts to run, to move hastily, to rush upon any one. Our
translators have adopted the former. Gesenius also supposes that this is
the true interpretation of the word, and that it means, that he would
not be broken, that is, checked in his zeal, or discouraged by any
opposition. The latter interpretation is preferred by Vitringa,
Rosenmuller, Hengstenberg, and others. The Chaldee renders it, 'Shall
not labor,' that is, shall not be fatigued, or discouraged. The
Septuagint renders it, 'He shall shine out, and not be broken.' The
connection seems to require the sense which our translators have given
to it, and according to this, the meaning is, 'he shall not become
broken in spirit, or discouraged; he shall persevere amidst all
opposition and embarrassment, until he shall accomplish his purposes.'
We have a similar phraseology when we speak of a man's being
heart-broken.

Till he have set judgment - Until he has secured the prevalence of the
true religion in all the world.

And the isles - Distant nations (see the note at [Isa
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001)); the pagan nations. The
expression is equivalent to saying that the Gentiles would be desirous
of receiving the religion of the Messiah, and would wait for it (see the
notes at [Isa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)).

Shall wait - They shall be dissatisfied with their own religions, and
see that their idol-gods are unable to aid them; and they shall be in a
posture of waiting for some new religion that shall meet their needs. It
cannot mean that they shall wait for it, in the sense of their already
having a knowledge of it, but that their being sensible that their own
religions cannot save them may be represented as a condition of waiting
for some better system. It has been true, as in the Sandwich Islands,
that the pagan have been so dissatisfied with their own religion as to
east away their idols, and to be without any religion, and thus to be in
a waiting posture for some new and better system. And it may be true yet
that the pagan shall become extensively dissatisfied with their
idolatry; that they shall be convinced that some better system is
necessary, and that they may thus be prepared to welcome the gospel when
it shall be proposed to them. It may be that in this manner God intends
to remove the now apparently insuperable obstacles to the spread of the
gospel in the pagan world. The Septuagint renders this, 'And in his name
shall the Gentiles trust,' which form has been retained by Matthew [Mat
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#021).

His law - His commands, the institutions of his religion. The word 'law'
is often used in the Scriptures to denote the whole of religion.

[Isaiah 42:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 42:5</span></span>

Thus saith God the Lord - This verse commences a new form of discourse.
It is still Yahweh who speaks; but in the previous verses he had spoken
of the Messiah in the third person; here he is introduced as speaking to
him directly. He introduces the discourse by showing that he is the
Creator and Lord of all things. The object of his dwelling on this seems
to have been, to show that he had power to sustain the Messiah in the
work to which he had called him; and to secure for him respect as having
been commissioned by him who had formed the heavens and the earth, and
who ruled over all. He shows that he had power to accomplish all that he
had promised: and he seeks thus to elevate and confirm the hopes of the
people with the assurance of their deliverance and salvation.

And stretched them out - The heavens are often represented as stretched
out as a veil ([Gen 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006), Hebrew) or as
an expanse that can be rolled up (see the note at [Isa
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#004)), or as a tent for the
appropriate dwelling-place of God (see the note at [Isa
40:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022)). His great power and glory are
indicated by the fact that he has stretched out what to us appears a
vast expanse over our heads. On the grammatical construction of the word
which occurs here in the Hebrew, see Rosenmuller in loc.

He that spread forth the earth - He stretched it out as a plain -
retaining the idea which was so common among the ancients that the earth
was a vast plain, reaching from one end of the heavens to the other. The
words, however, which are used here are not inconsistent with the idea
that the earth is a sphere, since it may still be represented as
stretched out, or expanded to a vast extent. The main idea in the
passage is not to teach the form in which the earth is made, but to show
that it has been made by God.

And that which cometh out of it - The productions of the earth - the
trees, shrubs, grain, etc. As the verb to stretch out cannot be applied
to these, some verb must be understood; as he produced, or caused to
grow.

He that giveth breath and spirit to them - This refers, doubtless, to
beasts as well as to people; and the idea is, that God is the source of
life to all the creatures that live and move on the earth. The argument
in the passage is, that as God is the creator and upholder of all; as he
has given life to all, and has the universe entirely under his control,
he has a right to appoint whom he will to be the medium of his favors to
people, and to demand that suitable respect shall be shown to the
Messiah whom he has designated for this work.

[Isaiah 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 42:6</span></span>

I the Lord have called thee in righteousness - The phrase 'in
righteousness' has been very differently understood by different
expositors (see the note at [Isa
41:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#010)). The most probable meaning may
be, 'I have done it as a righteous and just God, or in the
accomplishment of my righteous purposes. I am the just moral governor of
the universe, and to accomplish my purposes of justice and fidelity, I
have designated thee to this work.' Lowth has well rendered it, 'For a
righteous purpose.' In this work all was righteousness. God was
righteous, who appointed him; it was because he was righteous, and could
not save without a mediator and an atonement, that he sent him into the
world; he selected one who was eminently righteous to accomplish his
purpose; and he came that he might establish righteousness on the earth,
and confirm the just government of God (see [Isa
42:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#021)).

And will hold thine hand - I will take thee by the hand, as one does who
guides and leads another. The phrase denotes the same as to guard, or
keep - as we protect a child by taking him by the hand.

And give thee for a covenant - This is evidently an abbreviated form of
expression, and the meaning is, 'I will give or appoint thee as the
medium, or means by which a covenant shall be made with the people; or a
mediator of the new covenant which God is about to establish with men'
(see [Isa 49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008)). A similar expression
occurs in [Mic 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#005), where it is said
of the Messiah, 'and this man shall be the peace;' that is, he shall be
the source of peace, or peace shall be established and maintained by
him. So in [Eph 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014), it is said of
him, 'he is our peace.'

Of the people - It has been doubted whether this means the Jewish
people, or the Gentiles. Grotius, Hengstenberg, Vitringa, and others
understand it of the Jews; Rosenmuller and others, of the Gentiles. It
is not easy to determine which is the correct interpretation. But the
meaning, as I apprehend, is, not that he would confirm the ancient
covenant with the descendants of Abraham, as Hengstenberg and Vitringa
suppose, but that his covenant would be established with all, with both
Jews and Gentiles. According to this, it will refer to the Jews, not as
Jews, or as already interested in the covenant, but as constituting one
portion of the world; and the whole expression will mean, that his
religion will be extended to Jews and Gentiles: that is, to the whole
world.

For a light of the Gentiles - (See [Luk
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#032)). 'Light' is the emblem of
knowledge, instruction, and of the true religion. The Messiah is often
called 'light,' and the 'light of the world' (see [Mat
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#016); compare the note at [Isa
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002); [Joh
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004), [Joh
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#007), [Joh
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009); [Joh
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#019); [Joh
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012); [Joh
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#005); [Joh
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#035), [Joh
12:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#046); [Rev
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023)). This is one of the numerous
declarations which occur in Isaiah, that the religion of the Messiah
would be extended to the pagan world; and that they, as well as the
Jews, would be brought to partake of its privileges.

[Isaiah 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 42:7</span></span>

To open the blind eyes - This is equivalent to saying that he would
impart instruction to those who were ignorant. It relates to the Jews as
well as to the Gentiles. He would acquaint them with God, and with the
way of salvation. The condition of the world is often represented as one
of darkness and blindness. Men see not their true character; they see
not their real condition; they are ignorant of God, and of the truths
pertaining to their future existence; and they need, therefore, some one
who shall enlighten, and sanctify, and save them.

To bring out the prisoners from the prison - (Compare [Isa
61:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)). This evidently refers to a
spiritual deliverance, though the language is derived from deliverance
from a prison. It denotes that he would rescue those who were confined
in mental darkness by sin; and that their deliverance from the thraldom
and darkness of sin would be as wonderful as if a prisoner should be
delivered suddenly from a dark cell, and be permitted to go forth and
breathe the pure air of freedom. Such is the freedom which the gospel
imparts; nor can there be a more striking description of its happy
effects on the minds and hearts of darkened and wretched people (compare
[Pe1 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)).

[Isaiah 42:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 42:8</span></span>

I am the Lord - I am Yahweh. Here is also a change in the address. In
the previous verses, God had addressed the Messiah. Here he turns to the
people, and assures them that he is the only true God, and that he will
not suffer the praise that is due to him to be given to any other, or to
any graven image. The name Yahweh signifies being, or essential
existence (see the note at [Isa 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009)).
It is a name which is given to none but the true God, and which is
everywhere in the Scriptures used to distinguish him from all others.

That is my name - That is the name which I have chosen by which to
distinguish myself from all idols, and which I regard as appropriately
expressive of my existence and perfections. Thus it is used in [Psa
83:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#018) (compare [Psa
96:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#005)). "And my glory." The glory,
honor, or praise that is due to me.

Will I not give - I will not allow it to ascribed to another; I will not
allow another to assume or receive the honor which is due to me.

To another - To any other; whether it be man, or whether it be an idol.
God claims that all appropriate honors should be rendered to him, and
that men should cherish no opinions, maintain no doctrines, indulge in
no feelings, that would be derogatory to the honor of his name. This
declaration is designed to counteract the propensity everywhere manifest
to attribute to man that which belongs to God, or to ascribe to our own
wisdom, skill, or power, that which he alone can accomplish.

Neither my praise - The praise which is due to me. He would not permit
graven images to receive the praise of having done that which he himself
had accomplished.

[Isaiah 42:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 42:9</span></span>

Behold, the former things are come to pass - That is, the former things
which he had foretold. This is the evidence to which he appeals in proof
that he alone was God, and this is the basis on which he calls upon them
to believe that what he had predicted in regard to future things would
also come to pass. He had by his prophets foretold events which had now
been fulfilled, and this should lead them to confide in him alone as the
true God.

And new things do I declare - Things pertaining to future events,
relating to the coming of the Messiah, and to the universal prevalence
of his religion in the world.

Before they spring forth - There is here a beautiful image. The metaphor
is taken from plants and flowers, the word צמח tsâmach properly
referring to the springing up of plants, or to their sending out shoots,
buds, or flowers. The phrase literally means, 'before they begin to
germinate,' that is, before there are any indications of life, or growth
in the plant. The sense is, that God predicted the future events before
there was anything by which it might be inferred that such occurrences
would take place. It was not done by mere sagacity - as men like Burke
and Canning may sometimes predict future events with great probability
by marking certain political indications or developments. God did this
when there were no such indications, and when it must have been done by
mere omniscience. In this respect, all his predictions differ from the
conjectures of man, and from all the reasonings which are founded on
mere sagacity.

[Isaiah 42:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 42:10</span></span>

Sing unto the Lord a new song - It is common, as we have seen, to
celebrate the goodness of God in a hymn of praise on the manifestation
of any special act of mercy (see the notes at [Isa
12:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001); [Isa
25:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#001); 26) Here the prophet calls
upon all people to celebrate the divine mercy in a song of praise in
view of his goodness in providing a Redeemer. The sentiment is, that
God's goodness in providing a Saviour demands the thanksgiving of all
the world.

A new song - A song hitherto unsung; one that shall be expressive of the
goodness of God in this new manifestation of his mercy. None of the
hymns of praise that had been employed to express his former acts of
goodness would appropriately express this. The mercy was so great that
it demanded a song expressly made for the occasion.

And his praise frown the end of the earth - From all parts of the earth.
Let the most distant nations who are to be interested in this great

Ye that go down to the sea - That is, traders, navigators, merchants,
seamen; such as do business in the great waters. The sense is, that they
would be interested in the plan of mercy through a Redeemer; and hence,
they are called on to celebrate the goodness of God (compare the notes
at [Isa 60:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#005)). This is referred to by
the prophet, first, because of the great multitude who thus go down to
the sea; and, secondly, because their conversion will have so important
an influence in diffusing the true religion to distant nations.

And all that is therein - Margin, as Hebrew, 'The fullness thereof.' All
that fill it; that is, either in ships, or by dwelling on the islands
and coasts. The meaning is, that all who were upon the sea - the
completeness, the wholeness of the maritime population, being equally
interested with all others in the great salvation, should join in
celebrating the goodness of God.

The isles - A large portion of the inhabitants of the world are dwellers
upon islands. In modern times, some of the most signal displays of the
divine mercy, and some of the most remarkable conversions to
Christianity, have been there. In the Sandwich Islands, and in Ceylon,
God has poured out his Spirit, and their inhabitants have been among the
first in the pagan world to embrace the gospel.

[Isaiah 42:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 42:11</span></span>

Let the wilderness - (See the note at [Isa
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001)). The word here denotes the most
uncultivated countries, intimating that even the most rude and barbarous
people would have occasion to rejoin, and would be interested in the
mercy of God.

And the cities thereof - To us there seems to be something incongruous
in speaking of the 'cities' in a 'wilderness.' But we are to remember
that the Hebrews gave the name wilderness or desert to those regions
that were mostly uncultivated, or sparsely inhabited. They were places
that were chiefly devoted to pasturage, and not cultivated by the plow,
or regions of vast plains of sand and far-extended barrenness, with here
and there an oasis on which a city might be built. Josephus, speaking of
the desert or wilderness lying between Jerusalem and Jericho enumerates
several villages or towns in it, showing that though it was mainly a
waste, yet that it was not wholly without towns or inhabitants. We are
to remember also that large towns or cities for commercial purposes, or
thorough fares, were often built in the few fertile or advantageous
places which were found in the midst of desert wastes. Thus we are told
of Solomon [Ch2 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#004), that 'he built
Tadmor in the wilderness;' and we know that Palmyra, and Bozrah, and
Sela, were large cities that were built in the midst of regions that
were generally to be regarded as deserts, or wastes.

The villages that Kedar doth inhabit - Where the inhabitants of Kedar
dwell. Kedar was a son of Ishmael [Gen
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#013), the father of the Kedarenians
or Cedrei, mentioned by Pliny (Nat. Hist. v. 2), who dwell in the
vicinity of the Nabathaeans in Arabia Deserta. They often changed their
place, though it would seem that they usually dwelt in the neighborhood
of Petra, or Sela. The name Kedar is often given to Arabia Deserta, and
the word may in some instances denote Arabia in general. The inhabitants
of those countries usually dwell in tents, and lead a nomadic and
wandering life.

Let the inhabitants of the rock sing - It is uncertain whether the word
'rock' here (Hebrew, סלע sela‛, Greek Πέτραν Petran, 'Petra' or 'rock')
is to be regarded as a proper name, or to denote in a general sense
those who dwell in the rocky part of Arabia. Sela, or Petra, was the
name of the celebrated city that was the capital of Idumea (see the
notes at [Isa 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001)); and the
connection here would rather lead us to suppose that this city was
intended here, and that the inhabitants of the capital were called upon
to join with the dwellers in the surrounding cities and villages in
celebrating the goodness of God. But it may denote in general those who
inhabited the desolate and stony region of Arabia Petrea, or whose home
was among the cliffs of the rocks. If so, it is a call upon Arabia in
general to rejoice in the mercy of God, and to give glory to him for
providing a plan of redemption - an intimation that to the descendants
of Ishmael the blessings of the gospel would be extended.

Let them shout from the top of the mountains - They who had taken refuge
there, or who had made their permanent abode there. Vitringa supposes
that the mountains of Paran are meant, which are situated on the north
of Mount Sinai. The idea in the verse is, that all the dwellers in
Arabia would celebrate the goodness of God, and join in praising him for
his mercy in giving a deliverer. They were yet to partake of the
benefits of his coming, and to have occasion of joy at his advent. It is
possible that Cowper may have had this passage in his eye in the
following description of the final and universal prevalence of the
gospel:

The dwellers in the vales and on the rocks,

Shout to each other, sad the mountain-tops,

From distant mountains catch the flying joy:

Till nation after nation taught the strain,

Earth rolls the rapturous hosannas round.

Task.

[Isaiah 42:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 42:12</span></span>

Let them give glory ... in the islands - (see the note at [Isa
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001)). Let the distant regions praise
God.

[Isaiah 42:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 42:13</span></span>

The Lord shall go forth - This and the following verses give the reasons
why they should praise Yahweh. He would go forth in his might to
overcome and subdue his foes, and to deliver his people. In his
conquests, and in the establishment of his kingdom, all people would
have occasion to rejoice and be glad.

As a mighty man - As a hero, as a warrior. Yahweh is often in the
Scriptures represented as a hero, or a man of war:

Yahweh is a man of war:

Yahweh is his name. - [Exo 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#003).

Who is this King of glory?

Yahweh, strong and mighty;

Yahweh mighty in battle. - [Psa 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#008).

Compare [Psa 45:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003); [Isa
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001); [Isa
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#030),

He shall stir up jealousy - He shall rouse his vengeance, or his
indignation. The word קנאה qin'âh means vengeance, or indignation, as
well as jealousy. The image here is that of a warrior who rushes on
impetuously to take vengeance on his foes.

He shall cry - He shall give a shout, or a loud clamor. Warriors usually
entered a battle with a loud shout, designed to stimulate their own
courage, and to intimidate their foes. All this language is taken from
such an entrance on an engagement, and denotes the fixed determination
of God to overthrow all his enemies.

[Isaiah 42:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 42:14</span></span>

I have long time holden my peace - This is the language of Yahweh, and
it means that he had for a long time been patient and forbearing; but
that now he would go forth as a warrior to overpower and destroy his
foes.

I will destroy - The word used here (from נשׁם nâsham) denotes properly
to breathe hard, to pant, as a woman in travail; and then to breathe
hard in any manner. It here denotes the hard breathing which is
indicative of anger, or a purpose to execute vengeance.

And devour at once - Margin, 'Swallow,' or 'Sup up.' The word שׁאף
sha'aph means rather "to breathe hard, to pant, to blow, as in anger, or
in the haste of pursuit." The idea in the verse is, that Yahweh had for
a long time restrained his anger against his foes, and had refrained
from executing vengeance on them. But now he would rouse his righteous
indignation, and go forth to accomplish his purposes in their
destruction. All this language is descriptive of a hero or warrior; and
is, of course, not to be regarded as applicable literally to God. He
often uses the language of people, and speaks of his purposes under the
image of human passions. But we are not to infer that the language is
literally applicable to him, nor is it to be interpreted too strictly.
It means, in general, that God would go forth with a fixed and settled
purpose to destroy his foes.

[Isaiah 42:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 42:15</span></span>

I will make waste mountains - This verse denotes the utter desolation
which God would bring upon his foes in his anger. The meaning of this
part of the verse is, that he would spread desolation over the hills and
mountains that were well watered and laid out in gardens and orchards.
It was common to plant vineyards on the sides of hills and mountains;
and indeed most of the mountains of Palestine and adjacent regions were
cultivated nearly to the top. They were favorable to the culture of the
vine and the olive; and by making terraces, the greater portion of the
hills were thus rescued for purposes of agriculture. Yet an enemy or
warrior marching through a land would seek to spread desolation through
all its cultivated parts, and lay waste all its fields. God, therefore,
represents himself as a conqueror, laying waste the cultivated portions
of the country of his foes.

And dry up all their herbs - He would destroy all the grain and fruits
on which they were depending for support.

And I will make the rivers islands - Or rather, dry land, or deserts. I
will, in the heat of my anger, dry up the streams, so that the bottoms
of those streams shall be dry land. The word rendered here 'islands,'
from אי 'ı̂y, properly denotes dry land, habitable ground, as opposed to
water, the sea, rivers, etc., and the signification 'islands' is a
secondary signification.

And I will dry up the pools - The pools on which they have been
dependent for water for their flocks and herds. The sense of the whole
passage is, I will bring to desolation those who worship idols, and the
idols themselves. I will produce an entire change among them, as great
as if I were to spread desolation over their cultivated hills, and to
dry up all their streams. The reference is probably to the great changes
which God would make in the pagan world. All that flourished on Pagan
ground; all that was nurtured by idolatry; all their temples, fanes,
altars, shrines, should be overturned and demolished; and in all these
things great and permanent changes would be produced. The time would
have come when God could no longer bear with the growing abominations of
the pagan nations, and when he would go forth as a conqueror to subdue
all to himself.

[Isaiah 42:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 42:16</span></span>

And I will lead the blind - Having said in the previous verses what he
would do to his enemies, God now speaks of his people. He would conduct
them to their own land, as a blind people that needed a guide, and would
remove whatever obstacle there was in their way. By the 'blind' here, he
refers doubtless to his own people. The term is applied originally to
his people in captivity, as being ignorant, after their seventy years'
exile, of the way of return to their own land. It is possible that it
may have a reference to the fact, so often charged on them, that they
were characteristically a stupid and spiritually blind people. But it is
more probable that it is the language of tenderness rather than that of
objurgation; and denotes their ignorance of the way of return, and their
need of a guide, rather than their guilt, and hardness of heart. If
applied to the people of God under the New Testament - as the entire
strain of the prophecy seems to lead ns to conclude - then it denotes
that Christians will feel their need of a leader, counselor, and guide;
and that Yahweh, as a military leader, will conduct them all in a way
which they did not know, and remove all obstacles from their path.

By a way that they knew not - When they were ignorant what course to
take; or in a path which they did not contemplate or design. It is true
of all the friends of God that they have been led in a way which they
knew not. They did not mark out this course for themselves; they did not
at first form the plans of life which they came ultimately to pursue;
they have been led, by the providence of God, in a different path, and
by the Spirit of God they have been inclined to a course which they
themselves would never have chosen (compare the note at [Isa
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#021)).

I will make darkness light before them - Darkness, in the Scriptures, is
the emblem of ignorance, sin, adversity, and calamity. Here it seems to
be the emblem of adverse and opposing events; of calamities,
persecutions, and trials. The meaning is, that God would make those
events which seemed to be adverse and calamitous, the means of
furthering his cause, and promoting the spirit of the true religion, and
the happiness of his people. This has been eminently the case with the
persecutions which rite church has endured. The events which have been
apparently most adverse, have been ultimately overruled to the best
interests of the true religion. Such was the case with the persecutions
under the Roman emperors, and in general such has been the case in all
the persecutions which the church has been called to suffer.

And crooked things straight - Things which seem to be adverse and
opposing - the persecutions and trials which the people of God would be
called to endure.

And not forsake them - (See [Isa
41:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#010), note, [Isa
41:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#013), note).

[Isaiah 42:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 42:17</span></span>

They shall be turned back - The phrases, to be turned back, and to be
suffused with shame, are frequently used in the Scriptures to denote a
state of disappointment in regard to an object of trust or confidence,
and especially of those who had trusted in idols (see [Psa
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#004); [Psa
70:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa070.htm#003); [Psa
97:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#007); compare the notes at [Isa
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#029); [Isa
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#009); [Isa
37:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#027); see also [Eze
16:52](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#052)). The sense here is, that they
should find no such protection in their idol-gods as they had hoped, and
that they should be covered with conscious guilt forever, having trusted
in them and given to them the homage which was due to the true God.

[Isaiah 42:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 42:18</span></span>

Hear, ye deaf - This is evidently an address to the Jews, and probably
to the Jews of the time of the prophet. He had been predicting the
coming of the Messiah, and the influence of his religion on the Gentile
world. He had said that God would go forth to destroy the idolatry of
the pagan nations, and to convince them of the folly of the worship of
images, and to confound them for putting their trust in them. He seems
here to have recollected that this was the easily-besetting sin of his
own countrymen, and perhaps especially of the times when he penned this
portion of the prophecy - under the reign of Manasseh; that that
generation was stupid, blind, deaf to the calls of God, and sunk in the
deepest debasement of idolatry. In view of this, and of the great truths
which he had uttered, he calls on them to hear, to be alarmed, to return
to God, and assures them that for these sins they exposed themselves to,
and must experience, his sore displeasure. The statement of these
truths, and the denouncing of these judgments, occupy the remainder of
this chapter. A similar instance occurs in Isa. 2, where the prophet,
having foretold the coming of the Messiah, and the fact that his
religion would be extended among the Gentiles, turns and reproves the
Jews for their idolatry and crimes (see the notes at that chapter). The
Jewish people are often described as 'deaf' to the voice of God, and
'blind' to their duty and their interests (see [Isa
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#018); [Isa
42:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#008)).

And look ... that ye may see - This phrase denotes an attentive,
careful, and anxious search, in order that there may be a clear view of
the object. The prophet calls them to an attentive contemplation of the
object, that they might have a clear and distinct view of it. They had
hitherto looked at the subject of religion in a careless, inattentive,
and thoughtless manner.

[Isaiah 42:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 42:19</span></span>

Who is blind, but my servant? - Some of the Jewish expositors suppose
that by 'servant' here, the prophet himself is intended, who, they
suppose is here called blind and deaf by the impious Jews who rejected
his message. But it is evident, that by 'servant' here, the Jewish
people themselves are intended, the singular being used for the plural,
in a sense similar to that where they are so often called 'Jacob' and
'Israel.' The phrase 'servants of God' is often given to his people, and
is used to denote true worshippers. The word is used here to denote
those who professed to be the true worshippers of Yahweh. The prophet
had, in the previous verses, spoken of the blindness and stupidity of
the Gentile world. He here turns to his own countrymen, and addresses
them as more blind, and deaf, and stupid than they. 'Who,' he asks, 'is
as blind as they are?' Where are any of the pagan nations so insensible
to the appeals of God, and so hard-hearted? The idea of the prophet is,
that the Jews had had far greater advantages, and yet they were so sunk
in sin that it might be said that comparatively none were blind but
they. Even the degradation of the pagan nations, under the circumstances
of the case, could not be compared with theirs.

As my messenger that I sent - Lowth renders this, 'And deaf, as he to
whom I have sent my messengers.' The Septuagint renders it, 'And deaf
but those that rule over them;' by a slight change in the Hebrew text.
The Vulgate reads it as Lowth has rendered it. The Chaldee renders it,'
If the wicked are converted, shall they not be called my servants? And
the sinners to whom I sent my prophets?' But the sense seems to be this:
The Jewish people were regarded as a people selected and preserved by
God for the purpose of preserving and extending the true religion. They
might be spoken of as sent for the great purpose of enlightening the
world, as God's messengers in the midst of the deep darkness of
benighted nations, and as appointed to be the agents by which the true
religion was to be perpetuated and propagated on earth. Or perhaps, the
word 'messenger' here may denote collectively the Jewish leaders,
teachers, and priests, who had been sent as the messengers of God to
that people, and who were, with the people, sunk in deep debasement and
sin.

As he that is perfect - (כמשׁלם kı̂meshullâm). A great variety of
interpretations has been offered on this word - arising from the
difficulty of giving the appellation 'perfect' to a people so corrupt as
were the Jews in the time of Isaiah. Jerome renders it, Qui venundatus
est - 'He that is sold.' The Syriac renders it, 'Who is blind as the
prince?' Symmachus renders it, Ὡς ὁ τέλειος hōs ho teleios; and Kimchi
in a similar manner by תמים tâmı̂ym - 'perfect.' The verb שׁלם shālam
means properly "to be whole, sound, safe"; to be completed, finished,
ended: and then, to be at peace or friendship with anyone. And it may he
applied to the Jews, to whom it undoubtedly refers here, in one of the
following senses; either

\(1\) ironically, as claiming to be perfect; or

\(2\) as those who professed to be perfect; or

\(3\) as being favored with rites and laws, and a civil and sacred
constitution that were complete (Vitringa); or

\(4\) as being in friendship with God, as Grotius and Gesenius suppose.

It most probably refers to the fact that they were richly endowed by
Yahweh with complete and happy institutions adapted to their entire
welfare, and such as, in comparison with other nations, were suited to
make them perfect.

As the Lord's servant - The Jewish people, professing to serve and obey
God.

[Isaiah 42:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 42:20</span></span>

Seeing many things - That is, the people, the Jews, spoken of here as
the servants of God. They had had an opportunity of observing many
things pertaining to the law, the government, and the dealing of Yahweh.
They had often witnessed his interposition in the days of calamity, and
he often rescued them from peril. These things they could not but have
observed, much as they had chosen to disregard the lessons which they
were calculated to convey.

But thou observest not - Thou dost not keep them (תשׁמר tı̂shmor); thou
dost not regard them.

Opening the ears - Thou hast thine ears open. They heard the words of
the law, and the instructions conveyed by tradition from their fathers,
but they did not lay them to heart, or give heed to them (see the note
at [Isa 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010)).

[Isaiah 42:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 42:21</span></span>

The Lord is well pleased for his righteousness' sake - There is great
variety in the translation and interpretation of this verse. Lowth
renders it:

Yet Yahweh was gracious unto him for his truth's sake;

He hath exalted his own praise, and made it glorious.

Noyes renders it:

It pleased Yahweh for his goodness' sake

To give him a law great and glorious;

And yet it is a robbed and plundered people.

The Septuagint renders it, 'The Lord God determined that he should be
justified, and magnify his praise.' The Chaldee renders it, 'Yahweh
willed that Israel should be justified; he magnified the doers of his
law, and comforted them.' The Syriac, 'The Lord willed on account of his
righteousness to magnify his law, and to commend it.' Vitringa explains
it, 'God has embraced the Jewish people in his love and favor, and
regards them as acceptable to himself, not indeed on account of any
merit of theirs, or on account of any external advantages, but on
account of his own truth, fidelity, and equity, that he might fulfill
the promises which he made to their fathers.' This seems to express the
sense of the passage. According to this, it refers solely to the Jewish
people, and not, as is often supposed, to the Messiah. The phrase, 'is
well pleased,' means that Yahweh takes delight in his people, or looks
upon them with an eye of tenderness and affection. He finds pleasure in
contemplating them as his people, and in regarding and treating thorn as
such.

For his righteousness' sake - Not for the righteousness of his people,
but on account of his own righteousness; that is, his own goodness,
clemency, mercy, and forbearance. It is not because he sees in them
anything that should win his love, or excite his favor, for he says [Isa
42:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#022) that they are robbed, and
plundered, and hid, and bound in prison. But Yahweh had selected their
fathers as his own people. He had made them precious promises. He had
designs of mercy toward them. He had given them a holy law. He had
promised to be their protector and their God. On this accouter he was
pleased with them still; and it was on account of his own fidelity and
plighted protection, that he was delighted in them as his people. The
word 'righteousness,' therefore (צדק tsedeq), is used to denote God's
purpose to do right; that is, to adhere to his promises, and to maintain
a character of fidelity and integrity. He would not fail, or violate his
own pledges to his people.

He will magnify the law - The word 'law' bore is used to denote the
entire series of statutes, or legislative acts of God, in regard to the
Jewish people - including all his promises and pledges to them. And the
meaning is, that he would so deal with them as to make that law
important in their view; so as to show that he regarded it as of
infinite moment. He would adhere strictly himself to all his own
covenant pledges in that law, so as to show that he regarded it as
sacred and of binding obligation; and all his dealings with them under
that law would be such as to magnify its importance and purity in their
view. The Hebrew is, 'he will make the law great;' that is, he will make
it of great importance.

And make it honorable - Or, make it glorious, by himself showing a
constant regard for it, and by so dealing with them that they should be
brought to see and feel its importance. According to this, which is the
obvious interpretation, the passage has no reference particularly to the
Messiah. It is true, however, that the language hero used is such as
would appropriately describe the work of the Redeemer; and that a large
part of what he did in his public ministry, and by his atonement, was
'to magnify the law and make it honorable;' - to vindicate its equity -
to urge its binding obligation - to sustain its claims - to show that it
could not be violated with impunity - and to demonstrate that its
penalty was just. The whole effect of the Redeemer's work is to do honor
to the law of God, nor has anything occurred in the history of our world
that has done so much to maintain its authority and binding obligation,
as his death on the cross, in the place of sinners.

[Isaiah 42:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 42:22</span></span>

But this is a people robbed and spoiled - The Jewish people, though
highly favored, have been so unmindful of the goodness of God to them,
that he has given them into the hand of their enemies to plunder them.
This is to be conceived as spoken after the captivity, and while the
Jews were in exile. Their being robbed and spoiled, therefore, refers to
the invasion of the Chaldeans, and is to be regarded as spoken
propheticly of the exiled and oppressed Jews while in Babylon.

They are all of them snared in holes - This passage has been variously
rendered. Lowth renders it, 'All their chosen youth are taken in the
toils;' following in this the translation of Jerome, and rendering it as
Le Clerc and Houbigant do. The Septuagint read it, 'And I saw, and the
people were plundered and scattered, and the snare was in all their
private chambers, and in their houses where they hid themselves;' -
meaning, evidently, that they had been taken by their invaders from the
places where they had secreted themselves in their own city and country.
The Chaldee renders it, 'All their youth were covered with confusion,
and shut up in prison.' The Syriac, 'All their youth are snared, and
they have hid them bound in their houses.' This variety of
interpretation has arisen in part, because the Hebrew which is rendered
in our version, 'in holes' (בחוּרים bachûrı̂ym) may be either the plural
form of the word בצוּר bachûr ("chosen, selected"); and thence "youths"
- selected for their beauty or strength; or it may be the plural form of
the word חוּר chûr, "a hole" or "cavern," with the preposition בּ (b)
prefixed. Our translation prefers the latter; and this is probably the
correct interpretation, as the parallel expression, 'they are hid in
prison-houses,' seems to demand this. The literal interpretation of the
passage is, therefore, that they were snared, or secured in the caverns,
holes, or places of refuge where they sought security.

And they are hid in prison-houses - They were concealed in their houses
as in prisons, so that they could not go out with safety, or without
exposing themselves to the danger of being taken captive. The land was
filled with their enemies, and they were obliged to conceal themselves,
if possible, from their foes.

And none saith, Restore - There is no deliverer - no one who can
interpose, and compel the foe to give up his captives. The sense is, the
Jewish captives were so strictly confined in Babylon, and under a
government so powerful, that there was no one who could rescue them, or
that they were so much the object of contempt, that there were none who
would feel so much interest in them as to demand them from their foes.

[Isaiah 42:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 42:23</span></span>

Who among you will give ear to this? - Who is there in the nation that
will be so warned by the judgments of God, that he will attend to the
lessons which he designs to teach, and reform his life, and return to
him? It is implied by these questions that such ought to be the effect;
it is implied also that they were so sunken and abandoned that they
would not do it. These judgments were a loud call on the nation to turn
to God, and, in time to come, to avoid the sins which had made it
necessary for him to interpose in this manner, and give them to spoil.

[Isaiah 42:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 42:24</span></span>

Who gave Jacob for a spoil? - Who gave up the Jewish people to be
plundered? The object of this verse is, to bring distinctly before them
the fact that it was Yahweh, the God of their fathers, and of their
nation, who had brought this calamity upon them. It was not the work of
chance, but it was the immediate and direct act of God on account of
their sins. Probably, as a people, they were not disposed to believe
this; and the prophet, therefore, takes occasion to calf their attention
particularly to this fact.

[Isaiah 42:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 42:25</span></span>

Therefore he hath poured upon him the fury of his anger - His righteous
indignation in the overturning of their nation, the destruction of their
temple and city, and in carrying them captive into a distant land.

And it hath set him on fire - That is, the fury of Yahweh kindled the
flame of war all around the Jewish nation, and spread desolation
everywhere.

Yet he knew not - They refused to attend to it, and lay it to heart.
They pursued their ways of wickedness, regardless of the threatening
judgments, and the impending wrath of God. They did not consider that
these evils were inflicted for their crimes, nor did they turn from
their sins when they were thus threatened with the wrath of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 43](isa043)

</div>
