<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa045)  [Next](isa047) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 46](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 46:0</span></span>

This chapter is a continuation of the argument before commenced to show
the folly of idolatry, and to induce the captive and exile Jews to put
their trust in Yahweh. The argument consists of the following
particulars:

I. The idols of Babylon should be overthrown [Isa
46:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001). The prophet sees those idols
removed from their places, laid on beasts of burden and borne away. They
were unable to deliver their city from the arm of the conqueror, but
were themselves carried into captivity. The exiles, therefore, had the
certain prospect of deliverance.

II\. God appeals to the fact, that be had always protected the Jewish
people; that he had dealt with them as a parent in the infancy and youth
of their nation, and be solemnly assures them that be would not leave
them in their old age and their trials [Isa
46:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#003).

III\. He shows them the folly of idolatry, and the vanity of idols [Isa
46:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#005). They could not aid or defend
in the day of trial; and, therefore, the people should put their trust
in the true God.

IV\. He appeals to them by the recollection of former events, and
reminds them of his merciful interposition [Isa
46:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#008).

V. He appeals to them by the fact that he had prcdicted future events,
and especially by the fact that he had raised up a distinguished
conqueror - Cyrus - who would accomplish all his pleasure [Isa
46:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#010).

VI\. He assures them that his righteous purpose was near to be
accomplished, and that he would restore Zion to its former splendor, and
that his salvation should be made known to his people [Isa
46:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#012).

The scene of this prophecy is laid in Babylon, and at the time when the
city was about to be taken by Cyrus, and the Jews about to be delivered
from captivity. The idols of the Chaldeans, unable to defend their city,
are borne in haste away for safety, and Cyrus is at the gates. The
design is to give to the exiles there an assurance that when they should
see these things, they should conclude that their deliverance drew near;
and to furnish them thus with ample demonstration that Yahweh was the
true God, and that he was their protector and friend In their long and
painful captivity also, they would have these promises to comfort them;
and when they surveyed the splendor of the idol worship in Babylon, and
their hearts were pained with the prevalent idolatry, they would have
also the assurance that those idols were to be removed, and that that
idolatry would come to an end.

[Isaiah 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 46:1</span></span>

Bel boweth down - Bel or Belus (בל bēl, from בעל be‛ēl, the same as בעל
ba‛al was the chief domestic god of the Babylonians, and was worshipped
in the celebrated tower of Babylon (compare [Jer
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#002); [Jer
51:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#044)). It was usual to compound names
of the titles of the divinities that were worshipped, and hence, we
often meet with this name, as in Bel-shazzar, Bel-teshazzar, Baal-Peor,
Baal-zebub, Baal-Gad, Baal-Berith. The Greek and Roman writers compare
Bel with Jupiter, and the common name which they give to this idol is
Jupiter Belus (Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxxvii. 10; Cic. De Nat. Deor. iii. 16;
Diod. ii. 8, 9). Herodotus (i. 181-183) says, that in the center of each
division of the city of Babylon (for the Euphrates divided the city into
two parts) there is a circular space surrounded by a wall. In one of
these stands the royal palace, which fills a large and strongly defended
space.

The temple of Jupiter Belus, says he, occupies the other, whose huge
gates of brass may still be seen. It is a square building, each side of
which is of the length of two furlongs. In the midst, a tower rises of
the solid depth and height of one furlong; on which, resting as a base,
seven other turrets are built in regular succession. The ascent on the
outside, winding from the ground, is continued to the highest tower; and
in the middle of the whole structure there is a convenient resting
place. In this temple there is a small chapel, which contains a figure
of Jupiter in a sitting posture, with a large table before him; these,
with the base of the table, and the sear of the throne, are all of the
purest gold. There was formerly in this temple a statue of solid gold,
twelve cubits high. This was seized, says Herodotus, by Xerxes, who put
the priest to death who endeavored to prevent its removal.

The upper room of this tower was occupied as an observatory. The idol
Baal, or Bel, was especially the god of the Phenicians, of the
Canaanites, of the Chaldeans, of the Moabites, and of some of the
surrounding nations. The most common opinion has been, that the idol was
the sun (see the notes at [Isa
17:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#008)), and that, under this name,
this luminary received divine honors. But Gesenius supposes that by the
name Jupiter Belus was not denoted Jupiter, 'the father of the gods,'
but the planet Jupiter, Stella Jovis, which was regarded, together with
Venus, as the giver of all good fortune; and which forms with Venus the
most fortunate of all constellations under which sovereigns can be born.
The planet Jupiter, therefore, he supposes to have been worshipped under
the name Bel, and the planet Venus under the name of Astarte, or
Astareth (see Gesenius, Commentary zu Isaiah, ii. 333ff, and Robinson's
Calmet, Art. Baal). The phrase 'boweth down,' means here, probably, that
the idol sunk down, fell, or was removed. It was unable to defend the
city, and was taken captive, and carried away. Jerome renders Confractus
est Bel - 'Bel is broken.' The Septuagint, Ἔπεσε Βὴλ Epese Bēl - 'Bel
has fallen.' Perhaps in the language there is allusion to the fact that
Dagon fell before the ark of God [Sa1
5:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#002), [Sa1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#007). The sense is, that even the
object of worship - that which was regarded as the most sacred among the
Chaldeans - would be removed.

Nebo stoopeth - This was an idol-god of the Chaldeans. In the
astrological mythology of the Babylonians, according to Gesenius
(Commentary zu Isaiah ii. 333ff), this idol was the planet Mercury. He
is regarded as the scribe of the heavens, who records the succession of
the celestial and terrestrial events; and is related to the Egyptian
Hermes and Anubis. The extensive worship of this idol among the
Chaldeans and Assyrians is evident from the many compound proper names
occurring in the Scriptures, of which this word forms a part, as
Neb-uchadnezzar, Neb-uzaradan: and also in the classics, as Nab-onad,
Nab-onassar. Nebo was, therefore, regarded as an attendant on Bel, or as
his scribe. The exact form of the idol is, however, unknown. The word
'stoopeth,' means that it had fallen down, as when one is struck dead he
falls suddenly to the earth; and the language denotes conquest, where
even the idols so long worshipped would be thrown down. The scene is in
Babylon, and the image in the mind of the prophet is that of the city
taken, and the idols that were worshipped thrown down by the conqueror,
and carried away in triumph.

Their idols were upon the beasts - That is, they are laid upon the
beasts to be borne away in triumph. It was customary for conquerors to
carry away all that was splendid and valuable, to grace their triumph on
their return; and nothing would be a more certain indication of victory,
or a more splendid accompaniment to a triumph, than the gods whom the
vanquished nations had adored. Thus in [Jer
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#007), it is said, 'And Chemosh shall
go forth into captivity, with his priests and his princes together'
(compare [Jer 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#003), margin.)

Your carriages - That is, they were laden with the idols that were thus
borne off in triumph.

They are a burden - They are so numerous; so heavy; and to be borne so
far. This is a very striking and impressive manner of foretelling that
the city of Babylon would be destroyed. Instead of employing the direct
language of prophecy, the prophet represents himself as seeing the heavy
laden animals and wagons moving along slowly, pressed down under the
weight of the captured gods to be borne into the distant country of the
conqueror. They move forth from Babylon, and the caravan laden with the
idols, the spoils of victory, is seen slowly moving forward to a distant
land.

[Isaiah 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 46:2</span></span>

They stoop - Bel, and Nebo, and all the Babylonian gods (see [Isa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001)).

They could not deliver the burden - The word 'burden' here, probably
means the load of metal, wood, and stone, of which the idols were
composed. The gods whom the Babylonians worshipped had not even power to
protect the images which were made to represent them, and which had now
become a heavy burden to the animals and wains which were carrying them
away. They could not rescue them from the hands of the conqueror; and
how unable were they, therefore, to defend those who put their trust in
them. The Vulgate renders this, 'They could not deliver him that bare
them.' The Septuagint, 'You are carrying them like a burden bound on the
weary, faint, and hungry; who are all without strength, and unable to
escape from battle; and as for them, they are carried away captives!'

But themselves - Margin, as Hebrew, 'Their soul.' The sense is, that the
gods thus worshipped, so far from being able to defend those who
worshipped them, had themselves become captive, and were borne to a
distant land.

[Isaiah 46:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 46:3</span></span>

Hearken unto me - From this view of the captive gods, the address is now
turned to the Jews. The utter vanity of the idols had been set before
them; and in view of that, God now addresses his own people, and
entreats them to put their trust in him. The address he commences with
words of great tenderness and endearment, designed to lead them to
confide in him as their Father and friend.

And all the remnant - All who were left from slaughter, and all who were
borne into captivity to Babylon. The language here is all full of
tenderness, and is suited to inspire them with confidence in God. The
idols of the pagan, so far from being able to protect their worshippers,
were themselves carried away into ignoble bondage, but Yahweh was
himself able to carry his people, and to sustain them.

Which are borne by me - Like an indulgent father, or a tender nurse, he
had carried them from the very infancy of their nation. The same image
occurs in [Deu 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#031) : 'And in the
wilderness, where thou hast seen how that the Lord thy God bare thee, as
a man doth bear his son, in all the way that ye went, until ye came into
thins place.' A similar figure occurs in [Exo
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#004) : 'Ye have seen, how I bare you
on eagles' wings, and brought you unto myself' (so [Deu
32:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011); compare [Num
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#012); [Isa
63:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#009)). All this here stands opposed to
the idols of the Babylonians. They were unable to protect their people.
They were themselves made captive. But God had shown the part of a
father and a protector to his people in all times. He had sustained and
guided them; he had never forsaken them; he had never, like the
idol-gods, been compelled to leave them in the power of their enemies.
From the fact that he had always, even from the infancy of their nation,
thus protected them, they are called on to put their trust in him.

[Isaiah 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 46:4</span></span>

And even to your old age, I am he - Or rather, I am the same. I remain,
unchangeably, with the same tenderness, the same affection, the same
care. In this the care of God for his people surpasses that of the most
tender parent, and the most kind nourisher of the young. The care of the
parent naturally dies away as the child reaches manhood, and he is
usually removed by death before the son or daughter that excited so much
solicitude in infancy and childhood, reaches old age. But not so with
God. His people are always the objects of his tender solicitude. Age
does not make them less dependent, and experience only teaches them more
and more their need of his sustaining grace. The argument here is, that
he who had watched over the infancy of his people with so much
solicitude, would not leave them in the exposures, and infirmities, and
trials of the advanced years of their history. The doctrine is, first,
that his people always need his protection and care; secondly, that he
will never leave nor forsake them; thirdly, that he who is the God of
infancy and childhood will be the God of age, and that he will not leave
or forsake his people, who have been the objects of his care and
affection in childhood, when they become old. For though this passage
refers primarily to a people, or a community as such, yet I see no
reason why the principle should not be regarded as applicable to those
who are literally aged. They need the care of God no less than childhood
does; and if they have walked in his ways in the vigor and strength of
their life, he will not cast them off 'when they are old and
gray-headed.' Hoary hairs, therefore, if 'found in the way of
righteousness.' may trust in God; and the 'second childhood' of man may
find him no less certainly a protector than the first.

[Isaiah 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 46:5</span></span>

To whom will ye liken me - (see the notes at [Isa
40:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018), [Isa
40:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#025)). The design of this and the
following verses is to show the folly of idolatry, and the vanity of
trusting in idols. This is a subject that the prophet often dwells on.
The argument here is derived from the fact that the idols of Babylon
were unable to defend the city, and were themselves carried away in
triumph [Isa 46:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001). If so, how vain
was it to rely on them! how foolish to suppose that the living and true
God could resemble such weak and defenseless blocks!

[Isaiah 46:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 46:6</span></span>

They lavish gold - The word used here means properly to shake out; and
then to pour out abundantly, or in a lavish manner. It is used in
connection with the idea of squandering in [Deu
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#020); [Pro
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#021); [Pro
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#007). Here the idea is, that they
spared no expense; they poured out gold as if it were vile and
worthless, in order to make an idol. The design of this verse is, to
show the superstition of those who were idolaters; and, particularly,
how much they were willing to devote in order to maintain idol-worship.

Out of the bag - They pour their gold out of the bag, or purse, where
they have kept it; that is, they lavish it freely.

And weigh silver in the balance - Perhaps the idea is here, that they
used silver so lavishly that they did not wait to count it, but weighed
it as they would the grosser metals. The word used here and translated
'balance' (קנה qâneh), means properly "cane, reed, calamus"; then a
measuring reed or rod [Eze 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#003), [Eze
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#005); then a rod, or beam of a
balance, or scales (Greek ζυγὸς zugos).

And hire a goldsmith - (See the notes at [Isa
40:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#019)).

And he maketh it a god - The goldsmith manufactures the gold and the
silver into an image. The object of the prophet is to deride the custom
of offering divine homage to a god formed in this manner (see the notes
at [Isa 44:9-19](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#009)).

[Isaiah 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 46:7</span></span>

They bear him upon the shoulder - They carry the idol which they have
made on their shoulder to the temple, or place where it is to be fixed.
This circumstance, with the others, is doubtless introduced to show how
ridiculous and absurd it was to offer divine homage to a god whom they
could thus carry about on the shoulder.

And set him in his place - Fix the idol on its basis or pedestal, in its
proper niche, or place in the temple. The whole design of this verse is
to contrast the idol with Yahweh. Yahweh is uncreated and eternal; the
idol, on the contrary, is made by human beings, is borne about, is fixed
in its place, has no power to move, remains there until it is taken
down, and has no ability either to hear or save those who worship it.

[Isaiah 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 46:8</span></span>

Remember this - Bear in mind what is now said of the manner in which
idols are made. This is addressed, doubtless, to the Jews, and is
designed to keep them from idolatry.

And show yourselves men - Act as men; throw away the childish trifles of
idolaters. The word used here (התאשׁשׁוּ hithe'oshâshû' occurs nowhere
else in the Bible. It is according to Gesenius, derived from אישׁ 'ı̂ysh,
"a man," and means to act "as a man." A similar word is used in [Co1
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#013) (ἀνδρίζεσθε andrizesthe, from
ἀνήρ anēr, a man), and is correctly rendered there, 'quit you like men.'
This Greek word often occurs in the Septuagint. It is used as a
translation of אמץ 'âmats, in [Jos
1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#006), [Jos
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#009), [Jos
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#018); [Ch1
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#020); [Ch2
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#007); [Neh
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#001); of גדל gâdal in [Rut
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#012); of חזק châzaq, in [Deu
31:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#006), [Deu
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#023); [Jos
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#025); [Kg2
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#012); [Kg2
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#008); [Ch1
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#020), and in several other places.
Jerome renders the Hebrew word here, 'Be confounded;' the Septuagint,
Στενάξατε Stenachate) - 'Groan;' the Syriac, 'Consider,' or understand.
The meaning is, that they were to act as became people - not as
children; as became those endowed with an immortal mind, and not as the
brutes. So Kimchi renders it: 'Be men, and not brutes, which neither
consider nor understand.'

O ye transgressors - Ye who have violated the laws of God by the worship
of idols. In the time of Manasseh, the Israelites were much addicted to
idolatry, and probably this is to be regarded as addressed to them, and
as designed to recall them from it to the worship of the true God.

[Isaiah 46:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 46:9</span></span>

Remember the former things ... - Bear in mind the repeated and constant
proofs that have been given that Yahweh is the true God - the proofs
derived from the prediction of future events, and from the frequent
interpositions of his providence in your behalf as a nation.

For I am God - (See the notes at [Isa
44:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006)).

[Isaiah 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 46:10</span></span>

Declaring the end from the beginning - Foretelling accurately the course
of future events. This is an argument to which God often appeals in
proof that he is the only true God (see [Isa
41:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#022); [Isa
43:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#012); [Isa
44:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#026)).

My counsel shall stand - My purpose, my design, my will. The phrase
'shall stand' means that it shall be stable, settled, fixed,
established. This proves:

1\. That God has a purpose or plan in regard to human affairs. If he had
not, he could not predict future events, since a contingent event cannot
be foreknown and predicted; that is, it cannot be foretold that an event
shall certainly occur in one way, when by the very supposition of its
being contingent it may happen either that way, or some other way, or
not at all.

2\. That God's plan will not be frustrated. He has power enough to
secure the execution of his designs, and he will exert that power in
order that all his plans may be accomplished. We may observe, also, that
it is a matter of unspeakable joy that God has a plan, and that it will
be executed. For

\(1\) If there were no plan in relation to human things, the mind could
find no rest. If there was no evidence that One Mind presided over human
affairs; that an infinitely wise plan had been formed, and that all
things had been adjusted so as best to secure the ultimate
accomplishment of that plan, everything would have the appearance of
chaos, and the mind must be filled with doubts and distractions. But our
anxieties vanish in regard to the apparent irregularities and disorders
of the universe, when we feel that all things are under the direction of
an Infinite Mind, and will be made to accomplish his plans, and further
his great designs.

\(2\) If his plans were not accomplished, there would be occasion of
equal doubt and dismay. If there was any power that could defeat the
purposes of God; if there was any stubbornness of matter, or any
inflexible perverseness in the nature of mind; if there were any
unexpected and unforeseen extraneous causes that could interpose to
thwart his plans, then the mind must be full of agitation and distress.
But the moment it can fasten on the conviction that God has formed a
plan that embraces all things, and that all things which occur will be
in some way made tributary to that plan, that moment the mind can be
calm in resignation to his holy will.

And I will do all my pleasure - I will accomplish all my wish, or effect
all my desire. The word rendered here 'pleasure' (חפץ chepēts) means
properly delight or pleasure [Sa1
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022); [Psa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002); [Psa
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#003); [Ecc
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#004); [Ecc
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#010); then desire, wish, will [Job
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#016); and then business, cause,
affairs [Isa 53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010). Here it means that
God would accomplish everything which was to him an object of desire;
everything which he wished, or willed. And why should he not? Who has
power to hinder or prevent him [Rom
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#019)? And why should not we rejoice
that he will do all that is pleasing to him? What better evidence have
we that it is desirable that anything should be done, than that it is
agreeable, or pleasing to God? What better security can we have that it
is right, than that he wills it? What more substantial and permanent
ground of rejoicing is there in regard to anything, than that it is such
as God prefers, loves, and wills?

[Isaiah 46:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 46:11</span></span>

Calling a ravenous bird from the east - There can be no doubt that Cyrus
is intended here (see the notes at [Isa
41:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#002), [Isa
41:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#025)). The east here means Persia.
The word rendered 'ravenous bird' (עיט ‛ayiṭ) is rendered 'fowl' in [Job
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#007); 'bird' or 'birds' in [Jer
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#009); 'fowls' in [Gen
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#011); [Isa
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#006); and 'ravenous birds' in [Eze
39:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#004). It does not occur elsewhere in
the Bible. It is used here as an emblem of a warlike king, and the
emblem may either denote the rapidity of his movements - moving with the
flight of an eagle; or it may denote the devastation which he would
spread - an emblem in either sense especially applicable to Cyrus. It is
not uncommon in the Bible to compare a warlike prince to an eagle [Jer
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#022); [Eze
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#003); and the idea here is, probably,
that Cyrus would come with great power and velocity upon nations, like
the king of birds, and would pounce suddenly and unexpectedly upon his
prey. Perhaps also there may be here allusion to the standard or banner
of Cyrus. Xenophon (Cyrop. vii.) says that it was a golden eagle affixed
to a long spear; and it is well remarked by Lowth, that Xenophon has
used the very word which the prophet uses here, as near as could be,
expressing it in Greek letters. The word of the prophet is עיט ‛ayiṭ;
the Greek word used by Xenophon is ἀετὸς aetos. The Chaldee has,
however, given a different rendering to this passage: 'I, who say that I
will gather my captivity from the east, and will lead publicly like a
swift bird from a distant land the sons of Abraham, my friend.'

The man that executeth my counsel - Margin, as Hebrew, 'Of my counsel.'
It may either mean the man whom he had designated by his counsel; or it
may mean the man who should execute his purpose.

Yea, I have spoken - He spake it by the prophets; and the idea is, that
all that he had spoken should be certainly accomplished.

[Isaiah 46:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 46:12</span></span>

Hearken unto me - This is designed to call the attention of the
skeptical and unbelieving Jews to the important truth which he was
delivering. Many among them might be disposed to say that the
fulfillment was delayed, and he therefore calls upon them to attend
particularly to his solemn declarations.

Ye stout-hearted - The phrase 'stout-hearted' would naturally, denote
those who were bold and courageous. But here it evidently means those
whose hearts were strong against God; who nerved themselves to resist
and oppose his plans and government; who were stubborn and rebellious.

[Isaiah 46:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 46:13</span></span>

I bring near my righteousness - The word 'righteousness' here evidently
denotes his truth; the fulfillment of his promises. His righteous and
true character would be manifested to them so plainly and clearly that
they would be able no longer to doubt. It would not be remote in time,
or in place, but it would be so near that they could see it, and so
plain that they could no longer doubt or misunderstand it.

And my salvation shall not tarry - The people shall be delivered from
their bondage at the exact time which has been predicted.

I will place salvation in Zion - Zion or Jerusalem shall be rebuilt, and
salvation shall emanate from that as from a center to the whole world.

Israel my glory - The people whom he had chosen, and who reflected his
glory. God's honor and glory on earth are seen in, and by the church,
and he designs that the church shall be the means of making his glory
known among people. Or it may mean I will give my glory to Israel. I
will show to them my perfections, and will make their nation the place
of the manifestations of my glorious attributes.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 47](isa047)

</div>
