<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](jam000)  [Next](jam002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

This chapter seems to comprise two general classes of subjects; the
statement in regard to the first of which is complete, but the second is
only commenced in this chapter, and is continued in the second. The
first is the general subject of temptation and trial [Jam
1:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001); the second is the nature of
true religion: the statement that all true religion has its origin in
God, the source of purity and truth, and that it requires us to be
docile and meek; to be doers of the word; to bridle the tongue, and to
be the friends of the fatherless and the widow, [Jam
1:16-27](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#016).

I. The general subject of temptation or trial, [Jam
1:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001). It is evident that those to
whom the Epistle was directed were, at that time, suffering in some
form, or that they were called to pass through temptations, and that
they needed counsel and support. They were in danger of sinking in
despondency; of murmuring and complaining, and of charging God as the
author of temptation and of sin. This part of the chapter comprises the
following topics:

1\. The salutation, [Jam 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001).

2\. The subject of temptations or trials. They were to regard it, not as
a subject of sorrow, but of gladness and joy, that they were called to
pass through trials; for if borne in a proper manner, they would produce
the grace of patience, and this was to be regarded as an object worth
being secured, even by much suffering, [Jam
1:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#002).

3\. If in their trials they felt that they had lacked the wisdom which
they needed to enable them to bear them in a proper manner, they had the
privilege of looking to God, and seeking it at his hand. This was a
privilege conceded to all, and if it were asked in faith, without any
wavering, it would certainly be granted, [Jam
1:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005).

4\. The importance and value of stability, especially in trials; of
being firm in principle, and of having one single great aim in life. A
man who wavered in his faith would waver in everything, [Jam
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#008).

5\. An encouragement to those who, in the trials which they experienced,
passed through rapid changes of circumstances. Whatever those changes
were, they were to rejoice in them as ordered by the Lord. They were to
remember the essential instability of all earthly things. The rich
especially, who were most disposed to murmur and complain when their
circumstances were changed, were to remember how the burning heat blasts
the beauty of the flower, and that in like manner all worldly splendor
must fade away, [Jam 1:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#009).

6\. Every person is blessed who endures trials in a proper manner, for
such an endurance of trial will be connected with a rich reward - the
crown of life, [Jam 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#012).

7\. In their trials, however, in the allurements to sin which might be
set before them; in the temptations to apostatize, or to do anything
wrong, which might be connected with their suffering condition, they
were to be careful never to charge temptation as such on God. They were
never to allow their minds to feel for a moment that he allured them to
sin, or placed an inducement of any kind before them to do wrong.
Everything of that kind, every disposition to commit sin, originated in
their own hearts, and they should never allow themselves to charge it on
God, [Jam 1:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#013).

II\. The nature of true religion, [Jam
1:16-27](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#016).

1\. It has its origin in God, the source of every good gift, the Father
of lights, who has of his own will begotten us again, that he might
raise us to an exalted rank among his creatures. God, therefore, should
be regarded not as the author of sin, but as the source of all the good
that is in us, [Jam 1:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#016).

2\. Religion requires us to be meek and docile; to lay aside all
disposition to dictate or prescribe, all irritability against the truth,
and all corruption of heart, and to receive meekly the ingrafted word,
[Jam 1:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#019).

3\. Religion requires us to be doers of the word, and not hearers only,
[Jam 1:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#023).

4\. Religion requires us to bridle the tongue, to set a special guard on
our words, [Jam 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#026).

5\. Religion requires us to be the friends of the fatherless and the
widow, and to keep ourselves unspotted from the world, [Jam
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#027).

[James 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 1:1</span></span>

James, a servant of God - On the meaning of the word "servant" in this
connection, see the note at [Rom 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001).
Compare the note at [Plm 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#016). It is
remarkable that James does not call himself an apostle; but this does
not prove that the writer of the Epistle was not an apostle, for the
same omission occurs in the Epistle of John, and in the Epistle of Paul
to the Philippians, the Thessalonians, and to Philemon. It is
remarkable, also, considering the relation which James is supposed to
have borne to the Lord Jesus as his "brother" ([Gal
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019); Introduction, 1). That he did
not refer to that as constituting a ground of claim to his right to
address others; but this is only one instance out of many, in the New
Testament, in which it is regarded as a higher honor to be the "servant
of God," and to belong to his family, than to sustain any relations of
blood or kindred. Compare [Mat 11:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#050).
It may be observed also (Compare the introduction, Section 1), that this
term is one which was especially appropriate to James, as a man eminent
for his integrity. His claim to respect and deference was not primarily
founded on any relationship which he sustained; any honor of birth or
blood; or even any external office, but on the fact that he was a
"servant of God."

And of the Lord Jesus Christ - The "servant of the Lord Jesus," is an
appellation which is often given to Christians, and particularly to the
ministers of religion. They are his servants, not in the sense that they
are slaves, but in the sense that they voluntarily obey his will, and
labor for him, and not for themselves.

To the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad - Greek "The twelve
tribes which are in the dispersion," or of the dispersion (ἐν τῇ
διασπορᾷ en tē diaspora). This word occurs only here and in [Pe1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001), and [Joh
7:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#035). It refers properly to those who
lived out of Palestine, or who were scattered among the Gentiles. There
were two great "dispersions;" the Eastern and the Western. The first had
its origin about the time when the ten tribes were carried away to
Assyria, and in the time of the Babylonian captivity. In consequence of
these events, and of the fact that large numbers of the Jews went to
Babylon, and other Eastern countries, for purposes of travel, commerce,
etc., there were many Jews in the East in the times of the apostles. The
other was the Western "dispersion," which commenced about the time of
Alexander the Great, and which was promoted by various causes, until
there were large numbers of Jews in Egypt and along Northern Africa, in
Asia Minor, in Greece proper, and even in Rome. To which of these
classes this Epistle was directed is not known; but most probably the
writer had particular reference to those in the East. See the
introduction, Section 2. The phrase "the twelve tribes," was the common
term by which the Jewish people were designated, and was in use long
after the ten tribes were carried away, leaving, in fact, only two of
the twelve in Palestine. Compare the notes at [Act
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#007). Many have supposed that James
here addressed them as Jews, and that the Epistle was sent to them as
such. But this opinion has no probability; because:

\(1\) If this had been the case, he would not have been likely to begin
his Epistle by saying that he was "a servant of Jesus Christ," a name so
odious to the Jews.

\(2\) and, if he had spoken of himself as a Christian, and had addressed
his countrymen as himself a believer in Jesus as the Messiah, though
regarding them as Jews, it is incredible that he did not make a more
distinct reference to the principles of the Christian religion; that he
used no arguments to convince them that Jesus was the Messiah; that he
did not attempt to convert them to the Christian faith.

It should be added, that at first most converts were made from those who
had been trained in the Jewish faith, and it is not improbable that one
in Jerusalem, addressing those who were Christians out of Palestine,
would naturally think of them as of Jewish origin, and would be likely
to address them as appertaining to the "twelve tribes." The phrase "the
twelve tribes" became also a sort of technical expression to denote the
people of God - the church.

Greeting - A customary form of salutation, meaning, in Greek, to joy, to
rejoice; and implying that he wished their welfare. Compare [Act
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#023).

[James 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jam 1:2</span></span>

My brethren - Not brethren as Jews, but as Christians. Compare [Jam
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001).

Count it all joy - Regard it as a thing to rejoice in; a matter which
should afford you happiness. You are not to consider it as a punishment,
a curse, or a calamity, but as a fit subject of felicitation. Compare
the notes at [Mat 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012).

When ye fall into divers temptations - Oh the meaning of the word
"temptations," see the notes at [Mat
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001). It is now commonly used in the
sense of placing allurements before others to induce them to sin, and in
this sense the word seems to be used in [Jam
1:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#013) of this chapter. Here,
however, the word is used in the sense of trials, to wit, by
persecution, poverty, calamity of any kind. These cannot be said to be
direct inducements or allurements to sin, but they try the faith, and
they show whether he who is tried is disposed to adhere to his faith in
God, or whether he will apostatize. They so far coincide with
temptations, properly so called, as to test the religion of men. They
differ from temptations, properly so called, in that they are not
brought before the mind for the express purpose of inducing people to
sin. In this sense it is true that God never tempts men, [Jam
1:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#013). On the sentiment in the
passage before us, see the notes at [Pe1
1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#006). The word "divers" here refers
to the various kinds of trials which they might experience - sickness,
poverty, bereavement, persecution, etc. They were to count it a matter
of joy that their religion was subjected to anything that tried it. It
is well for us to have the reality of our religion tested, in whatever
way it may be done.

[James 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jam 1:3</span></span>

Knowing this, that the trying of your faith worketh patience - Patience
is one of the fruits of such a trial, and the grace of patience is worth
the trial which it may cost to procure it. This is one of the passages
which show that James was acquainted with the writings of Paul. See the
Introduction, Section 5. The sentiment expressed here is found in [Rom
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003). See the notes at that verse. Paul
has carried the sentiment out farther, and shows that tribulation
produces other effects than patience. James only asks that patience may
have its perfect work, supposing that every Christian grace is implied
in this.

[James 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jam 1:4</span></span>

But let patience have her perfect work - Let it be fairly developed; let
it produce its appropriate effects without being hindered. Let it not be
obstructed in its fair influence on the soul by murmurings, complaining,
or rebellion. Patience under trials is fitted to produce important
effects on the soul, and we are not to hinder them in any manner by a
perverse spirit, or by opposition to the will of God. Every one who is
afflicted should desire that the fair effects of affliction should be
produced on his mind, or that there should be produced in his soul
precisely the results which his trials are adapted to accomplish.

That ye may be perfect and entire - The meaning of this is explained in
the following phrase - "wanting nothing;" that is, that there may be
nothing lacking to complete your character. There may be the elements of
a good character; there may be sound principles, but those principles
may not be fully carried out so as to show what they are. Afflictions,
perhaps more than anything else, will do this, and we should therefore
allow them to do all that they are adapted to do in developing what is
good in us. The idea here is, that it is desirable not only to have the
elements or principles of piety in the soul, but to have them fairly
carried out, so as to show what is their real tendency and value.
Compare the notes at [Pe1 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#007). On the
word "perfect," as used in the Scriptures, see the notes at [Job
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001). The word rendered "entire"
(ὁλόκληροι holoklēroi) means, whole in every part. Compare the notes at
[Th1 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023). The word occurs only in
these two places. The corresponding noun (ὁλοκληρία holoklēria) occurs
in [Act 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#016), rendered "perfect
soundness."

Wanting nothing - "Being left in nothing;" that is, everything being
complete, or fully carried out.

[James 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jam 1:5</span></span>

If any of you lack wisdom - Probably this refers particularly to the
kind of wisdom which they would need in their trials, to enable them to
bear them in a proper manner, for there is nothing in which Christians
more feel the need of heavenly wisdom than in regard to the manner in
which they should bear trials, and what they should do in the
perplexities, and disappointments, and bereavements that come upon them;
but the language employed is so general, that what is here said may be
applied to the need of wisdom in all respects. The particular kind of
wisdom which we need in trials is to enable us to understand their
design and tendency; to perform our duty under them, or the new duties
which may grow out of them; to learn the lessons which God designs to
teach, for he always designs to teach us some valuable lessons by
affliction; and to cultivate such views and feelings as are appropriate
under the peculiar forms of trial which are brought upon us; to find out
the sins for which we have been afflicted, and to learn how we may avoid
them in time to come. We are in great danger of going wrong when we are
afflicted; of complaining and murmuring; of evincing a spirit of
rebellion, and of losing the benefits which we might have obtained if we
had submitted to the trial in a proper manner. So in all things we "lack
wisdom." We are short-sighted; we have hearts prone to sin; and there
are great and important matters pertaining to duty and salvation on
which we cannot but feel that we need heavenly guidance.

Let him ask of God - That is, for the specific wisdom which he needs;
the very wisdom which is necessary for him in the particular case. It is
proper to bear the very case before God; to make mention of the specific
want; to ask of God to guide us in the very matter where we feel so much
embarrassment. It is one of the privileges of Christians, that they may
not only go to God and ask him for that general wisdom which is needful
for them in life, but that whenever a particular emergency arises, a
case of perplexity and difficulty in regard to duty, they may bring that
particular thing before his throne, with the assurance that he will
guide them. Compare [Psa 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#009); [Isa
37:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#014); [Joe
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#017).

That giveth to all men liberally - The word men here is supplied by the
translators, but not improperly, though the promise should be regarded
as restricted to those who ask. The object of the writer was to
encourage those who felt their need of wisdom, to go and ask it of God;
and it would not contribute anything to furnish such a specific
encouragement to say of God that he gives to all men liberally whether
they ask or not. In the Scriptures, the promise of divine aid is always
limited to the desire. No blessing is promised to man that is not
sought; no man can feel that he has a right to hope for the favor of
God, who does not value it enough to pray for it; no one ought to obtain
it, who does not prize it enough to ask for it. Compare [Mat
7:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007). The word rendered "liberally"
haploos - means, properly, "simply;" that is, in simplicity, sincerity,
reality. It occurs nowhere else in the New Testament, though the
corresponding noun occurs in [Rom
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#008); [Co2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012); [Co2
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003), rendered simplicity; in [Co2
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#002); [Co2
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#013), rendered "liberality," and
"liberal;" [Co2 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#011), rendered
"bountifulness;" and [Eph 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005); [Col
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#022), rendered "singleness," of the
heart. The idea seems to be that of openness, frankness, generosity; the
absence of all that is sordid and contracted; where there is the
manifestation of generous feeling, and liberal conduct. In a higher
sense than in the case of any man, all that is excellent in these things
is to be found in God; and we may therefore come to him feeling that in
his heart there is more that is noble and generous in bestowing favors
than in any other being. There is nothing that is stinted and close;
there is no partiality; there is no withholding of his favor because we
are poor, and unlettered, and unknown.

And upbraideth not - Does not reproach, rebuke, or treat harshly. He
does not coldly repel us, if we come and ask what we need, though we do
it often and with importunity. Compare [Luk
18:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001). The proper meaning of the
Greek word is to rail at, reproach, revile, chide; and the object here
is probably to place the manner in which God bestows his favors in
contrast with what sometimes occurs among men. He does not reproach or
chide us for our past conduct; for our foolishness; for our importunity
in asking. He permits us to come in the most free manner, and meets us
with a Spirit of entire kindness, and with promptness in granting our
requests. We are not always sure, when we ask a favor of a man, that we
shall not encounter something that will be repulsive, or that will
mortify us; we are certain, however, when we ask a favor of God, that we
shall never be reproached in an unfeeling manner, or meet with a harsh
response.

And it shall be given him - Compare [Jer
29:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#012); "Then shall ye call upon me,
and go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you. And ye shall seek
me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with your whole heart." See
also [Mat 7:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007); [Mat
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#022); [Mar
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#024); [Jo1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#022); [Jo1
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#014). This promise in regard to the
wisdom that may be necessary for us, is absolute; and we may be sure
that if it be asked in a proper manner it will be granted us. There can
be no doubt that it is one of the things which God is able to impart;
which will be for our own good; and which, therefore, he is ever ready
to bestow. About many things there might be doubt whether, if they were
granted, they would be for our real welfare, and therefore there may be
a doubt whether it would be consistent for God to bestow them; but there
can be no such doubt about wisdom. That is always for our good; and we
may be sure, therefore, that we shall obtain that, if the request be
made with a right spirit. If it be asked in what way we may expect he
will bestow it on us, it may be replied:

\(1\) That it is through his word - by enabling us to see clearly the
meaning of the sacred volume, and to understand the directions which he
has there given to guide us;

\(2\) By the secret influences of his Spirit.

\(a\) Suggesting to us the way in which we should go, and,

\(b\) Inclining us to do that which is prudent and wise; and,

\(3\) By the events of His Providence making plain to us the path of
duty, and removing the obstructions which may be in our path. It is easy
for God to guide his people; and they who "watch daily at the gates, and
wait at the posts of the doors" of wisdom [Pro
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#034), will not be in danger of going
astray. [Psa 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#009).

[James 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jam 1:6</span></span>

But let him ask in faith - See the passages referred to in [Jam
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005). Compare the [Mat
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007) note, and [Heb
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006) note. We cannot hope to obtain
any favor from God if there is not faith; and where, as in regard to the
wisdom necessary to guide us, we are sure that it is in accordance with
his will to grant it to us, we may come to him with the utmost
confidence, the most entire assurance, that it will be granted. In this
case, we should come to God without a doubt that, if we ask with a
proper spirit, the very thing that we ask will be bestowed on us. We
cannot in all other cases be so sure that what we ask will be for our
good, or that it will be in accordance with his will to bestow it; and
hence, we cannot in such cases come with the same kind of faith. We can
then only come with unwavering confidence in God, that he will do what
is right and best; and that if he sees that what we ask will be for our
good, he will bestow it upon us. Here, however, nothing prevents our
coming with the assurance that the very thing which we ask will be
conferred on us.

Nothing wavering - (μηδὲν διακρινόμενος mēden diakrinomenos.) "Doubting
or hesitating as to nothing, or in no respect." See [Act
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#020); [Act
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#012). In regard to the matter under
consideration, there is to be no hesitancy, no doubting, no vacillation
of the mind. We are to come to God with the utmost confidence and
assurance.

For he that wavereth, is like a wave of the sea ... - The propriety and
beauty of this comparison will be seen at once. The wave of the sea has
no stability. It is at the mercy of every wind, and seems to be driven
and tossed every way. So he that comes to God with unsettled convictions
and hopes, is liable to be driven about by every new feeling that may
spring up in the mind. At one moment, hope and faith impel him to come
to God; then the mind is at once filled with uncertainty and doubt, and
the soul is agitated and restless as the ocean. Compare [Isa
57:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#020). Hope on the one hand, and the
fear of not obtaining the favor which is desired on the other, keep the
mind restless and discomposed.

[James 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jam 1:7</span></span>

For let not that man think that he shall receive anything of the Lord -
Compare [Heb 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006). A man can hope for
favor from God only as he puts confidence in him. He sees the heart; and
if he sees that there is no belief in his existence, or his perfections
- no real trust in him - no reliance on his promises, his wisdom, his
grace - it cannot be proper that he should grant an answer to our
petitions. That will account sufficiently for the fact that there are so
many prayers unanswered; that we so frequently go to the throne of
grace, and are sent empty away. A man that goes to God in such a state
of mind, should not expect to receive any favor.

[James 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jam 1:8</span></span>

A double minded man - The word here used, δίψυχος dipsuchos occurs only
here and in [Jam 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#008). It means,
properly, one who has two souls; then one who is wavering or inconstant.
It is applicable to a man who has no settled principles; who is
controlled by passion; who is influenced by popular feeling; who is now
inclined to one opinion or course of conduct, and now to another.

Is unstable in all his ways - That is, not merely in regard to prayer,
the point particularly under discussion, but in respect to everything.
From the instability which the wavering must evince in regard to prayer,
the apostle takes occasion to make the general remark concerning such a
man, that stability and firmness could be expected on no subject. The
hesitancy which manifested on that one subject would extend to all; and
we might expect to find such a man irresolute and undetermined in all
things. This is always true. If we find a man who takes hold of the
promises of God with firmness; who feels the deepest assurance when he
prays that God will hear prayer; who always goes to him without
hesitation in his perplexities and trials, never wavering, we shall find
one who is firm in his principles, steady in his integrity, settled in
his determinations, and steadfast in his plans of life - a man whose
character we shall feel that we understand, and in whom we can confide.
Such a man eminently was Luther; and the spirit which is thus evinced by
taking firmly hold of the promises of God is the best kind of religion.

[James 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jam 1:9</span></span>

Let the brother of low degree - This verse seems to introduce a new
topic, which has no other connection with what precedes than that the
apostle is discussing the general subject of trials. Compare [Jam
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#002). Turning from the consideration of
trials in general, he passes to the consideration of a particular kind
of trials, that which results from a change of circumstances in life,
from poverty to affluence, and from affluence to poverty. The idea which
seems to have been in the mind of the apostle is, that there is a great
and important trial of faith in any reverse of circumstances; a trial in
being elevated from poverty to riches, or in being depressed from a
state of affluence to want. Wherever change occurs in the external
circumstances of life, there a man's religion is put to the test, and
there he should feel that God is trying the reality of his faith. The
phrase "of low degree" (ταπεινὸς tapeinos) means one in humble
circumstances; one of lowly rank or employment; one in a condition of
dependence or poverty. It stands here particularly opposed to one who is
rich; and the apostle doubtless had his eye, in the use of this word, on
those who had been poor.

Rejoice - Margin, "glory." Not because, being made rich, he has the
means of sensual gratification and indulgence; not because he will now
be regarded as a rich man, and will feel that he is above want; not even
because he will have the means of doing good to others. Neither of these
was the idea in the mind of the apostle; but it was, that the poor man
that is made rich should rejoice because his faith and the reality of
his religion are now tried; because a test is furnished which will show,
in the new circumstances in which he is placed, whether his piety is
genuine. In fact, there is almost no trial of religion which is more
certain and decisive than that furnished by a sudden transition from
poverty to affluence from adversity to prosperity, from sickness to
health. There is much religion in the world that will bear the ills of
poverty, sickness, and persecution, or that will bear the temptations
arising from prosperity, and even affluence, which will not bear the
transition from one to the other; as there is many a human frame that
could become accustomed to bear either the steady heat of the equator,
or the intense cold of the north, that could not bear a rapid transition
from the one to the other. See this thought illustrated in the notes at
[Phi 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#012).

In that he is exalted - A good man might rejoice in such a transition,
because it would furnish him the means of being more extensively useful;
most persons would rejoice because such a condition is that for which
men commonly aim, and because it would furnish them the means of
display, of sensual gratification, or of ease; but neither of these is
the idea of the apostle. The thing in which we are to rejoice in the
transitions of life is, that a test is furnished of our piety; that a
trial is applied to it which enables us to determine whether it is
genuine. The most important thing conceivable for us is to know whether
we are true Christians, and we should rejoice in everything that will
enable us to settle this point.

(Yet it seems not at all likely that an Apostle would exhort a poor man
to rejoice in his exaltation to wealth. An exhortation to fear and
trembling appears more suitable. Wealth brings along with it so many
dangerous temptations, that a man must have greater confidence in his
faith and stability than he ought to have, who can rejoice in its
acquisition, simply as furnishing occasion to try him: the same may be
said of poverty, or of the transition front riches to poverty. The
spirit of Agar is more suitable to the humility of piety, "Give me
neither poverty nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me, lest I
be full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or lest I be poor, and
steal, and take the name of my God in vain, "[Pro
30:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#008). Besides, there is no necessity
for resorting to this interpretation. The words will, without any
straining, bear another sense, which is both excellent in itself, and
suitable in its connection. The poor man, or man in humble life, may
well rejoice "in that he is exalted" to the dignity of a child of God,
and heir of glory.

If he be depressed with his humble rank in this life, let him but think
of his spiritual elevation, of his relation to God and Christ, and he
shall have an antidote for his dejection. What is the world's dignity in
comparison of his! The rich man, or the man of rank, on the other hand,
has reason to rejoice "in that he is made low" through the possession of
a meek and humble spirit which his affluence illustrates, but neither
destroys nor impairs. It would be matter of grief were he otherwise
minded; since all his adventitious splendor is as evanescent as the
flower which, forming for a time the crown of the green stalk on which
it hangs, perishes before it. This falls admirably in with the design of
the Apostle, which was to fortify Christians against trial. Every
condition in life had its own trials. The two great conditions of
poverty and wealth had theirs; but Christianity guards against the
danger, both of the one state and of the other. It elevates the poor
under his depression, and humbles the rich in his elevation, and bids
both rejoice in its power to shield and bless them. The passage in this
view is conceived in the same spirit with one of Paul, in which he
beautifully balances the respective conditions of slaves and freemen, by
honoring the former with the appellation of the Lord's freemen, and
imposing on the latter that of Christ's servants, [Co1
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#022).)

[James 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jam 1:10</span></span>

But the rich, in that he is made low - That is, because his property is
taken away, and he is made poor. Such a transition is often the source
of the deepest sorrow; but the apostle says that even in that a
Christian may find occasion for thanksgiving. The reasons for rejoicing
in this manner, which the apostle seems to have had in view, were these:

\(1\) because it furnished a test of the reality of religion, by showing
that it is adapted to sustain the soul in this great trial; that it can
not only bear prosperity, but that it can bear the rapid transition from
that state to one of poverty; and,

\(2\) because it would furnish to the mind an impressive and salutary
illustration of the fact that all earthly glory is soon to fade away.

I may remark here, that the transition from affluence to poverty is
often borne by Christians with the manifestation of a most lovely
spirit, and with an entire freedom from murmuring and complaining.
Indeed, there are more Christians who could safely bear a transition
from affluence to poverty, from prosperity to adversity, than there are
who could bear a sudden transition from poverty to affluence. Some of
the loveliest exhibitions of piety which I have ever witnessed have been
in such transitions; nor have I seen occasion anywhere to love religion
more than in the ease, and grace, and cheerfulness, with which it has
enabled those accustomed long to more elevated walks, to descend to the
comparatively humble lot where God places them. New grace is imparted
for this new form of trial, and new traits of Christian character are
developed in these rapid transitions, as some of the most beautiful
exhibitions of the laws of matter are brought out in the rapid
transitions in the laboratory of the chemist.

Because as the flower of the grass he shall pass away - That is, since
it is a fact that he will thus pass away, he should rejoice that he is
reminded of it. He should, therefore, esteem it a favor that this lesson
is brought impressively before his mind. To learn this effectually,
though by the loss of property, is of more value to him than all his
wealth would be if he were forgetful of it. The comparison of worldly
splendor with the fading flower of the field, is one that is common in
Scripture. It is probable that James had his eye on the passage in [Isa
40:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006). See the notes at that passage.
Compare the notes at [Pe1 1:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#024). See
also [Psa 103:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#015); [Mat
6:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#028).

[James 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jam 1:11</span></span>

For the sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat - Isaiah [Isa
40:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#007) employs the word "wind,"
referring to a burning wind that dries up the flowers. It is probable
that the apostle also refers not so much to the sun itself, as to the
hot and fiery wind called the simoom, which often rises with the sun,
and which consumes the green herbage of the fields. So Rosenmuller and
Bloomfield interpret it.

It withereth the grass - [Isa 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#007). It
withereth the stalk, or that which, when dried, produces hay or fodder -
the word here used being commonly employed in the latter sense. The
meaning is, that the effect of the hot wind is to wither the stalk or
spire which supports the flower, and when that is dried up, the flower
itself falls. This idea will give increased beauty and appropriateness
to the figure - that man himself is blasted and withered, and then that
all the external splendor which encircled him falls to the ground, like
a flower whose support is gone.

And the grace of the fashion of it perisheth - Its beauty disappears.

So shall the rich man fade away in his ways - That is, his splendor, and
all on which he prideth himself, shall vanish. The phrase "in his ways,"
according to Rosenmuller, refers to his counsels, his plans, his
purposes; and the meaning is, that the rich man, with all by which he is
known, shall vanish. A man's "ways," that is, his mode of life, or those
things by which he appears before the world, may have somewhat the same
relation to him which the flower has to the stalk on which it grows, and
by which it is sustained. The idea of James seems to be, that as it was
indisputable that the rich man must soon disappear, with all that he had
of pomp and splendor in the view of the world, it was well for him to be
reminded of it by every change of condition; and that he should
therefore rejoice in the providential dispensation by which his property
would be taken away, and by which the reality of his religion would be
tested. We should rejoice in anything by which it can be shown whether
we are prepared for heaven or not.

[James 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jam 1:12</span></span>

Blessed is the man that endureth temptation - The apostle seems here to
use the word "temptation" in the most general sense, as denoting
anything that will try the reality of religion, whether affliction, or
persecution, or a direct inducement to sin placed before the mind. The
word temptation appears in this chapter to be used in two senses; and
the question may arise, why the apostle so employs it. Compare [Jam
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#002), [Jam
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#013). But, in fact, the word
"temptation" is in itself of so general a character as to cover the
whole usage, and to justify the manner in which it is employed. It
denotes anything that will try or test the reality of our religion; and
it may be applied, therefore, either to afflictions or to direct
solicitations to sin - the latter being the sense in which it is now
commonly employed. In another respect, also, essentially the same idea
enters into both the ways in which the word is employed.

Affliction, persecution, sickness, etc., may be regarded as, in a
certain sense, temptations to sin; that is, the question comes before us
whether we will adhere to the religion on account of which we are
persecuted, or apostatize from it, and escape these sufferings; whether
in sickness and losses we will be patient and submissive to that God who
lays his hand upon us, or revolt and murmur. In each and every case,
whether by affliction, or by direct allurements to do wrong, the
question comes before the mind whether we have religion enough to keep
us, or whether we will yield to murmuring, to rebellion, and to sin. In
these respects, in a general sense, all forms of trial may be regarded
as temptation. Yet in the following verse [Jam
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#013) the apostle would guard this from
abuse. So far as the form of trial involved an allurement or inducement
to sin, he says that no man should regard it as from God. That cannot be
his design. The trial is what he aims at, not the sin. In the verse
before us he says, that whatever may be the form of the trial, a
Christian should rejoice in it, for it will furnish an evidence that he
is a child of God.

For when he is tried - In any way - if he bears the trial.

He shall receive the crown of life - See the notes at [Ti2
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008). It is possible that James had
that passage in his eye Compare the Introduction, 5.

Which the Lord hath promised - The sacred writers often speak of such a
crown as promised, or as in reserve for the children of God. [Ti2
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008); [Pe1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#004); [Rev
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#010); [Rev
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#011); [Rev
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004).

Them that love him - A common expression to denote those who are truly
pious, or who are his friends. It is sufficiently distinctive to
characterize them, for the great mass of men do not love God. Compare
[Rom 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#030).

[James 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jam 1:13</span></span>

Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God - See the remarks
on the previous verse. The apostle here seems to have had his eye on
whatever there was in trial of any kind to induce us to commit sin -
whether by complaining, by murmuring, by apostacy, or by yielding to
sin. So far as that was concerned, he said that no one should charge it
on God. He did nothing in any way with a view to induce men to do evil.
That was only an incidental thing in the trial, and was no part of the
divine purpose or design. The apostle felt evidently that there was
great danger, from the general manner in which the word "temptation" was
used, and from the perverse tendency of the heart, that it would be
charged on God that he so arranged these trials, and so influenced the
mind, as to present inducements to sin. Against this, it was proper that
an inspired apostle should bear his solemn testimony; so to guard the
whole subject as to show that whatever there was in any form of trial
that could be regarded as an inducement or allurement to sin, is not the
thing which he contemplated in the arrangement, and does not proceed
from him. It has its origin in other causes; and if there was nothing in
the corrupt human mind itself leading to sin, there would be nothing in
the divine arrangement that would produce it.

For God cannot be tempted with evil - Margin, "evils." The sense is the
same. The object seems to be to show that, in regard to the whole matter
of temptation, it does not pertain to God. Nothing can be presented to
his mind as an inducement to do wrong, and as little can he present
anything to the mind of man to induce him to sin. Temptation is a
subject which does not pertain to him. He stands aloof from it
altogether. In regard to the particular statement here, that "God cannot
be tempted with evil," or to do evil, there can be no doubt of its
truth, and it furnishes the highest security for the welfare of the
universe. There is nothing in him that has a tendency to wrong; there
can be nothing presented from without to induce him to do wrong:

\(1\) There is no evil passion to be gratified, as there is in men;

\(2\) There is no want of power, so that an allurement could be
presented to seek what he has not;

\(3\) There is no want of wealth, for he has infinite resources, and all
that there is or can be is his [Psa
50:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#010);

\(4\) There is no want of happiness, that he should seek happiness in
sources which are not now in his possession. Nothing, therefore, could
be presented to the divine mind as an inducement to do evil.

Neither tempteth he any man - That is, he places nothing before any
human being with a view to induce him to do wrong. This is one of the
most positive and unambiguous of all the declarations in the Bible, and
one of the most important. It may be added, that it is one which stands
in opposition to as many feelings of the human heart as perhaps any
other one. We are perpetually thinking - the heart suggests it
constantly - that God does place before us inducements to evil, with a
view to lead us to sin. This is done in many ways:

\(a\) People take such views of his decrees as if the doctrine implied
that he meant that we should sin, and that it could not be otherwise
than that we should sin.

\(b\) It is felt that all things are under his control, and that he has
made his arrangements with a design that men should do as they actually
do.

\(c\) It is said that he has created us with just such dispositions as
we actually have, and knowing that we would sin.

\(d\) It is said that, by the arrangements of his Providence, he
actually places inducements before us to sin, knowing that the effect
will be that we will fall into sin, when we might easily have prevented
it.

\(e\) It is said that he suffers some to tempt others, when he might
easily prevent it if he chose, and that this is the same as tempting
them himself.

Now, in regard to these things, there may be much which we cannot
explain, and much which often troubles the heart even of the good; yet
the passage before us is explicit on one point, and all these things
must be held in consistency with that - that God does not place
inducements before us with a view that we should sin, or in order to
lead us into sin. None of his decrees, or his arrangements, or his
desires, are based on that, but all have some other purpose and end. The
real force of temptation is to be traced to some other source - to
ourselves, and not to God. See the next verse.

[James 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jam 1:14</span></span>

But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust - That
is, the fountain or source of all temptation is in man himself. It is
true that external inducements to sin may be placed before him, but they
would have no force if there was not something in himself to which they
corresponded, and over which they might have power. There must be some
"lust;" some desire; some inclination; something which is unsatisfied
now, which is made the foundation of the temptation, and which gives it
all its power. If there were no capacity for receiving food, or desire
for it, objects placed before us appealing to the appetite could never
be made a source of temptation; if there were nothing in the soul which
could be regarded as the love of acquisition or possession, gold would
furnish no temptation; if there were no sensual propensities, we should
be in that quarter above the power of temptation.

In each case, and in every form, the power of the temptation is laid in
some propensity of our nature, some desire of that which we do not now
possess. The word rendered "lust" in this place (ἐπιθυμίας epithumias),
is not employed here in the narrow sense in which it is now commonly
used, as denoting libidinousness. It means desire in general; an earnest
wish for anything. Notes, [Eph 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022).
It seems here to be used with reference to the original propensities of
our nature - the desires implanted in us, which are a stimulus to
employment - as the desire of knowledge, of food, of power, of sensual
gratifications; and the idea is, that a man may be drawn along by these
beyond the prescribed limits of indulgence, and in the pursuit of
objects that are forbidden. He does not stop at the point at which the
law requires him to stop, and is therefore guilty of transgression. This
is the source of all sin. The original propensity may not be wrong, but
may be perfectly harmless - as in the case of the desire of food, etc.
Nay, it may furnish a most desirable stimulus to action; for how could
the human powers be called forth, if it were not for this? The error,
the fault, the sin, is, not restraining the indulgence where we are
commanded to do it, either in regard to the objects sought, or in regard
to the degree of indulgence.

And enticed - Entrapped, caught; that is, he is seized by this power,
and held fast; or he is led along and beguiled, until he falls into sin,
as in a snare that springs suddenly upon him.

Επιθυμια Epithumia in the New Testament, is sometimes employed in a good
sense, [Luk 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#015); [Phi
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023); [Th1
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#017); often in a bad sense, as in [Mar
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#019); [Joh
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044); [Rom
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024); [Rom
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012); [Rom
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007); [Jo1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#016); but there is no difficulty in
making the distinction; the context easily determining the matter. And
this passage in James seems at once to fix down on επιθυμιας epithumias
the sense of evil or corrupt desire. That it can mean a "harmless
propensity;" or that it is a propensity on whose character the apostle
does not at all pronounce, is incredible. It is said to "draw away a man
and entice him;" to "conceive and bring forth sin:" and a principle from
which such fruit springs cannot be very harmless. Without doubt, the
apostle traces the whole evil of temptation, which some falsely ascribed
to God, to the sinful desires of the human heart; and, as our author
remarks, he seems to take the common sense view without entertaining any
thought of nice philosophical distinction. We cannot for a moment
suppose the apostle to say - "the evil is not to be traced to God, but
to a harmless propensity."

The whole passage, with the words and figures which are used, show that
the idea in the apostle's mind was that of an enticing harlot. The
επιθυμια epithumia is personified. She persuades the understanding and
will into her impure embrace. The result of this fatal union is the
"conception" and ultimate "bringing forth" of actual sin, which again
brings forth death. This is the true genealogy of sin (McKnight); and to
say that the επιθυμια epithumia, or evil desire, of which the apostle
says that it is the "origo mali," is harmless, - is to contradict him,
and Paul also, who in a parallel passage says that he had not known the
επιθυμια epithumia, or inward desire after forbidden objects, to be
sinful, unless the law had enlightened him and said "thou shalt not
covet." Mr. Scott has spoken in strong terms of the folly of some
parties who understand επιθυμια epithumia. Here only of the desire of
sensual gross indulgence, to the exclusion of other sinful desires; but
the extreme of interpreting it as meaning nothing sinful at all,
deserves equal reprehension. The reader, however, will notice that the
author does not venture on this assertion. He says "it may be so," and
otherwise modifies his view.)

[James 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jam 1:15</span></span>

Then when lust hath conceived - Compare [Job
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#035). The allusion here is obvious.
The meaning is, when the desire which we have naturally is quickened, or
made to act, the result is that sin is produced. As our desires of good
lie in the mind by nature, as our propensities exist as they were
created, they cannot be regarded as sin, or treated as such; but when
they are indulged, when plans of gratification are formed, when they are
developed in actual life, the effect is sin. In the mere desire of good,
of happiness, of food, of raiment, there is no sin; it becomes sin when
indulged in an improper manner, and when it leads us to seek that which
is forbidden - to invade the rights of others, or in any way to violate
the laws of God. The Rabbis have a metaphor which strongly expresses the
general sense of this passage" - "Evil concupiscence is at the beginning
like the thread of a spider's web; afterwards it is like a cart rope."
Sanhedrin, fol. 99.

It bringeth forth sin - The result is sin - open, actual sin. When that
which is conceived in the heart is matured, it is seen to be sin. The
design of all this is to show that sin is not to be traced to God, but
to man himself; and in order to this, the apostle says that there is
enough in the heart of man to account for all actual sin, without
supposing that it is caused by God. The solution which he gives is, that
there are certain propensities in man which, when they are suffered to
act themselves out, will account for all the sin in the world. In regard
to those native propensities themselves, he does not say whether he
regards them as sinful and blameworthy or not; and the probability is,
that he did not design to enter into a formal examination, or to make a
formal statement, of the nature of these propensities themselves. He
looked at man as he is as a creature of God - as endowed with certain
animal propensities - as seen, in fact, to have strong passions by
nature; and he showed that there was enough in him to account for the
existence of sin, without bringing in the agency of God, or charging it
on him.

In reference to those propensities, it may be observed that there are
two kinds, either of which may account for the existence of sin, but
which are frequently both combined. There are, first, our natural
propensities; those which we have as men, as endowed with an animal
nature, as having constitutional desires to be gratified, and wants to
be supplied. Such Adam had in innocence; such the Saviour had; and such
are to be regarded as in no respect in themselves sinful and wrong. Yet
they may, in our case, as they did in Adam, lead us to sin, because,
under their strong influence, we may be led to desire that which is
forbidden, or which belongs to another. But there are, secondly, the
propensities and inclinations which we have as the result of the fall,
and which are evil in their nature and tendency; which as a matter of
course, and especially when combined with the former, lead to open
transgression. It is not always easy to separate these, and in fact they
are often combined in producing the actual guilt of the world. It often
requires a close analysis of a man's own mind to detect these different
ingredients in his conduct, and the one often gets the credit of the
other. The apostle James seems to have looked at it as a simple matter
of fact, with a common sense view, by saying that there were "desires"
(ἐπιθυμίας epithumias) in a man's own mind which would account for all
the actual sin in the world, without charging it on God. Of the truth of
this, no one can entertain a doubt. - (See the supplementary note above
at [Jam 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#014).)

And sin, when it is finished bringeth forth death - The result of sin
when it is fully carried out, is death - death in all forms. The idea
is, that death, in whatever form it exists, is to be traced to sin, and
that sin will naturally and regularly produce it. There is a strong
similarity between this declaration and that of the apostle Paul [Rom
6:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021); and it is probable that James
had that passage in his mind. See the sentiment illustrated in the notes
at that passage, and [Rom 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012) note.
Any one who indulges in a sinful thought or corrupt desire, should
reflect that it may end in death - death temporal and eternal. Its
natural tendency will be to produce such a death. This reflection should
induce us to check an evil thought or desire at the beginning. Not for
one moment should we indulge in it, for soon it may secure the mastery
and be beyond our control; and the end may be seen in the grave, and the
awful world of woe.

[James 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jam 1:16</span></span>

Do not err, my beloved brethren - This is said as if there were great
danger of error in the point under consideration. The point on which he
would guard them, seems to have been in respect to the opinion that God
was the author of sin, and that the evils in the world are to be traced
to him. There was great danger that they would embrace that opinion, for
experience has shown that it is a danger into which men are always prone
to fall. Some of the sources of this danger have been already alluded
to. Notes, [Jam 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#013). To meet the
danger he says that, so far is it from being true that God is the source
of evil, he is in fact the author of all that is good: every good gift,
and every perfect gift [Jam 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017), is
from him, [Jam 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#018).

[James 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jam 1:17</span></span>

Every good gift and every perfect gift - The difference between good and
perfect here, it is not easy to mark accurately. It may be that the
former means that which is benevolent in its character and tendency; the
latter that which is entire, where there is nothing even apparently
wanting to complete it; where it can be regarded as good as a whole and
in all its parts. The general sense is, that God is the author of all
good. Every thing that is good on the earth we are to trace to him; evil
has another origin. Compare [Mat
13:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#028).

Is from above - From God, who is often represented as dwelling above -
in heaven.

And cometh down from the Father of lights - From God, the source and
fountain of all light. Light, in the Scriptures, is the emblem ot
knowledge, purity, happiness; and God is often represented as light.
Compare [Jo1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005). Notes, [Ti1
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016). There is, doubtless, an allusion
here to the heavenly bodies, among which the sun is the most brilliant.
It appears to us to be the great original fountain of light, diffusing
its radiance overall worlds. No cloud, no darkness seems to come from
the sun, but it pours its rich effulgence on the farthest part of the
universe. So it is with God. There is no darkness in him [Jo1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005); and all the moral light and
purity which there is in the universe is to be traced to him. The word
Father here is used in a sense which is common in Hebrew (Compare the
notes at [Mat 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)) as denoting that
which is the source of anything, or that from which anything proceeds.
Compare the notes at [Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006).

With whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning - The design
here is clearly to contrast God with the sun in a certain respect. As
the source of light, there is a strong resemblance. But in the sun there
are certain changes. It does not shine on all parts of the earth at the
same time, nor in the same manner all the year. It rises and sets; it
crosses the line, and seems to go far to the south, and sends its rays
obliquely on the earth; then it ascends to the north, recrosses the
line, and sends its rays obliquely on southern regions. By its
revolutions it produces the changes of the seasons, and makes a constant
variety on the earth in the productions of different climes. In this
respect God is not indeed like the sun. With him there is no
variableness, not even the appearance of turning. He is always the same,
at all seasons of the year, and in all ages; there is no change in his
character, his mode of being, his purposes and plans. What he was
millions of ages before the worlds were made, he is now; what he is now,
he will be countless millions of ages hence. We may be sure that
whatever changes there may be in human affairs; whatever reverses we may
undergo; whatever oceans we may cross, or whatever mountains we may
climb, or in whatever worlds we may hereafter take up our abode, God is
the same. The word which is here rendered "variableness" (παραλλαγὴ
parallagē) occurs nowhere else in the New Testament. It means change,
alteration, vicissitude, and would properly be applied to the changes
observed in astronomy. See the examples quoted in Wetstein. The phrase
rendered "shadow of turning" would properly refer to the different shade
or shadow cast by the sun from an object, in its various revolutions, in
rising and setting, and in its changes at the different seasons of the
year. God, on the other hand, is as if the sun stood in the meridian at
noon-day, and never cast any shadow.

[James 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jam 1:18</span></span>

Of his own will - Greek "willing." βουληθεὶς boulētheis. The idea is,
that the fact that we are "begotten" to be his children is to be traced
solely to his will. He purposed it, and it was done. The antecedent in
the case on which all depended was the sovereign will of God. See this
sentiment explained in the notes at [Joh
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013). Compare the notes at [Eph
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005). When it is said, however, that he
has done this by his mere will, it is not to be inferred that there was
no reason why it should be done, or that the exercise of his will was
arbitrary, but only that his will determined the matter, and that is the
cause of our conversion. It is not to be inferred that there are not in
all cases good reasons why God wills as he does, though those reasons
are not often stated to us, and perhaps we could not comprehend them if
they were. The object of the statement here seems to be to direct the
mind up to God as the source of good and not evil; and among the most
eminent illustrations of his goodness is this, that by his mere will,
without any external power to control him, and where there could be
nothing but benevolence, he has adopted us into his family, and given us
a most exalted condition, as renovated beings, among his creatures.

Begat he us - The Greek word here is the same which in [Jam
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#015) is rendered "bringeth forth," -
"sin bringeth forth death." The word is perhaps designedly used here in
contrast with that, and the object is to refer to a different kind of
production, or bringing forth, under the agency of sin, and the agency
of God. The meaning here is, that we owe the beginning of our spiritual
life to God.

With the word of truth - By the instrumentality of truth. It was not a
mere creative act, but it was by truth as the seed or germ. There is no
effect produced in our minds in regeneration which the truth is not
fitted to produce, and the agency of God in the case is to secure its
fair and full influence on the soul.

That we should be a kind of first-fruits of his creatures - Compare [Eph
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#012). For the meaning of the word
rendered "first-fruits," see the note at [Rom
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023). Compare [Rom
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#006); [Rom
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#005); [Co1
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020), [Co1
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#023); [Co1
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#015); [Rev
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004). It does not elsewhere occur in
the New Testament It denotes, properly, that which is first taken from
anything; the portion which was usually offered to God. The phrase here
does not primarily denote eminence in honor or degree, but refers rather
to time - the first in time; and in a secondary sense it is then used to
denote the honor attached to that circumstance. The meaning here is,
either.

\(1\) that, under the gospel, those who were addressed by the apostles
had the honor of being first called into his kingdom as a part of that
glorious harvest which it was designed to gather in this world, and that
the goodness of God was manifested in thus furnishing the first-fruits
of a most glorious harvest; or,

\(2\) the reference may be to the rank and dignity which all who are
born again would have among the creatures of God in virtue of the new
birth.

[James 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jam 1:19</span></span>

Wherefore, my beloved brethren - The connection is this: "since God is
the only source of good; since he tempts no man; and since by his mere
sovereign goodness, without any claim on our part, we have had the high
honor conferred on us of being made the first-fruits of his creatures,
we ought to be ready to hear his voice, to subdue all our evil passions,
and to bring our souls to entire practical obedience." The necessity of
obedience, or the doctrine that the gospel is not only to be learned but
practiced, is pursued at length in this and the following chapter. The
particular statement here [Jam 1:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#019)
is, that religion requires us to be meek and docile; to lay aside all
irritability against the truth, and all pride of opinion, and all
corruption of heart, and to receive meekly the ingrafted word. See the
analysis of the chapter.

Let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak - That is, primarily, to
hear God; to listen to the instructions of that truth by which we have
been begotten, and brought into so near relation to him. At the same
time, though this is the primary sense of the phrase here, it may be
regarded as inculcating the general doctrine that we are to be more
ready to hear than to speak; or that we are to be disposed to learn
always, and from any source. Our appropriate condition is rather that of
learners than instructors; and the attitude of mind which we should
cultivate is that of a readiness to receive information from any
quarter. The ancients have some sayings on this subject which are well
worthy of our attention. "Men have two ears, and but one tongue, that
they should hear more than they speak." "The ears are always open, ever
ready to receive instruction; but the tongue is surrounded with a double
row of teeth, to hedge it in, and to keep it within proper bounds." See
Benson. So Valerius Maximus, vii. 2.

"How noble was the response of Xenocrates! When he met the reproaches of
others with a profound silence, someone asked him why he alone was
silent. 'Because,' says he, 'I have sometimes had occasion to regret
that I have spoken, never that I was silent.'" See Wetstein. So the son
of Sirach, "Be swift to hear, and with deep consideration (ἐν μακροθυμίᾳ
en makrothumia) give answer." So the Rabbis have some similar
sentiments. "Talk little and work much." Pirkey Aboth. c. i. 15. "The
righteous speak little and do much; the wicked speak much and do
nothing." Bava Metsia, fol. 87. A sentiment similar to that before us is
found in [Ecc 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#002). "Be not rash with
thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter anything before
God." So [Pro 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#019). "In the multitude
of words there wanteth not sin." [Pro
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#003). "He that keepeth his mouth
keepeth his life." [Pro 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#002). "The
tongue of the wise useth knowledge aright, but the mouth of fools
poureth out foolishness."

Slow to wrath - That is, we are to govern and restrain our temper; we
are not to give indulgence to excited and angry passions. Compare [Pro
16:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#032), "He that is slow to anger is
greater than the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit than he that
taketh a city." See also on this subject, [Job
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#002); [Pro
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#017); [Pro
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#010); [Pro
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#016); [Pro
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#018); [Pro
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#019); [Pro
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#024); [Pro
25:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#028); [Ecc
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#009); [Rom
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#017); [Th1
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#014); [Pe1
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#008). The particular point here is,
however, not that we should be slow to wrath as a general habit of mind,
which is indeed most true, but in reference particularly to the
reception of the truth. We should lay aside all anger and wrath, and
should come to the investigation of truth with a calm mind, and an
imperturbed spirit. A state of wrath or anger is always unfavorable to
the investigation of truth. Such an investigation demands a calm spirit,
and he whose mind is excited and enraged is not in a condition to see
the value of truth, or to weigh the evidence for it.

[James 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jam 1:20</span></span>

For the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God - Does not
produce in the life that righteousness which God requires. Its tendency
is not to incline us to keep the law, but to break it; not to induce us
to embrace the truth, but the opposite. The meaning of this passage is
not that our wrath will make God either more or less righteous; but that
its tendency is not to produce that upright course of life, and love of
truth, which God requires. A man is never sure of doing right under the
influence of excited feelings; he may do that which is in the highest
sense wrong, and which he will regret all his life. The particular
meaning of this passage is, that wrath in the mind of man will not have
any tendency to make him righteous. It is only that candid state of mind
which will lead him to embrace the truth which can be hoped to have such
an effect.

[James 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jam 1:21</span></span>

Wherefore - In view of the fact that God has begotten us for his own
service; in view of the fact that excited feeling tends only to wrong,
let us lay aside all that is evil, and submit ourselves wholly to the
influence of truth.

Lay apart all filthiness - The word here rendered filthiness, occurs
nowhere else in the New Testament, It means properly filth; and then is
applied to evil conduct considered as disgusting or offensive. Sin may
be contemplated as a wrong thing; as a violation of law; as evil in its
nature and tendency, and therefore to be avoided; or it may be
contemplated as disgusting, offensive, loathsome. To a pure mind, this
is one of its most odious characteristics; for, to such a mind, sin in
any form is more loathsome than the most offensive object can be to any
of the senses.

And superfluity of haughtiness - Literally, "abounding of evil." It is
rendered by Doddridge, "overflowing of malignity;" by Tindal,
"superfluity of maliciousness;" by Benson, "superfluity of malice;" by
Bloomfield, "petulance." The phrase "superfluity of haughtiness," or of
evil, does not exactly express the sense, as if we were only to lay
aside that which abounded, or which is superfluous, though we might
retain that which does not come under this description; but the object
of the apostle is to express his deep abhorrence of the thing referred
to by strong and emphatic language. He had just spoken of sin in one
aspect, as filthy, loathsome, detestable; here he designs to express his
abhorrence of it by a still more emphatic description, and he speaks of
it not merely as an evil, but as an evil abounding, overflowing; an evil
in the highest degree. The thing referred to had the essence of evil in
it (κακία kakia); but it was not merely evil, it was evil that was
aggravated, that was overflowing, that was eminent in degree (περισσείαν
perisseian). The particular reference in these passages is to the
reception of the truth; and the doctrine taught is, that a corrupt mind,
a mind full of sensuality and wickedness, is not favorable to the
reception of the truth. It is not fitted to see its beauty, to
appreciate its value, to understand its just claims, or to welcome it to
the soul. Purity of heart is the best preparation always for seeing the
force of truth.

And receive with meekness - That is, open the mind and heart to
instruction, and to the fair influence of truth. Meekness, gentleness,
docility, are everywhere required in receiving the instructions of
religion, as they are in obtaining knowledge of any kind. See the notes
at [Mat 18:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#002).

The engrafted word - The gospel is here represented under the image of
that which is implanted or engrafted from another source; by a figure
that would be readily understood, for the art of engrafting is
everywhere known. Sometimes the gospel is represented under the image of
seed sown (Compare [Mar 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#014),
following); but here it is under the figure of a shoot implanted or
engrafted, that produces fruit of its own, whatever may be the original
character of the tree into which it is engrafted. Compare the notes at
[Rom 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#017). The meaning here is, that
we should allow the principles of the gospel to be thus engrafted on our
nature; that however crabbed or perverse our nature may be, or however
bitter and vile the fruits which it might bring forth of its own accord,
it might, through the engrafted word, produce the fruits of
righteousness.

Which is able to save your souls - It is not, therefore, a weak and
powerless thing, merely designed to show its own feebleness, and to give
occasion for God to work a miracle; but it has power, and is adapted to
save. Compare the notes at [Rom 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016);
[Co1 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#018); [Ti2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015).

[James 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jam 1:22</span></span>

But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only - Obey the gospel, and
do not merely listen to it. Compare [Mat
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#021).

Deceiving your own selves - It is implied here, that by merely hearing
the word but not doing it, they would deceive their own souls. The
nature of this deception was this, that they would imagine that that was
all which was required, whereas the main thing was that they should be
obedient. If a man supposes that by a mere punctual attendance on
preaching, or a respectful attention to it, he has done all that is
required of him, he is laboring under a most gross self-deception. And
yet there are multitudes who seem to imagine that they have done all
that is demanded of them when they have heard attentively the word
preached. Of its influence on their lives, and its claims to obedience,
they are utterly regardless.

[James 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jam 1:23</span></span>

For if any be ... - The ground of the comparison in these verses is
obvious. The apostle refers to what all persons experience, the fact
that we do not retain a distinct impression of ourselves after we have
looked in a mirror. While actually looking in the mirror, we see all our
features, and can trace them distinctly; when we turn away, the image
and the impression both vanish. When looking in the mirror, we can see
all the defects and blemishes of our person; if there is a scar, a
deformity, a feature of ugliness, it is distinctly before the mind; but
when we turn away, that is "out of sight and out of mind." When unseen
it gives no uneasiness, and, even if capable of correction, we take no
pains to remove it. So when we hear the word of God. It is like a mirror
held up before us. In the perfect precepts of the law, and the perfect
requirements of the gospel, we see our own short-comings and defects,
and perhaps think that we will correct them. But we turn away
immediately, and forget it all. If, however, we were doers of the word,"
we should endeavor to remove all those defects and blemishes in our
moral character, and to bring our whole souls into conformity with what
the law and the gospel require. The phrase "natural face" (Greek: face
of birth), means, the face or appearance which we have in virtue of our
natural birth. The word glass here means mirror. Glass was not commonly
used for mirrors among the ancients, but they were made of polished
plates of metal. See the [Isa 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#024)
note, and [Job 37:18](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#018) note.

[Jam 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#024)

For he beholdeth himself - While he looks in the mirror he sees his true
appearance.

And goeth his way, and straightway forgetteth - As soon as he goes away,
he forgets it. The apostle does not refer to any intention on his part,
but to what is known to occur as a matter of fact.

What manner of than he was - How he looked; and especially if there was
anything in his appearance that required correction.

[James 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jam 1:25</span></span>

But whoso looketh - (παρακύψας parakupsas). This word means, to stoop
down near by anything; to bend forward near, so as to look at anything
more closely. See the word explained in the notes at [Pe1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012). The idea here is that of a close
and attentive observation. The object is not to contrast the manner of
looking in the glass, and in the law of liberty, implying that the
former was a "careless beholding," and the latter an attentive and
careful looking, as Doddridge, Rosenmuller, Bloomfield, and others
suppose; for the word used in the former case (κατενόησε katanoēse)
implies intense or accurate observation, as really as the word used
here; but the object is to show that if a man would attentively look
into, and continue in the law of liberty, and not do as one who went
away and forgot how he looked, he would be blessed. The emphasis is not
in the manner of looking, it is on the duty of continuing or persevering
in the observance of the law.

The perfect law of liberty - Referring to the law of God or his will,
however made known, as the correct standard of conduct. It is called the
perfect law, as being wholly free from all defects; being just such as a
law ought to be. Compare [Psa 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007). It
is called the law of liberty, or freedom because it is a law producing
freedom from the servitude of sinful passions and lusts. Compare [Psa
119:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#045); Notes, [Rom
6:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#016).

And continueth therein - He must not merely look at the law, or see what
he is by comparing himself with its requirements, but he must yield
steady obedience to it. See the notes at [Joh
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021).

This man shall be blessed in his deed - Margin, doing. The meaning is,
that he shall be blessed in the very act of keeping the law. It will
produce peace of conscience; it will impart happiness of a high order to
his mind; it will exert a good influence over his whole soul. [Psa
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#011). "In keeping of them there is
great reward."

[James 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jam 1:26</span></span>

If any man among you seem to be religious - Pious, or devout. That is,
if he does not restrain his tongue, his other evidences of religion are
worthless. A man may undoubtedly have many things in his character which
seem to be evidences of the existence of religion in his heart, and yet
there may be some one thing that shall show that all those evidences are
false. Religion is designed to produce an effect on our whole conduct;
and if there is any one thing in reference to which it does not bring us
under its control, that one thing may show that all other appearances of
piety are worthless.

And bridleth not his tongue - Restrains or curbs it not, as a horse is
restrained with a bridle. There may have been some reason why the
apostle referred to this particular sin which is now unknown to us; or
he may perhaps have intended to select this as a specimen to illustrate
this idea, that if there is any one evil propensity which religion does
not control, or if there is any one thing in respect to which its
influence is not felt, whatever other evidences of piety there may be,
this will demonstrate that all those appearances of religion are vain.
For religion is designed to bring the whole man under control, and to
subdue every faculty of the body and mind to its demands. If the tongue
is not restrained, or if there is any unsubdued propensity to sin
whatever, it proves that there is no true religion.

But deceiveth his own heart - Implying that he does deceive his heart by
supposing that any evidence can prove that he is under the influence of
religion if his tongue is unrestrained. Whatever love, or zeal, or
orthodoxy, or gift in preaching or in prayer he may have, this one evil
propensity will neutralize it all, and show that there is no true
religion at heart.

This man's religion is vain - As all religion must be which does not
control all the faculties of the body and the mind. The truths, then,
which are taught in this verse are:

\(1\) That there may be evidences of piety which seem to be very
plausible or clear, but which in themselves do not prove that there is
any true religion. There may be much zeal, as in the case of the
Pharisees; there may be much apparent love of Christians, or much
outward benevolence; there may be an uncommon gift in prayer; there may
be much self-denial, as among those who withdraw from the world in
monasteries or nunneries; or there may have been deep conviction for
sin, and much joy at the time of the supposed conversion, and still
there be no true religion. Each and all of these things may exist in the
heart where there is no true religion.

\(2\) a single unsubdued sinful propensity neutralizes all these things,
and shows that there is no true religion. If the tongue is not subdued;
if any sin is indulged, it will show that the seat of the evil has not
been reached, and that the soul, as such, has never been brought into
subjection to the law of God. For the very essence of all the sin that
there was in the soul may have been concentrated on that one propensity.
Everything else which may be manifested may be accounted for on the
supposition that there is no religion; this cannot be accounted for on
the supposition that there is any.

[James 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jam 1:27</span></span>

Pure religion - On the word here rendered "religion" (θρησκεία
thrēskeia), see the notes at [Col
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018). It is used here evidently in the
sense of piety, or as we commonly employ the word religion. The object
of the apostle is to describe what enters essentially into religion;
what it will do when it is properly and fairly developed. The phrase
"pure religion" means that which is genuine and sincere, or which is
free from any improper mixture.

And undefiled before God and the Father - That which God sees to be pure
and undefiled. Rosenmuller supposes that there is a metaphor here taken
from pearls or gems, which should be pure, or without stain.

Is this - That is, this enters into it; or this is religion such as God
approves. The apostle does not say that this is the whole of religion,
or that there is nothing else essential to it; but his general design
clearly is, to show that religion will lead to a holy life, and he
mentions this as a specimen, or an instance of what it will lead us to
do. The things which he specifies here are in fact two:

\(1\) that pure religion will lead to a life of practical benevolence;
and,

\(2\) that it will keep us unspotted from the world. If these things are
found, they show that there is true piety. If they are not, there is
none.

To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction - To go to see,
to look after, to be ready to aid them. This is an instance or specimen
of what true religion will do, showing that it will lead to a life of
practical benevolence. It may be remarked in respect to this:

\(1\) that this has always been regarded as an essential thing in true
religion; because

\(a\) it is thus an imitation of God, who is "a father of the
fatherless, and a judge of the widows in his holy habitation," [Psa
68:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#005); and who has always revealed
himself as their friend, [Deu 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#018);
[Deu 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#029); [Psa
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#014); [Psa
82:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#003); [Isa
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017); [Jer
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#007); [Jer
49:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#011); [Hos
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#003).

\(b\) Religion is represented as leading its friends to do this, or this
is required everywhere of those who claim to be religious, [Isa
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017); [Deu
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#017); [Deu
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#029); [Exo
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#022); [Job
29:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#011).

\(2\) where this disposition to be the real friend of the widow and the
orphan exists, there will also exist other corresponding things which go
to make up the religious character. This will not stand alone. It will
show what the heart is, and prove that it will ever be ready to do good.
If a man, from proper motives, is the real friend of the widow and the
fatherless, he will be the friend of every good word and work, and we
may rely on him in any and every way in doing good.

And to keep himself unspotted from the world - Compare the [Rom
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002) note; [Jam
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#004) note; [Jo1
2:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#015) note. That is, religion will
keep us from the maxims, vices, and corruptions which prevail in the
world, and make us holy. These two things may, in fact, be said to
constitute religion. If a man is truly benevolent, he bears the image of
that God who is the fountain of benevolence; if he is pure and
uncontaminated in his walk and deportment, he also resembles his Maker,
for he is holy. If he has not these things, he cannot have any
well-founded evidence that he is a Christian; for it is always the
nature and tendency of religion to produce these things. It is,
therefore, an easy matter for a man to determine whether he has any
religion; and equally easy to see that religion is eminently desirable.
Who can doubt that that is good which leads to compassion for the poor
and the helpless, and which makes the heart and the life pure?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 2](jam002)

</div>
