<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[James Index](jam.md)  
  [Previous](jam004)  [Next](pe1000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001.md)

[James](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jam 5:0</span></span>

The subjects which are introduced in this chapter are the following:

I. An address to rich men, and a severe condemnation of the manner in
which they lived, [Jam 5:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001.md). There
have been various opinions in regard to the persons here referred to.

\(1\) some have supposed that the address is to unbelieving Jews, and
that the punishment which the apostle threatens was that which was about
to be brought on the nation by the Roman armies. But, as Benson well
observes, it can hardly be presumed that the apostle supposed that his
letter would be read by the Jews, and it is not probable, therefore,
that he would in this manner directly address them.

\(2\) another opinion has been, that this, like the rest of the Epistle,
is addressed to professed Christians who had been Jews, and that the
design is to reprove faults which prevailed among them. It is not
supposed indeed, by those who hold this opinion, that all of those who
were rich among them were guilty of the sins here adverted to, nor even
that they were very prevalent among them. The rebuke would be proper if
the sins here referred to existed at all, and were practiced by any who
bore the Christian name. As to any improbability that professed
Christians would be guilty of these faults, it might be remarked that
the period has been rare in the church, if it has occurred at all, in
which all that is here said of "rich men" would not be applicable to
some members of the church. Certainly it is applicable in all those
countries where slavery prevails; in countries where religion is allied
to the state; in all places where the mass are poor, and the few are
rich. It would be difficult now to find any extended church on earth in
relation to which the denunciation here would not be applicable to some
of its members. But still it can hardly be supposed that men were
tolerated in the church, in the times of the apostles, who were guilty
of the oppressions and wrongs here referred to, or who lived in the
manner here specified. It is true, indeed, that such men have been, and
are still found, in the Christian church; but we should not, without the
clearest proof, suppose that such cases existed in the times of the
apostles.

\(3\) the correct opinion therefore seems to be, that the design of the
apostle in this chapter was to encourage and strengthen poor and
oppressed Christians; to impart consolation to those who, under the
exactions of rich men, were suffering wrong. In doing this, nothing
would be more natural than for him first to declare his views in regard
to those who were guilty of these wrongs, and who made use of the power
which wealth gave to injure those in the humble walks of life. This he
does in the form of an address to rich men - not perhaps expecting that
they would see what he had written, but with a design to set before
those to whom he wrote, and for whose benefit the statement is made, in
a vivid manner, the nature of the wrongs under which they were
suffering, and the nature of the punishment which must come upon those
who oppressed them. Nothing would tend more effectually to reconcile
those to whom he wrote to their own lot, or do more to encourage them to
bear their trials with patience. At the same time, nothing would do more
to keep them from envying the lot of the rich, or desiring the wealth
which was connected with such a mode of life.

II\. The apostle exhorts these who were suffering under these wrongs to
exercise patience, [Jam 5:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007.md). He
encourages them with the hope that the Lord would come; he refers them
to the example of the farmer, who waits long for the fruit of the earth;
he cautions them against indulging in hard feelings and thoughts against
others more prospered than they were; he refers them, as examples of
patience, to the prophets, to the case of Job, and to the Lord Jesus
himself.

III\. He adverts to a fault among them on the subject of swearing, [Jam
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#012.md). This subject is introduced here
apparently because they were in danger, through impatience, of
expressing themselves in a severe manner, and even of uttering
imprecations on those who oppressed them. To guard against this, be
exhorts them to control their temper, and to confine themselves in their
conversation to a simple affirmative or denial.

IV\. He refers to the case of those who were sick and afflicted among
them, and directs them what to do, [Jam
5:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014.md). The duty of those who were
sick was to employ prayer - as the duty of those who were in health and
prosperity was praise. The afflicted were to pray; the sick were to call
for the elders of the church, who were to pray over them, and to anoint
them with the oil in the name of the Lord, not as "extreme unction," or
with a view to their dying, but with a view to their living. To
encourage them thus to call in the aid of praying men, he refers them to
an illustrious instance of the power of prayer in the case of Elijah.

V. In the close of the chapter and of the Epistle, the apostle adverts
to the possibility that some among them might err from the truth, and
urges the duty of endeavoring to convert such, [Jam
5:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#019.md). To encourage them to do this,
he states the important consequences which would follow where such an
effort would be successful, He who should do this, would have the
satisfaction of saving a soul from death, and would hide from the
universe a multitude of sins, which otherwise, in the case of the erring
brother, could not but have been exposed in the great day of judgment.

[James 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 5:1</span></span>

Go to now - Notes, [Jam 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013.md).

Ye rich men - Not all rich men, but only that class of them who are
specified as unjust and oppressive. There is no sin in merely being
rich; where sin exists peculiarly among the rich, it arises from the
manner in which wealth is acquired, the spirit which it tends to
engender in the heart, and the way in which it is used. Compare the [Luk
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#024.md) note; [Ti1
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#009.md) note.

Weep and howl - Greek: "Weep howling." This would be expressive of very
deep distress. The language is intensive in a high degree, showing that
the calamities which were coming upon them were not only such as would
produce tears, but tears accompanied with loud lamentations. In the
East, it is customary to give expression to deep sorrow by loud
outcries. Compare [Isa 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#006.md); [Isa
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#031.md); [Isa
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002.md); [Isa
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#007.md); [Jer
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#008.md); [Jer
47:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#002.md); [Joe
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#005.md).

For your miseries that shall come upon you - Many expositors, as Benson,
Whitby, Macknight, and others, suppose that this refers to the
approaching destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, and to the miseries
which would be brought in the siege upon the Jewish people, in which the
rich would be the peculiar objects of cupidity and vengeance. They refer
to passages in Josephus, which describe particularly the sufferings to
which the rich were exposed; the searching of their houses by the
zealots, and the heavy calamities which came upon them and their
families. But there is no reason to suppose that the apostle referred
particularly to those events. The poor as well as the rich suffered in
that siege, and there were no such special judgments then brought upon
the rich as to show that they were the marked objects of the divine
displeasure. It is much more natural to suppose that the apostle means
to say that such men as he here refers to exposed themselves always to
the wrath of God, and that they had great reason to weep in the
anticipation of his vengeance. The sentiments here expressed by the
apostle are not applicable merely to the Jews of his time. If there is
any class of men which has special reason to dread the wrath of God at
all times, it is just the class of men here referred to.

[James 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jam 5:2</span></span>

Your riches are corrupted - The word here rendered "corrupted" (σήπω
sēpō) does not occur elsewhere in the New Testament. It means, to cause
to rot, to corrupt, to destroy. The reference here is to their hoarded
treasures; and the idea is, that they had accumulated more than they
needed for their own use; and that, instead of distributing them to do
good to others, or employing them in any useful way, they kept them
until they rotted or spoiled. It is to be remembered, that a
considerable part of the treasures which a man in the East would lay up,
consisted of perishable materials, as garments, grain, oil, etc. Such
articles of property were often stored up, expecting that they would
furnish a supply for many years, in case of the prevalence of famine or
wars. Compare [Luk 12:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#018.md). A
suitable provision for the time to come cannot be forbidden; but the
reference here is to cases in which great quantities had been laid up,
perhaps while the poor were suffering, and which were kept until they
became worthless.

Your garments are moth-eaten - The same idea substantially is expressed
here in another form. As the fashions in the East did not change as they
do with us, wealth consisted much in the garments that were laid up for
show or for future use. See the notes at [Mat
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#019.md). Q. Curtius says that when
Alexander the Great was going to take Persepolis, the riches of all Asia
were gathered there together, which consisted not only of a great
abundance of gold and silver, but also of garments, Lib. vi. c. 5.
Horace tells us that when Lucullus the Roman was asked if he could lend
a hundred garments for the theater, he replied that he had five thousand
in his house, of which they were welcome to take part or all. Of course,
such property would be liable to be moth-eaten; and the idea here is,
that they had amassed a great amount of this kind of property which was
useless to them, and which they kept until it became destroyed.

[James 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jam 5:3</span></span>

Your gold and silver is cankered - That is, that you have heaped
together, by injustice and fraud, a large amount, and have kept it from
those to whom it is due, [Jam 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#004.md),
until it has become corroded. The word rendered is "cankered" (κατίωται
katiōtai,) does not occur elsewhere in the New Testament. It properly
means "to cause to rust; to rust out" (Passow); "to be corroded with
rust" (Robinson); to be spotted with rust. It is true that gold and
silver do not properly rust, or become oxidized, and that they will not
be corroded like iron and steel; but by being kept long in a damp place
they will contract a dark color, resembling rust in appearance. This
seems to be the idea in the mind of the apostle. He speaks of gold and
silver as they appear after having been long laid up without use; and
undoubtedly the word which he uses here is one which would to an ancient
have expressed that idea, as well as the mere literal idea of the
rusting or oxidizing of metals. There is no reason to suppose that the
word was then used in the strict chemical sense of rusting, for there is
no reason to suppose that the nature of oxidization was then fully
understood.

And the rust of them - Another word is used here - ἰὸς ios. This
properly denotes something sent out or emitted, (from ἕημι hēmi), and is
applied to a missile weapon, as an arrow; to poison, as emitted from the
tooth of a serpent; and to rust, as it seems to be emitted from metals.
The word refers to the dark discoloration which appears on gold and
silver, when they have remained long without use.

Shall be a witness against you - That is, the rust or discoloration
shall bear testimony against you that the money is not used as it should
be, either in paying those to whom it is due, or in doing good to
others. Among the ancients, the gold and silver which anyone possessed
was laid up in some secret and safe place. Compare the notes at [Isa
45:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#003.md). There were no banks then in
which money might be deposited; there were few ways of investing money
so as to produce regular interest; there were no corporations to employ
money in joint operations; and it was not very common to invest money in
the purchase of real estate, and stocks and mortgages were little known.

And shall eat your flesh as it were fire - This cannot be taken
literally. It must mean that the effect would be as if it should corrode
or consume their very flesh; that is, the fact of their laying up
treasures would be followed by painful consequences. The thought is very
striking, and the language in which it is conveyed is singularly bold
and energetic. The effect of thus heaping up treasure will be as
corroding as fire in the flesh. The reference is to the punishment which
God would bring on them for their avarice and in-justice - effects that
will come on all now for the same offences.

Ye have heaped treasure together for the last days - The day of
judgment; the closing scenes of this world. You have been heaping up
treasure; but it will be treasure of a different kind from what you have
supposed. It is treasure not laid up for ostentation, or luxury, or use
in future life, but treasure the true worth of which will be seen at the
judgment-day. So Paul speaks of "treasuring up wrath against the day of
wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God," [Rom
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005.md). There are many who suppose they
are accumulating property that may be of use to them, or that may secure
them the reputation of possessing great wealth, who are in fact
accumulating a most fearful treasure against the day of final
retribution. Every man who is rich should examine himself closely to see
whether there is anything in the manner in which he has gained his
property, or in which he now holds it, that will expose him to the wrath
of God in the last day. That on which he so much prides himself may yet
bring down on him the vengeance of heaven; and in the day of judgment he
may curse his own madness and folly in wasting his probation in efforts
to amass property.

[James 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jam 5:4</span></span>

Behold, the hire of the labourers who have reaped down your fields - In
the previous verses the form of the sin which the apostle specified was
that they had hoarded their property. He now states another form of
their guilt, that, while doing this, they had withheld what was due from
the very laborers who had cultivated their fields, and to whose labor
they were indebted for what they had. The phrase "who have reaped down
your fields," is used to denote labor in general. This particular thing
is specified, perhaps, because the reaping of the harvest seems to be
more immediately connected with the accumulation of property. What is
said here, however, will apply to all kinds of labor. It may be
remarked, also, that the sin condemned here is one that may exist not
only in reference to those who are hired to cultivate a farm, but to all
in our employ - to day-laborers, to mechanics, to seamen, etc.

It will apply, in an eminent degree, to those who hold others in
slavery, and who live by their unrequited toils. The very essence of
slavery is, that the slave shall produce by his labor so much more than
he receives for his own maintenance as to support the master and his
family in indolence. The slave is to do the work which the master would
otherwise be obliged to do; the advantage of the system is supposed to
be that the master is not under a necessity of laboring at all. The
amount which the slave receives is not presumed to be what is a fair
equivalent for what he does, or what a freeman could be hired for; but
so much less than his labor is fairly worth, as to be a source of so
much gain to the master. If slaves were fairly compensated for their
labor; if they received what was understood to be a just price for what
they do, or what they would be willing to bargain for if they were free,
the system would at once come to an end. No owner of a slave would keep
him if he did not suppose that out of his unrequited toil he might make
money, or might be relieved himself from the necessity of labor. He who
hires a freeman to reap down his fields pays what the freeman regards as
a fair equivalent for what he does; he who employs a slave does not give
what the slave would regard as an equivalent, and expects that what he
gives will be so much less titan an equivalent, that he may be free
alike from the necessity of labor and of paying him what he has fairly
earned. The very essence of slavery, therefore, is fraud; and there is
nothing to which the remarks of the apostle here are more applicable
than to that unjust and oppressive system.

Which is of you kept back by fraud - The Greek word here used is
rendered defraud, in [Mar 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#010.md); [Co1
6:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#007.md); [Co1
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005.md); and destitute, in [Ti1
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#005.md). It occurs nowhere else, except in
the passage before us. It means to deprive of, with the notion that that
to which it is applied was due to one, or that he had a claim on it. The
fraud referred to in keeping it back, may be anything by which the
payment is withheld, or the claim evaded - whether it be mere neglect to
pay it; or some advantage taken in making the bargain; or some evasion
of the law; or mere vexatious delay; or such superior power that he to
whom it is due cannot enforce the payment; or such a system that he to
whom it is fairly due is supposed in the laws to have no rights, and to
be incapable of suing or being sued. Any one of these things would come
under the denomination of fraud.

Crieth - That is, cries out to God for punishment. The voice of this
wrong goes up to heaven.

And the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the
Lord of sabaoth - That is, he hears them, and he will attend to their
cry. Comp, [Exo 22:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#027.md). They are
oppressed and wronged; they have none to regard their cry on earth, and
to redress their wrongs, and they go and appeal to that God who will
regard their cry, and avenge them. On the phrase "Lord of sabaoth," or
Lord of hosts, for so the word sabaoth means, see the [Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009.md) note, and [Rom
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029.md) note. Perhaps by the use of the
word here it is implied that the God to whom they cry - the mighty Ruler
of all worlds - is able to vindicate them. It may be added, that the cry
of the oppressed and the wronged is going up constantly from all parts
of the earth, and is always heard by God. In his own time he will come
forth to vindicate the oppressed, and to punish the oppressor. It may be
added, also, that if what is here said were regarded as it should be by
all men, slavery, as well as other systems of wrong, would soon come to
an end.

If everywhere the workman was fairly paid for his earnings; if the poor
slave who cultivates the fields of the rich were properly compensated
for his toil; if he received what a freeman would contract to do the
work for; if there was no fraud in withholding what he earns, the system
would soon cease in the earth. Slavery could not live a day if this were
done. Now there is no such compensation; but the cry of oppressed
millions will continue to go up to heaven, and the period must come when
the system shall cease. Either the master must be brought to such a
sense of right that he will be disposed to do justice, and let the
oppressed go free; or God will so impoverish the lands where the system
prevails as to make all men see that the system is unprofitable and
ruinous as compared with free labor; or the oppressed will somehow
become so acquainted with their own strength and their rights that they
shall arise and assert their freedom; or under the prevalence of true
religion better views will prevail, and oppressors, turned to God, shall
relax the yoke of bondage; or God will so bring heavy judgments in his
holy providence on the oppressors, that the system of slavery will
everywhere come to an end on the earth.

Nothing is more certain than that the whole system is condemned by the
passage of Scripture before us; that it is contrary to the genuine
spirit of Christianity, and that the prevalence of true religion would
bring it to an end. Probably all slaveholders feel that to place the
Bible in the hands of slaves, and to instruct them to read it, would be
inconsistent with the perpetuity of the system. Yet a system which
cannot survive the most full and free circulation of the sacred
Scriptures, must be founded in wrong.

[James 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jam 5:5</span></span>

Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth - One of the things to which the
rich are peculiarly addicted. Their wealth is supposed to be of value,
because it furnishes them the means of doing it. Compare [Luk
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#019.md); [Luk
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019.md). The word translated "lived in
pleasure, (τρυφάω truphaō) occurs only here in the New Testament. It
means, to live delicately, luxuriously, at ease. There is not in the
word essentially the idea or vicious indulgence, but that which
characterizes those who live for enjoyment. They lived in ease and
affluence on the avails of the labors of others; they indulged in what
gratified the taste, and pleased the ear and the eye, while those who
contributed the means of this were groaning under oppression. A life of
mere indolence and ease, of delicacy and luxury, is nowhere countenanced
in the Bible; and even where unconnected with oppression and wrong to
others, such a mode of living is regarded as inconsistent with the
purpose for which God made man, and placed him on the earth. See [Luk
12:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#019.md). Every man has high and
solemn duties to perform, and there is enough to be done on earth to
give employment to every human being, and to fill up every hour in a
profitable and useful way.

And been wanton - This word now probably conveys to most minds a sense
which is not in the original. Our English word is now commonly used in
the sense of "lewd, lustful, lascivious." It was, however, formerly used
in the sense of "sportive, joyous, gay," and was applied to anything
that was variable or fickle. The Greek word used here (σπαταλάω
spatalaō) means, to live luxuriously or voluptuously. Compare the notes
at [Ti1 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006.md), where the word is
explained. It does not refer necessarily to gross criminal pleasures,
though the kind of living here referred to often leads to such
indulgences. There is a close connection between what the apostle says
here, and what he refers to in the previous verses - the oppression of
others, and the withholding of what is due to those who labor. Such acts
of oppression and wrong are commonly resorted to in order to obtain the
means of luxurious living, and the gratification of sensual pleasures.
In all countries where slavery exists, the things here referred to are
found in close connection. The fraud and wrong by which the reward of
hard toil is withheld from the slave is connected with indolence and
sensual indulgence on the part of the master.

Ye have nourished your hearts - Or, yourselves - the word hearts here
being equivalent to themselves. The meaning is, that they appeared to
have been fattening themselves, like stall-fed beasts, for the day of
slaughter. As cattle are carefully fed, and are fattened with a view to
their being slaughtered, so they seemed to have been fattoned for the
slaughter that was to come on them - the day of vengeance. Thus many now
live. They do no work; they contribute nothing to the good of society;
they are mere consumers - fruges, consumere nati; and, like stall-fed
cattle, they seem to live only with reference to the day of slaughter,
and to the recompense which awaits them after death.

As in a day of slaughter - There has been much variety in the
interpretation of this expression. Robinson (lex.) renders it, "like
beasts in the day of slaughter, without care or forethought."
Rosenmuller (Morgenland) supposes that it means, as in a festival;
referring, as he thinks, to the custom among the ancients of having a
feast when a part of the animal was consumed in sacrifice, and the rest
was eaten by the worshippers. So Benson. On such occasions, indulgence
was given to appetite almost without limit; and the idea then would be,
that they had given themselves up to a life of pampered luxury. But
probably the more correct idea is, that they had fattened themselves as
for the day of destruction; that is, as animals are fattened for
slaughter. They lived only to eat and drink, and to enjoy life. But, by
such a course, they were as certainly preparing for perdition, as cattle
were prepared to be killed by being stall-fed.

[James 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jam 5:6</span></span>

Ye have condemned and killed the just - τὸν δίκαιον ton dikaion - "the
just one," or "the just man" - for the word used is in the singular
number. This may either refer to the condemnation and crucifixion of
Christ - meaning that their conduct towards his people had been similar
to the treatment of the Saviour, and was in fact a condemnation and
crucifixion of him afresh; or, that by their rejection of him in order
to live in sin, they in fact condemned him and his religion; or, that
they had condemned and killed the just man - meaning that they had
persecuted those who were Christians; or, that by their harsh treatment
of others in withholding what was due to them, they had deprived them of
the means of subsistence, and had, as it were, killed the righteous.
Probably the true meaning is, that it was one of their characteristics
that they had been guilty of wrong towards good men. Whether it refers,
however, to any particular act of violence, or to such a course as would
wear out their lives by a system of oppression, injustice, and fraud,
cannot now be determined.

And he doth not resist you - Some have supposed that this refers to God,
meaning that he did not oppose them; that is, that he bore with them
patiently while they did it. Others suppose that it should be read a
question - "and doth he not resist you?" meaning that God would oppose
them, and punish them for their acts of oppression and wrong. But
probably the true reference is to the "just man" whom they condemned and
killed; meaning that they were so powerful that all attempts to resist
them would be vain, and that the injured and oppressed could do nothing
but submit patiently to their acts of injustice and violence. The sense
may be either that they could not oppose them - the rich men being so
powerful, and they who were oppressed so feeble; or that they bore their
wrongs with meekness, and did not attempt it. The sins, therefore,
condemned in these verses [Jam 5:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001.md),
and for which it is said the divine vengeance would come upon those
referred to, are these four:

\(1\) that of hoarding up money when it was unnecessary for their real
support and comfort, and when they might do so much good with it,
(compare [Mat 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#019);.md)

\(2\) that of keeping back the wages which was due to those who
cultivated their fields; that is, keeping back what would be a fair
compensation for their toil - applicable alike to hired men and to
slaves;

\(3\) that of giving themselves up to a life of ease, luxury, and
sensual; indulgence; and,

\(4\) that of wronging and oppressing good and just men - men, perhaps
in humble life, who were unable to vindicate their rights, and who had
none to undertake their cause; men who were too feeble to offer
successful resistance, or who were restrained by their principles from
attempting it.

It is needless to say that there are multitudes of such persons now on
the earth, and that they have the same reason to dread the divine
vengeance which the same class had in the time of the apostle James.

[James 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jam 5:7</span></span>

Be patient therefore, brethren - That is, under such wrongs as the
apostle had described in the previous verses. Those whom he addressed
were doubtless suffering under those oppressions, and his object was to
induce them to bear their wrongs without murmuring and without
resistance. One of the methods of doing this was by showing them, in an
address to their rich oppressors, that those who injured and wronged
them would be suitably punished at the day of judgment, or that their
cause was in the hands of God; and another method of doing it was by the
direct inculcation of the duty of patience. Compare the notes at [Mat
5:38-41](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#038.md), [Mat
5:43-45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#043.md). The margin here is, "be long
patient," or "suffer with long patience." The sense of the Greek is, "be
long-suffering, or let not your patience be exhausted. Your courage,
vigor, and forbearance is not to be short-lived, but is to be enduring.
Let it continue as long as there is need of it, even to the coming of
the Lord. Then you will be released from sufferings."

Unto the coming of the Lord - The coming of the Lord Jesus - either to
remove you by death, or to destroy the city of Jerusalem and bring to an
end the Jewish institutions, or to judge the world and receive his
people to himself. The "coming of the Lord" in any way was an event
which Christians were taught to expect, and which would be connected
with their deliverance from troubles. As the time of his appearing was
not revealed, it was not improper to refer to that as an event that
might possibly be near; and as the removal of Christians by death is
denoted by the phrase "the coming of the Lord" - that is, his coming to
each one of us - it was not improper to speak of death in that view. On
the general subject of the expectations entertained among the early
Christians of the second advent of the Saviour, see the [Co1
15:51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051.md) note; [Th2
2:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#002.md) note.

Behold, the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth - The
farmer waits patiently for the grain to grow. It requires time to mature
the crop, and he does not become impatient. The idea seems to be, that
we should wait for things to develop themselves in their proper season,
and should not be impatient before that season arrives. In due time we
may expect the harvest to be ripened. We cannot hasten it. We cannot
control the rain, the sun, the season; and the farmer therefore
patiently waits until in the regular course of events he has a harvest.
So we cannot control and hasten the events which are in God's own
keeping; and we should patiently wait for the developments of his will,
and the arrangements of his providence, by which we may obtain what we
desire.

And hath long patience for it - That is, his patience is not exhausted.
It extends through the whole time in which, by the divine arrangements,
he may expect a harvest.

Until he receive the early and latter rain - In the climate of Palestine
there are two rainy seasons, on which the harvest essentially depends -
the autumnal and the spring rains - called here and elsewhere in the
Scriptures the early and the latter rains. See [Deu
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#014.md); [Job
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#023.md); [Jer
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#024.md). The autumnal or early rains of
Scripture, usually commence in the latter half of October or the
beginning of November; not suddenly, but by degrees, which gives
opportunity for the husbandman to sow his fields of wheat and barley.
The rains come mostly from the west or south-west, continuing for two or
three days at a time, and falling especially during the nights. The wind
then chops round to the north or east, and several days of fine weather
succeed. During the months of November and December the rains continue
to fail heavily; afterwards they return only at longer intervals, and
are less heavy; but at no period during the winter do they entirely
cease to occur.

Snow often falls in Jerusalem, in January and February, to the depth of
a foot or more, but it does not last long. Rain continues to fall more
or less through the month of March, but it is rare after that period. At
the present time there are not any particular periods of rain, or
successions of showers, which might be regarded as distinct rainy
seasons. The whole period from October to March now constitutes only one
continued rainy season, without any regularly intervening time of
prolonged fair weather. Unless, therefore, there has been some change in
the climate since the times of the New Testament, the early and the
latter rains for which the husbandman waited with longing, seem rather
to have implied the first showers of autumn, which revived the parched
and thirsty earth, and prepared it for the seed; and the latter showers
of spring, which continued to refresh and forward the ripening crops and
the vernal products of the fields. In ordinary seasons, from the
cessation of the showers in spring until their commencement in October
or November, rain never falls, and the sky is usually serene. -
Robinson's Biblical Researches, vol. ii., pp. 96-100.

[James 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jam 5:8</span></span>

Be ye also patient - As the farmer is. In due time, as he expects the
return of the rain, so you may anticipate deliverance from your trials.

Stablish your hearts - Let your purposes and your faith be firm and
unwavering. Do not become weary and fretful; but bear with constancy all
that is laid upon you, until the time of your deliverance shall come.

For the coming of the Lord draweth nigh - Compare [Rev
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#010.md), [Rev
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#012.md), [Rev
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#020.md); the notes at [Co1
15:51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051.md). It is clear, I think, from this
place, that the apostle expected that that which he understood by "the
coming of the Lord" was soon to occur; for it was to be that by which
they would obtain deliverance from the trials which they then endured.
See [Jam 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007.md). Whether it means that he
was soon to come to judgment, or to bring to an end the Jewish policy
and to set up his kingdom on the earth, or that they would soon be
removed by death, cannot be determined from the mere use of the
language. The most natural interpretation of the passage, and one which
will accord well with the time when the Epistle was written, is, that
the predicted time of the destruction of Jerusalem Matt. 24 was at hand;
that there were already indications that that would soon occur; and that
there was a prevalent expectation among Christians that that event would
be a release from many trials of persecution, and would be followed by
the setting up of the Redeemer's kingdom.

Perhaps many expected that the judgment would occur at that time, and
that the Saviour would set up a personal reign on the earth. But the
expectation of others might have been merely - what is indeed all that
is necessarily implied in the predictions on the subject - that there
would be after that a rapid and extensive spread of the principles of
the Christian religion in the world. The destruction of Jerusalem and of
the temple would contribute to that by bringing to an end the whole
system of Jewish types and sacrifices; by convincing Christians that
there was not to be one central rallying-point, thus destroying their
lingering prejudices in favor of the Jewish mode of worship; and by
scattering them abroad through the world to propagate the new religion.
The Epistle was written, it is supposed, some ten or twelve years before
the destruction of Jerusalem, (Introduction, Section 3,) and it is not
improbable that there were already some indications of that approaching
event.

[James 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jam 5:9</span></span>

Grudge not one against another - Margin, "groan, grieve." The Greek word
(στενάζω stenazō) means, "to sigh, to groan," as of persons in distress,
[Rom 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023.md); and then to sigh or groan
through impatience, fretfulness, ill-humor; and hence "to murmur, to
find fault, to complain." The exact idea here is, not that of grudging
in the sense of dissatisfaction with what others possess, or of being
envious; it is that of being fretful and impatient - or, to use a common
word which more exactly expresses the sense that of grumbling. This may
arise from many causes; either because others have advantages which we
have not, and we are discontented and unhappy, as if it were wrong in
them to have such enjoyments; or because we, without reason, suppose
they intend to slight and neglect us; or because we are ready to take
offence at any little thing, and to "pick a quarrel" with them. There
are some persons who are always grumbling. They have a sour,
dissatisfied, discontented temper; they see no excellence in other
persons; they are displeased that others are more prospered, honored,
and beloved than they are themselves; they are always complaining of
what others do, not because they are injured, but because others seem to
them to be weak and foolish; they seem to feel that it becomes them to
complain if everything is not done precisely as in their estimation it
should be. It is needless to say that this spirit - the offspring of
pride - will make any man lead a wretched life; and equally needless to
say that it is wholly contrary to the spirit of the gospel. Compare [Luk
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#014.md); [Phi
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#011.md); [Ti1
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#008.md); [Heb
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#005.md).

Lest ye be condemned - That is, for judging others with this spirit -
for this spirit is in fact judging them. Compare the notes at [Mat
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001.md).

Behold, the judge standeth before the door - The Lord Jesus, who is soon
to come to judge the world. See [Jam
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#008.md). He is, as it were, even now
approaching the door - so near that he can hear all that you say.

[James 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jam 5:10</span></span>

Take, my brethren, the prophets - That is, in your trials and
persecutions. To encourage them to the exercise of patience, he points
them to the example of those who had trod the same thorny path before
them. The prophets were in general a much persecuted race of men; and
the argument on which the apostle relies from their example is this:

\(1\) that if the prophets were persecuted and tried, it may be expected
that other good men will be;

\(2\) that they showed such patience in their trials as to be a model
for us.

An example of suffering affliction - That is, they showed us how evils
are to be borne.

[James 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jam 5:11</span></span>

Behold, we count them happy which endure - The word rendered "we count
them happy" (μακαρίζομεν makarizomen,) occurs only here and in [Luk
1:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#048.md), where it is rendered "shall call
me blessed." The word μακάριος makarios (blessed, or happy,) however,
occurs often. See [Mat 5:3-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003.md); [Mat
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#006.md); [Mat
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#006.md), et soepe. The sense here is, we
speak of their patience with commendation. They have done what they
ought to do, and their name is honored and blessed.

Ye have heard of the patience of Job - As one of the most illustrious
instances of patient sufferers. See [Job
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021.md). The book of Job was written,
among other reasons, to show that true religion would bear any form of
trial to which it could be subjected. See [Job
1:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#009.md); [Job
2:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#005.md).

And have seen the end of the Lord - That is, the end or design which the
Lord had in the trials of Job, or the result to which he brought the
case at last - to wit, that he showed himself to be very merciful to the
poor sufferer; that he met him with the expressions of his approbation
for the manner in which he bore his trials; and that he doubled his
former possessions, and restored him to more than his former happiness
and honor. See Job 13. Augustine, Luther, Wetstein, and others,
understand this as referring to the death of the Lord Jesus, and as
meaning that they had seen the manner in which he suffered death, as an
example for us. But, though this might strike many as the true
interpretation, yet the objections to it are insuperable.

\(1\) it does not accord with the proper meaning of the word "end,"
(τέλος telos). That word is in no instance applied to "death," nor does
it properly express death. It properly denotes an end, term,
termination, completion; and is used in the following senses: -

\(a\) To denote the end, the termination, or the last of anything, [Mar
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#026.md); [Co1
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024.md); [Luk
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#009.md); [Heb
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003.md);

\(b\) An event, issue, or result, [Mat
26:58](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#058.md); [Rom
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021.md); [Co2
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#018.md);

\(c\) The final purpose, that to which all the parts tend, and in which
they terminate, [Ti1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005.md);

\(d\) Tax, custom, or tribute - what is paid for public ends or
purposes, [Mat 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#025.md); [Rom
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#007.md).

\(2\) this interpretation, referring it to the death of the Saviour,
would not accord with the remark of the apostle in the close of the
verse, "that the Lord is very merciful." That is, what he says was
"seen," or this was what was particularly illustrated in the ease
referred to. Yet this was not particularly seen in the death of the Lord
Jesus. He was indeed most patient and submissive in his death, and it is
true that he showed mercy to the penitent malefactor; but this was not
the particular and most prominent trait which he evinced in his death.
Besides, if it had been, that would not have been the thing to which the
apostle would have referred here. His object was to recommend patience
under trials, not mercy shown to others; and this he does by showing:

\(a\) That Job was an eminent instance of it, and,

\(b\) That the result was such as to encourage us to be patient.

The end or the result of the divine dealings in his case was, that the
Lord was "very pitiful and of tender mercy;" and we may hope that it
will be so in our case, and should therefore be encouraged to be patient
under our trials.

That the Lord is very pitiful - As he showed deep compassion in the case
of Job, we have equal reason to suppose that he will in our own.

[James 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jam 5:12</span></span>

But above all things - That is be especially careful on this point;
whatever else is done, let not this be. The manner in which James speaks
of the practice referred to here, shows that he regarded it as a sin of
a very heinous nature; one that was by all means to be avoided by those
whom he addressed. The habit of swearing by various things was a very
common one among the Jews, and it was important to guard those who from
among them had been converted to Christianity on that subject.

Swear not - See this command illustrated in the notes at [Mat
5:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#033.md). Nearly the same things are
mentioned here, as objects by which they were accustomed to swear, which
are referred to by the Saviour.

But let our yea be yea - Let there be a simple affirmation,
unaccompanied by any oath or appeal to God or to any of his works. A man
who makes that his common method of speech is the man who will be
believed. See the notes at [Mat 5:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#037.md).

Lest you fall into condemnation - That is, for profaning the name of
God. "The Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in
vain," [Exo 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#007.md).

[James 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jam 5:13</span></span>

Is any among you afflicted? - By sickness, bereavement, disappointment,
persecutions, loss of health or property. The word used here refers to
suffering evil of any kind, (κακοπαθεῖ kakopathei.)

Let him pray - That is, prayer is appropriate to trial. The mind
naturally resorts to it, and in every way it is proper. God only can
remove the source of sorrow; he can grant unto us "a happy issue out of
all our afflictions;" he can make them the means of sanctifying the
soul. Compare [Ch2 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#012.md); [Psa
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#004.md); [Psa
107:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#006.md), [Psa
107:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#013.md), [Psa
107:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#028.md). It matters not what is the
form of the trial, it is a privilege which all have to go to God in
prayer. And it is an inestimable privilege. Health fails, friends die,
property is lost, disappointments come upon us, danger threatens, death
approaches - and to whom shall we go but to God? He ever lives. He never
fails us or disappoints us if we trust in him, and his ear is ever open
to our cries. This would be a sad world indeed, if it were not for the
privilege of prayer. The last resource of millions who suffer - for
millions suffer every day - would be taken away, if men were denied the
access to the throne of grace. As it is, there is no one so poor that he
may not pray; no one so disconsolate and forsaken that he may not find
in God a friend; no one so broken-hearted that he is not able to bind up
his spirit. One of the designs of affliction is to lead us to the throne
of grace; and it is a happy result of trials if we are led by our trials
to seek God in prayer.

Is any merry? - The word merry now conveys an idea which is not properly
found in the original word here. It refers now, in common usage, to
light and noisy pleasure; to that which is jovial; to that which is
attended with laughter, or which causes laughter, as a merry jest. In
the Scriptures, however, the word properly denotes "cheerful, pleasant,
agreeable," and is applied to a state of mind free from trouble - the
opposite of affliction - happy, [Pro
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#013.md), [Pro
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#015.md); [Pro
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#022.md); [Isa
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#007.md); [Luk
15:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#023.md), [Luk
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#029.md), [Luk
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#032.md). The Greek word used here
(εὐθυμεῖ euthumei) means, literally, "to have the mind well" (εῦ eu and
θυμὸς thumos;) that is, to have it happy, or free from trouble; to be
cheerful.

Let him sing psalms - That is, if anyone is happy; if he is in health,
and is prospered; if he has his friends around him, and there is nothing
to produce anxiety; if he has the free exercise of conscience and enjoys
religion, it is proper to express that in notes of praise. Compare [Eph
5:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#019.md). On the meaning of the word
here rendered "sing psalms," see the notes at [Eph
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#019.md), where it is rendered "making
melody." It does not mean to sing psalms in contradistinction from
singing hymns, but the reference is to any songs of praise. Praise is
appropriate to such a state of mind. The heart naturally gives utterance
to its emotions in songs of thanksgiving. The sentiment in this verse is
well expressed in the beautiful stanza:

In every joy that crowns my days,

In every pain I bear,

My heart shall find delight in praise,

Or seek relief in prayer.

\- Mrs. Williams.

[James 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jam 5:14</span></span>

Is any sick among you? - In the previous verse the reference was to
affliction in general, and the duty there urged was one that was
applicable to all forms of trial. The subject of sickness, however, is
so important, since it so often occurs, that a specific direction was
desirable. That direction is to call in the aid of others to lead our
thoughts, and to aid us in our devotions, because one who is sick is
less able to direct his own reflections and to pray for himself than he
is in other form of trial. Nothing is said here respecting the degree of
sickness, whether it is that which would be fatal if these means were
used or not; but the direction pertains to any kind of illness.

Let him call for the elders of the church - Greek "presbyters." See the
notes at [Act 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002.md); [Act
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#030.md). It cannot be supposed that this
refers to the apostles, for it could not be that they would be always
accessible; besides, instructions like this were designed to have a
permanent character, and to be applicable to the church at all times and
in all places. The reference, therefore, is doubtless to the ordinary
religious teachers of the congregation; the officers of the church
intrusted with its spiritual interests. The spirit of the command would
embrace those who are pastors, and any others to whom the spiritual
interests of the congregation are confided - ruling elders, deacons,
etc. If the allusion is to the ordinary officers of the church, it is
evident that the cure to be hoped for [Jam
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#015.md) was not miraculous, but was that
to be expected in the use of appropriate means accompanied by prayer.

It may be added, as worthy of note, that the apostle says they should
"call" for the elders of the church; that is, they should send for them.
They should not wait for them to hear of their sickness, as they might
happen to, but they should cause them to be informed of it, and give
them an opportunity of visiting them and praying with them. Nothing is
more common than for persons - even members of the church - to be sick a
long time, and to presume that their pastor must know all about it; and
then they wonder that he does not come to see them, and think hard of
him because he does not. A pastor cannot be supposed to know everything;
nor can it be presumed that he knows when persons are sick, any more
than he can know anything else, unless he is apprized of it; and many
hard thoughts, and many suspicions of neglect would be avoided, if, when
persons are sick, they would in some way inform their pastor of it. It
should always be presumed of a minister of the gospel that he is ready
to visit the sick. But how can he go unless he is in some way apprized
of the illness of those who need his counsel and his prayers? The sick
send for their family physician; why should they presume that their
pastor will know of their illness any more than that their physician
will?

And let them pray over him - With him, and for him. A man who is sick is
often little capable of praying himself; and it is a privilege to have
some one to lead his thoughts in devotion. Besides, the prayer of a good
man may be of avail in restoring him to health, [Jam
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#015.md). Prayer is always one important
means of obtaining the divine favor, and there is no place where it is
more appropriate than by the bed-side of sickness. That relief from pain
may be granted; that the mind may be calm and submissive; that the
medicines employed may be blessed to a restoration to health; that past
sins may be forgiven; that he who is sick may be sanctified by his
trials; that he may be restored to health, or prepared for his "last
change" - all these are subjects of prayer which we feel to be
appropriate in such a case, and every sick man should avail himself of
the aid of those who "have an interest at the throne of grace," that
they may be obtained.

Anointing him with oil - Oil, or unguents of various kinds, were much
used among the ancients, both in health and in sickness. The oil which
was commonly employed was olive oil. See the [Isa
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006.md) note; [Luk
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#034.md) note. The custom of anointing
the sick with oil still prevails in the East, for it is believed to have
medicinal or healing properties. Niebuhr (Beschrieb. von Arabien, s.
131) says, "The southern Arabians believe that to anoint with oil
strengthens the body, and secures it against the oppressive heat of the
sun, as they go nearly naked. They believe that the oil closes the pores
of the skin, and thus prevents the effect of the excessive heat by which
the body is so much weakened; perhaps also they regard it as
contributing to beauty, by giving the skin a glossy appearance. I myself
frequently have observed that the sailors in the ships from Dsjidda and
Loheia, as well as the common Arabs in Tehama, anointed their bodies
with oil, in order to guard themselves against the heat. The Jews in
Mocha assured Mr. Forskal, that the Mohammedans as well as the Jews, in
Sana, when they were sick, were accustomed to anoint the body with oil."
Rosenmuller, Morgenland, in loc.

In the name of the Lord - By the authority or direction of the Lord; or
as an act in accordance with his will, and that will meet with his
approbation. When we do anything that tends to promote virtue, to
alleviate misery, to instruct ignorance, to save life, or to prepare
others for heaven, it is right to feel that we are doing it in the name
of the Lord Compare, for such uses of the phrase "in the name of the
Lord," and "in my name," [Mat 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#022.md);
[Mat 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#005.md), [Mat
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020.md); [Mat
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029.md); [Mat
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#009.md); [Mar
9:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#041.md); [Mar
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#013.md); [Luk
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#012.md), [Luk
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#017.md); [Rev
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#003.md); [Col
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#017.md). There is no reason to think that
the phrase is used here to denote any peculiar religious rite or
"sacrament." It was to be done in the name of the Lord, as any other
good deed is.

[James 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jam 5:15</span></span>

And the prayer of faith - The prayer offered in faith, or in the
exercise of confidence in God. It is not said that the particular form
of the faith exercised shall be that the sick man will certainly
recover; but there is to be unwavering confidence in God, a belief that
he will do what is best, and a cheerful committing of the cause into his
hands. We express our earnest wish, and leave the case with him. The
prayer of faith is to accompany the use of means, for all means would be
ineffectual without the blessing of God.

Shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up - This must be
understood, as such promises are everywhere, with this restriction, that
they will be restored to health if it shall be the will of God; if he
shall deem it for the best. It cannot be taken in the absolute and
unconditional sense, for then, if these means were used, the sick person
would always recover, no matter how often he might be sick, and he need
never die. The design is to encourage them to the use of these means
with a strong hope that it would be effectual. It may fairly be inferred
from this statement:

\(1\) that there would be cases in large numbers where these means would
be attended with this happy result; and,

\(2\) that there was so much encouragement to do it that it would be
proper in any case of sickness so make use of these means.

It may be added, that no one can demonstrate that this promise has not
been in numerous instances fulfilled. There are instances, not a few,
where recovery from sickness seems to be in direct answer to prayer, and
no one can prove that it is not so. Compare the case of Hezekiah, in
[Isa 38:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#001.md).

And if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him - Perhaps
there may be a particular allusion here to sins which may have brought
on the sickness as a punishment. In that case the removal of the disease
in answer to prayer would be an evidence that the sin was pardoned.
Compare [Mat 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002.md). But the promise may
be understood in a more general sense as denoting that such sickness
would be the means of bringing the sins of the past life to remembrance,
especially if the one who was sick had been unfaithful to his Christian
vows; and that the sickness in connection with the prayers offered would
bring him to true repentance, and would recover him from his wanderings.
On backsliding and erring Christians sickness often has this effect; and
the subsequent life is so devoted and consistent as to show that the
past unfaithfulness of him who has been afflicted is forgiven.

This passage [Jam 5:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014.md) is
important, not only for the counsel which it gives to the sick, but
because it has been employed by the Roman Catholic communion as almost
the only portion of the Bible referred to to sustain one of the peculiar
rites of their religion - that of "extreme unction" - a "sacrament," as
they suppose, to be administered to those who are dying. It is of
importance, therefore, to inquire more particularly into its meaning.
There can be but three views taken of the passage:

I. That it refers to a miraculous healing by the apostles, or by other
early ministers of religion who were endowed with the power of healing
diseases in this manner. This is the interpretation of Doddridge,
Macknight, Benson, and others. But to this view the objections seem to
me to be insuperable.

\(a\) Nothing of this kind is said by the apostle, and this is not
necessary to be supposed in order to a fair interpretation of the
passage.

\(b\) The reference, as already observed, is clearly not to the
apostles, but to the ordinary officers of the church - for such a
reference would be naturally understood by the word presbyters; and to
suppose that this refers to miracles, would be to suppose that this was
a common endowment of the ordinary ministers of religion. But there was
no promise of this, and there is no evidence that they possessed it. In
regard to the extent of the promise, "they shall lay hands on the sick,
and they shall recover," see the notes at [Mar
16:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#017.md).

\(c\) If this referred to the power of working miracles, and if the
promise was absolute, then death would not have occurred at all among
the early disciples. It would have been easy to secure a restoration to
health in any instance where a minister of religion was at hand,

II\. It is supposed by the Roman Catholics to give sanction to the
practice of "extreme unction," and to prove that this was practiced in
the primitive church. But the objections to this are still more obvious.

\(a\) It was not to be performed at death, or in the immediate prospect
of death, but in sickness at any time. There is no hint that it was to
be only when the patient was past all hope of recovery, or in view of
the fact that he was to die. But "extreme unction," from its very
nature, is to be practiced only where the patient is past all hope of
recovery.

\(b\) It was not with a view to his death, but to his living, that it
was to be practiced at all. It was not that he might be prepared to die,
but that he might be restored to health - "and the prayer of faith shall
save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up." But "extreme unction"
can be with no such reference, and no such hope. It is only with the
expectation that the patient is about to die; and if there were any
expectation that he would be raised up even by this ordinance, it could
not be administered as "extreme unction."

\(c\) The ordinance practiced as "extreme unction" is a rite wholly
unauthorized in the Scriptures, unless it be by this passage. There are
instances indeed of persons being embalmed after death. It was a fact
also that the Saviour said of Mary, when she poured ointment on his
body, that she "did it for his burial," or with reference to his burial,
(Notes, [Mat 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#012).md) but the Saviour
did not say that it was with reference to his death or was designed in
any way to prepare him to die, nor is there any instance in the Bible in
which such a rite is mentioned. The ceremony of extreme unction has its
foundation in two things: first, in superstition, in the desire of
something that shall operate as a charm, or that shall possess physical
efficiency in calming the apprehensions of a troubled conscience, and in
preparing the guilty to die; and, second, in the fact that it gives
immense power to the priesthood. Nothing is better adapted to impart
such power than a prevalent belief that a minister of religion holds in
his hands the ability to alleviate the pangs of the dying, and to
furnish a sure passport to a world of bliss. There is deep philosophy in
that which has led to the belief of this doctrine - for the dying look
around for consolation and support, and they grasp at anything which
will promise ease to a troubled conscience, and the hope of heaven. The
gospel has made arrangements to meet this state of mind in a better way
- in the evidence which the guilty may have that by repentance and faith
their sins are blotted out through the blood of the cross.

III\. The remaining supposition, therefore, and, as it seems to me, the
true one, is, that the anointing with oil was, in accordance with a
common custom, regarded as medicinal, and that a blessing was to be
invoked on this as a means of restoration to health. Besides what has
been already said, the following suggestions may be made in addition:

\(a\) This was, as we have seen, a common usage in the East, and is to
this day.

\(b\) This interpretation meets all that is demanded to a fair
understanding of what is said by the apostle.

\(c\) Everything thus directed is rational and proper.

It is proper to call in the ministers of religion in time of sickness,
and to ask their counsels and their prayers. It is proper to make use of
the ordinary means of restoration to health. It was proper then, as it
is now, to do this "in the name of the Lord;" that is, believing that it
is in accordance with his benevolent arrangements, and making use of
means which he has appointed. And it was proper then, as it is now,
having made use of those means, to implore the divine blessing on them,
and to feel that their efficacy depends wholly on him. Thus used, there
was ground of hope and of faith in regard to the recovery of the
sufferer; and no one can show that in thousands of instances in the
apostles" day, and since, the prayer of faith, accompanying the proper
use of means, may not have raised up those who were on the borders of
the grave, and who but for these means would have died.

[James 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jam 5:16</span></span>

Confess your faults one to another - This seems primarily to refer to
those who were sick, since it is added, "that ye may be healed." The
fair interpretation is, that it might be supposed that such confession
would contribute to a restoration to health. The case supposed all along
here (see [Jam 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#015).md) is, that the
sickness referred to had been brought upon the patient for his sins,
apparently as a punishment for some particular transgressions. Compare
the notes at [Co1 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030.md). In such a
case, it is said that if those who were sick would make confession of
their sins, it would, in connection with prayer, be an important means
of restoration to health. The duty inculcated, and which is equally
binding on all now, is, that if we are sick, and are conscious that we
have injured any persons, to make confession to them. This indeed is a
duty at all times, but in health it is often neglected, and there is a
special propriety that such confession should be made when we are sick.
The particular reason for doing it which is here specified is, that it
would contribute to a restoration to health - "that ye may be healed."
In the case specified, this might be supposed to contribute to a
restoration to health from one of two causes:

\(1\) If the sickness had been brought upon them as a special act of
divine visitation for sin, it might be hoped that when the confession
was made the hand of God would be withdrawn; or

\(2\) in any case, if the mind was troubled by the recollection of
guilt, it might be hoped that the calmness and peace resulting from
confession would be favorable to a restoration to health.

The former case would of course be more applicable to the times of the
apostles; the latter would pertain to all times. Disease is often
greatly aggravated by the trouble of mind which arises from conscious
guilt; and, in such a case, nothing will contribute more directly to
recovery than the restoration of peace to the soul agitated by guilt and
by the dread of a judgment to come. This may be secured by confession -
confession made first to God, and then to those who are wronged. It may
be added, that this is a duty to which we are prompted by the very
nature of our feelings when we are sick, and by the fact that no one is
willing to die with guilt on his conscience; without having done
everything that he can to be at peace with all the world. This passage
is one on which Roman Catholics rely to demonstrate the propriety of
"auricular confession," or confession made to a priest with a view to an
absolution of sin. The doctrine which is held on that point is, that it
is a duty to confess to a priest, at certain seasons, all our sins,
secret and open, of which we have been guilty; all our improper
thoughts, desires, words, and actions; and that the priest has power to
declare on such confession that the sins are forgiven. But never was any
text less pertinent to prove a doctrine than this passage to demonstrate
that. Because:

\(1\) The confession here enjoined is not to be made by a person in
health, that he may obtain salvation, but by a sick person, that he may
be healed.

\(2\) as mutual confession is here enjoined, a priest would be as much
bound to confess to the people as the people to a priest.

\(3\) no mention is made of a priest at all, or even of a minister of
religion, as the one to whom the confession is to be made.

\(4\) the confession referred to is for "faults" with reference to "one
another," that is, where one has injured another; and nothing is said of
confessing faults to those whom we have not injured at all.

\(5\) there is no mention here of absolution, either by a priest or any
other person.

\(6\) if anything is meant by absolution that is Scriptural, it may as
well be pronounced by one person as another; by a layman as a clergyman.
All that it can mean is, that God promises pardon to those who are truly
penitent, and this fact may as well be stated by one person as another.
No priest, no man whatever, is empowered to say to another either that
he is truly penitent, or to forgive sin. "Who can forgive sins but God
only?" None but he whose law has been violated, or who has been wronged,
can pardon an offence. No third person can forgive a sin which a man has
committed against a neighbor; no one but a parent can pardon the
offences of which his own children have been guilty towards him; and who
can put himself in the place of God, and presume to pardon the sins
which his creatures have committed against him?

\(7\) the practice of "auricular confession" is "evil, and only evil,
and that continually." Nothing gives so much power to a priesthood as
the supposition that they have the power of absolution. Nothing serves
so much to pollute the soul as to keep impure thoughts before the mind
long enough to make the confession, and to state them in words. Nothing
gives a man so much power over a female as to have it supposed that it
is required by religion, and appertains to the sacred office, that all
that passes in the mind should be disclosed to him. The thought which
but for the necessity of confession would have vanished at once; the
image which would have departed as soon as it came before the mind, but
for the necessity of retaining it to make confession - these are the
things over which a man would seek to have control, and to which he
would desire to have access, if he wished to accomplish purposes of
villany. The very thing which a seducer would desire would be the power
of knowing all the thoughts of his intended victim; and if the thoughts
which pass through the soul could be known, virtue would be safe
nowhere. Nothing probably under the name of religion has ever done more
to corrupt the morals of a community than the practice of auricular
confession.

And pray one for another - One for the other; mutually. Those who have
done injury, and those who are injured, should pray for each other. The
apostle does not seem here, as in [Jam
5:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014.md), to refer particularly to the
prayers of the ministers of religion, or the elders of the church, but
refers to it as a duty pertaining to all Christians.

That ye may be healed - Not with reference to death, and therefore not
relating to "extreme unction," but in order that the sick maybe restored
again to health. This is said in connection with the duty of confession,
as well as prayer; and it seems to be implied that both might contribute
to a restoration to health. Of the way in which prayer would do this,
there can be no doubt; for all healing comes from God, and it is
reasonable to suppose that this might be bestowed in answer to prayer.
Of the way in which confession might do this, see the remarks already
made. We should be deciding without evidence if we should say that
sickness never comes now as a particular judgment for some forms of sin,
and that it might not be removed if the suffering offender would make
full confession to God, or to him whom he has wronged, and should
resolve to offend no more. Perhaps this is, oftener than we suppose, one
of the methods which God takes to bring his offending and backsliding
children back to himself, or to warn and reclaim the guilty. When, after
being laid on a bed of pain, his children are led to reflect on their
violated vows and their unfaithfulness, and resolve to sin no more, they
are raised up again to health, and made eminently useful to the church.
So calamity, by disease or in other forms, often comes upon the vicious
and the abandoned. They are led to reflection and to repentance. They
resolve to reform, and the natural effects of their sinful course are
arrested, and they become examples of virtue and usefulness in the
world.

The effectual fervent prayer - The word effectual is not the most happy
translation here, since it seems to do little more than to state a
truism - that a prayer which is effectual is availing - that is, that it
is effectual. The Greek word (ἐνεργουμένη energoumenē) would be better
rendered by the word energetic, which indeed is derived from it. The
word properly refers to that which has power; which in its own nature is
fitted to produce an effect. It is not so much that it actually does
produce an effect, as that it is fitted to do it. This is the kind of
prayer referred to here. It is not listless, indifferent, cold,
lifeless, as if there were no vitality in it, or power, but that which
is adapted to be efficient - earnest, sincere, hearty, persevering.
There is but a single word in the original to answer to the translation
effectual fervent. Macknight and Doddridge suppose that the reference is
to a kind of prayer "inwrought by the Spirit," or the "inwrought
prayer;" but the whole force of the original is expressed by the word
energetic, or earnest.

Of a righteous man - The quality on which the success of the prayer
depends is not the talent, learning, rank, wealth, or office of the man
who prays, but the fact that he is a "righteous man," that is, a good
man; and this may be found in the ranks of the poor, as certainly as the
rich; among laymen, as well as among the ministers of religion; among
slaves, as well as among their masters.

Availeth much - ἰσχύει ischuei. Is strong; has efficacy; prevails. The
idea of strength or power is that which enters into the word; strength
that overcomes resistance and secures the object. Compare [Mat
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#028.md); [Act
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#016.md); [Rev
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#008.md). It has been said that "prayer
moves the arm that moves the world;" and if there is anything that can
prevail with God, it is prayer - humble, fervent, earnest petitioning.
We have no power to control him; we cannot dictate or prescribe to him;
we cannot resist him in the execution of his purposes; but we may asK
him for what we desire, and he has graciously said that such asking may
effect much for our own good and the good of our fellow-men. Nothing has
been more clearly demonstrated in the history of the world than that
prayer is effectual in obtaining blessings from God, and in
accomplishing great and valuable purposes. It has indeed no intrinsic
power; but God has graciously purposed that his favor shall be granted
to those who call upon him, and that what no mere human power can effect
should be produced by his power in answer to prayer.

[James 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jam 5:17</span></span>

Elias - The common way of writing the word "Elijah" in the New
Testament, [Mat 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#014.md); [Mat
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#014.md); [Mat
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#003.md), etc.

Was a man subject to like passions as we are - This does not mean that
Elijah was passionate in the sense in which that word is now commonly
used; that is, that he was excitable or irritable, or that he was the
victim of the same corrupt passions and propensities to which other men
are subject; but that he was like affected; that he was capable of
suffering the same things, or being affected in the same manner. In
other words, he was a mere man, subject to the same weaknesses and
infirmities as other men. Compare the notes at [Act
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#015.md). The apostle is illustrating the
efficacy of prayer. In doing this, he refers to an undoubted case where
prayer had such efficacy. But to this it might be objected that Elijah
was a distinguished prophet, and that it was reasonable to suppose that
his prayer would be heard. It might be said that his example could not
be adduced to prove that the prayers of those who were not favored with
such advantages would be heard; and especially that it could not be
argued from his case that the prayers of the ignorant, and of the weak,
and of children and of servants, would be answered. To meet this, the
apostle says that he was a mere man, with the same natural propensities
and infirmities as other men, and that therefore his case is one which
should encourage all to pray. It was an instance of the efficacy of
prayer, and not an illustration of the power of a prophet.

And he prayed earnestly - Greek, "He prayed with prayer" - a Hebraism,
to denote that he prayed earnestly. Compare [Luk
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#015.md). This manner of speaking is
common in Hebrew. Compare [Sa1 26:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#025.md);
[Psa 118:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#018.md); [Lam
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#002.md). The reference here is undoubtedly
to [Kg1 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001.md). In that place, however,
it is not said that Elijah prayed, but that he said, "As the Lord God of
Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain
these three years, but according to my word." Either James interprets
this as a prayer, because it could be accomplished only by prayer, or he
states what had been banded down by tradition as the way in which the
miracle was effected. There can be no reasonable doubt that prayer was
employed in the case, for even the miracles of the Saviour were
accomplished in connection with prayer, [Joh
11:41-42](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#041.md).

That it might not rain - Not to gratify any private resentment of his,
but as a punishment on the land for the idolatry which prevailed in the
time of Ahab. Famine was one of the principal methods by which God
punished his people for their sins.

And it rained not on the earth - On the land of Palestine, for so the
word earth is frequently understood in the Bible. See the notes at [Luk
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001.md). There is no reason to suppose
that the famine extended beyond the country that was subject to Ahab.

By the space - For the time.

Of three years and six months - See this explained in the notes at [Luk
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#025.md). Compare Lightfoot, Horae
Hebraicae, on [Luk 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#025.md).

[James 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jam 5:18</span></span>

And he prayed again - The allusion here seems to be to [Kg1
18:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#042.md), [Kg1
18:45](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#045.md), though it is not expressly said
there that he prayed. Perhaps it might be fairly gathered from the
narrative that he did pray, or at least that would be the presumption,
for he put himself into a natural attitude of prayer. "He cast himself
down upon the earth, and put his face between his knees," [Kg1
18:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#042.md). In such circumstances, it is to
be fairly presumed that such a man would pray; but it is remarkable that
it is not expressly mentioned, and quite as remarkable that James should
have made his argument turn on a thing which is not expressly mentioned,
but which seems to have been a matter of inference. It seems probable to
me, therefore, that there was some tradition on which he relied, or that
it was a common interpretation of the passage in 1 Kings, that Elijah
prayed earnestly, and that this was generally believed by those to whom
the apostle wrote. Of the fact that Elijah was a man of prayer, no one
could doubt; and in these circumstances the tradition and common belief
were sufficient to justify the argument which is employed here.

And the heaven gave rain - The clouds gave rain. "The heaven was black
with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain," [Kg1
18:45](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#045.md).

And the earth brought forth her fruit - The famine ceased, and the land
again became productive. The case referred to here was indeed a miracle,
but it was a case of the power of prayer, and therefore to the point. If
God would work a miracle in answer to prayer, it is reasonable to
presume that he will bestow upon us the blessings which we need in the
same way.

[James 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jam 5:19</span></span>

Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth - Either doctrinally and
speculatively, by embracing error; or practically, by falling into
sinful practices. Either of these may be called "erring from the truth,"
because they are contrary to what the truth teaches and requires. What
is here said does not appear to have any connection with what precedes,
but the apostle seems to have supposed that such a case might occur;
and, in the conclusion of the Epistle, he called their attention to the
importance of endeavoring to save an erring brother, if such an instance
should happen. The exhortation would be proper in addressing a letter to
any church, or in publicly addressing any congregation.

And one convert him - This does not mean "convert him as a sinner, or
regenerate him," but turn him from the error of his way; bring him back
from his wanderings; re-establish him in the truth, and in the practice
of virtue and religion. So far as the word used here is concerned,
ἐπιστρέψῃ epistrepsē he who had erred from the truth, and who was to be
converted, may have been a true Christian before. The word means simply
to turn, sc., from his way of error. See the notes at [Luk
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#032.md).

[James 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jam 5:20</span></span>

Let him know - Let him who converts the other know for his
encouragement.

That he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way - Any
sinner; anyone who has done wrong. This is a general principle,
applicable to this case and to all others of the same kind. It is a
universal truth that he who turns a sinner from a wicked path does a
work which is acceptable to God, and which will in some way receive
tokens of his approbation. Compare [Deu
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#003.md). No work which man can perform is
more acceptable to God; none will be followed with higher rewards. In
the language which is used here by the apostle, it is evidently intended
not to deny that success in converting a sinner, or in reclaiming one
from the error of his ways, is to be traced to the grace of God; but the
apostle here refers only to the divine feeling towards the individual
who shall attempt it, and the rewards which he may hope to receive. The
reward bestowed, the good intended and done, would be the same as if the
individual were able to do the work himself. God approves and loves his
aims and efforts, though the success is ultimately to be traced to
himself.

Shall save a soul from death - It has been doubted whether this refers
to his own soul, or to the soul of him who is converted. Several
manuscripts, and the Vulgate, Syriac, Arabic, and Coptic versions, here
read: "his soul." The most natural interpretation of the passage is to
refer it to the soul of the one converted, rather than of him who
converts him. This accords better with the uniform teaching of the New
Testament, since it is nowhere else taught that the method of saving our
souls is by converting others; and this interpretation will meet all
that the scope of the passage demands. The object of the apostle is to
present a motive for endeavoring to convert one who has wandered away;
and assuredly a sufficient motive for that is furnished in the fact,
that by this means an immortal soul would be saved from eternal ruin.
The word death here must refer to eternal death, or to future
punishment. There is no other death which the soul is in danger of
dying. The body dies and moulders away, but the soul is immortal. The
apostle cannot mean that he would save the soul from annihilation, for
it is in no danger of that. This passage proves, then, that there is a
death which the soul may die; that there is a condition which may
properly be called death as a consequence of sin; and that the soul will
suffer that unless it is converted.

And shall hide a multitude of sins - Shall cover them over so that they
shall not be seen; that is, they shall not be punished. This must mean
either the sins which he has committed who is thus converted and saved,
or the sins of him who converts him. Whichever is the meaning, a strong
motive is presented for endeavoring to save a sinner from the error of
his ways. It is not easy to determine which is the true sense.
Expositors have been about equally divided respecting the meaning.
Doddridge adopts substantially both interpretations, paraphrasing it,
"not only procuring the pardon of those committed by the convert, but
also engaging God to look with greater indulgence on his own character,
and to be less ready to mark severely what he has done amiss." The Jews
regarded it as a meritorious act to turn a sinner from the error of his
ways, and it is possible that James may have had some of their maxims in
his eye. Compare Clarke, in loc. Though it may not be possible to
determine with certainty whether the apostle here refers to the sins of
him who converts another, or of him who is converted, yet it seems to me
that the reference is probably to the latter, for the following reasons:

\(1\) Such an interpretation will meet all that is fairly implied in the
language.

\(2\) this interpretation will furnish a strong motive for what the
apostle expects us to do. The motive presented is, according to this,
that sin will not be punished. But this is always a good motive for
putting forth efforts in the cause of religion, and quite as powerful
when drawn from our doing good to others as when applied to ourselves.

\(3\) this is a safe interpretation; the other is attended with danger.
According to this, the effort would be one of pure benevolence, and
there would be no danger of depending on what we do as a ground of
acceptance with God. The other interpretation would seem to teach that
our sins might be forgiven on some other ground than that of the
atonement - by virtue of some act of our own.

\(4\) and there might be danger, if it be supposed that this refers to
the fact that our sins are to be covered up by this act, of supposing
that by endeavoriug to convert others we may live in sin with impunity;
that however we live, we shall be safe if we lead others to repentance
and salvation.

If the motive be the simple desire to hide the sins of others - to
procure their pardon - to save a soul from death, without any
supposition that by that we are making an atonement for our own sins -
it is a good one, a safe one. But if the idea is that by this act we are
making some atonement for our own offences, and that we may thus work
out a righteousness of our own, the idea is one that is every way
dangerous to the great doctrine of justification by faith, and is
contrary to the whole teaching of the Bible. For these reasons it seems
to me that the true interpretation is, that the passage refers to the
sins of others, not our own; and that the simple motive here presented
is, that in this way we may save a fellow-sinner from being punished for
his sins. It may be added, in the conclusion of the notes at this
Epistle, that this motive is one which is sufficient to stimulate us to
great and constant efforts to save others. Sin is the source of all the
evil in the universe: and the great object which a benevolent heart
ought to have, should be that its desolating effects may be stayed; that
the sinner may be pardoned; and that the guilty soul may be saved from
its consequences in the future world. This is the design of God in the
plan of redemption; this was the object of the Saviour in giving himself
to die; this is the purpose of the Holy Spirit in renewing and
sanctifying the soul; and this is the great end of all those acts of
Divine Providence by which the sinner is warned and turned to God. When
we come to die, as we shall soon, it will give us more pleasure to be
able to recollect that we have been the means of saying one soul from
death, than to have enjoyed all the pleasures which sense can furnish,
or to have gained all the honor and wealth which the world can give.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Introduction](pe1000.md)

</div>
