<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](jam001)  [Next](jam003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001)

[James](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jam 2:0</span></span>

This chapter is evidently made up of three parts, or three subjects are
discussed:

I. The duty of impartiality in the treatment of others, [Jam
2:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001). There was to be no favoritism
on account of rank, birth, wealth, or apparel. The case to which the
apostle refers for an illustration of this, is that where two persons
should come into an assembly of Christian worshippers, one elegantly
dressed, and the other meanly clad, and they should show special favor
to the former, and should assign to the latter a more humble place. The
reasons which the apostle assigns why they should not do this are,

\(a\) that God has chosen the poor for his own people, having selected
his friends mainly from them;

\(b\) because rich men in fact oppressed them, and showed that they were
worthy of no special regard;

\(c\) because they were often found among revilers, and in fact despised
their religion; and,

\(d\) because the law required that they should love their neighbors as
themselves, and if they did this, it was all that was demanded; that is,
that the love of the man was not to be set aside by the love of splendid
apparel.

II\. The duty of yielding obedience to the whole law in order to have
evidence of true religion, [Jam
2:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010). This subject seems to have
been introduced in accordance with the general principles and aims of
James (see the Introduction) that religion consists in obeying the law
of God, and that there can be none when this is not done. It is not
improbable that, among those to whom he wrote, there were some who
denied this, or who had embraced some views of religion which led them
to doubt it. He therefore enforces the duty by the following
considerations:

\(1\) That if a man should obey every part of the law, and yet be guilty
of offending in one point, he was in fact guilty of all; for he showed
that he had no genuine principle of obedience, and was guilty of
violating the law as a whole, [Jam
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010).

\(2\) every part of the law rests on the same authority, and one part,
therefore, is as binding as another. The same God that has forbidden
murder, has also forbidden adultery; and he who does the one as really
violates the law as he who does the other, [Jam
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#011).

\(3\) the judgment is before us, and we shall be tried on impartial
principles, not with reference to obeying one part of the law, but with
reference to its whole claim; and we should so act as becomes those who
expect to be judged by the whole law, or on the question whether we have
conformed to every part of it, [Jam
2:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#012).

III\. The subject of justification, showing that works are necessary in
order that a man may be justified, or esteemed righteous before God,
[Jam 2:14-26](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#014). For a general view of
the design of this part of the Epistle, see Introduction, Section 5. The
object here is to show that in fact no one can be regarded as truly
righteous before God who does not lead an upright life; and that if a
man professes to have faith, and has not works, he cannot be justified;
or that if he have real faith, it will be shown by his works. If it is
not shown by works corresponding to its nature, it will be certain that
there is no true religion, or that his professed faith is worth nothing.
The "stand-point" from which James views the subject, is not that faith
is unnecessary or worthless, or that a man is not justified by faith
rather than by his own works, in the sense of its being the ground of
acceptance with God; or, in other words, the place where the apostle
takes his position, and which is the point from which he views the
subject, is not before a man is justified, to inquire in what way he may
be accepted of God, but it is after the act of justification by faith,
to show that if faith does not lead to good works it is "dead," or is of
no value; and that in fact, therefore, the evidence of justification is
to be found in good living, and that when this is not manifest, all a
man's professed religion is worth nothing. In doing this, he:

\(a\) makes the general statement, by a pointed interrogatory, that
faith cannot profit, that is, cannot save a man, unless there be also
works, [Jam 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#014). He then:

\(b\) appeals, for an illustration, to the case of one who is hungry or
naked, and asks what mere faith could do in his case, if it were not
accompanied with proper acts of benevolence, [Jam
2:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#015). He then,

\(c\) by a strong supposable case, says that real faith will be evinced
by works, or that works are the proper evidence of its existence, [Jam
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#018). He then.

\(d\) shows that there is a kind of faith which even the devils have on
one of the most important doctrines of religion, and which can be of no
value; showing that it cannot be by mere faith, irrespective of the
question of what sort the faith is, that a man is to be saved, [Jam
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#019). He then.

\(e\) appeals to the case of Abraham showing that in fact works
performed an important part in his acceptance with God; or that if it
had not been for his works - that is, if there had been no spirit of
true obedience in his case, he could have had no evidence that he was
justified, or that his works were the proper carrying out or fulfillment
of his faith, [Jam 2:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#020). He then:

\(f\) shows that the same thing was true of another case recorded in the
Old Testament - that of Rahab [Jam
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#025); and then observes [Jam
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#026) that faith without works would
have no more claim to being true religion than a dead body, without a
soul, would be regarded as a living man.

[James 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 2:1</span></span>

My brethren - Perhaps meaning brethren in two respects - as Jews, and as
Christians. In both respects the form of address would be proper.

Have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ - Faith is the
distinguishing thing in the Christian religion, for it is this by which
man is justified, and hence, it comes to be put for religion itself.
Notes, [Ti1 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#009). The meaning here is,
"do not hold such views of the religion of Christ, as to lead you to
manifest partiality to others on account of their difference of rank or
outward circumstances."

The Lord of glory - The glorious Lord; he who is glorious himself, and
who is encompassed with glory. See the notes at [Co1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008). The design here seems to be to
show that the religion of such a Lord should be in no way dishonored.

With respect of persons - That is, you are not to show respect of
persons, or to evince partiality to others on account of their rank,
wealth, apparel, etc. Compare [Pro
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#023); [Pro
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#021); [Lev
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#015); [Deu
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#017); [Deu
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017); [Ch2
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#007); [Psa
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#004). See the subject explained in the
[Act 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034) note; [Rom
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#011) note.

[James 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jam 2:2</span></span>

For if there come into your assembly - Margin, as in Greek, "synagogue."
It is remarkable that this is the only place in the New Testament where
the word "synagogue" is applied to the Christian church. It is probably
employed here because the apostle was writing to those who had been
Jews; and it is to be presumed that the word synagogue would be
naturally used by the early converts from Judaism to designate a
Christian place of worship, or a Christian congregation, and it was
probably so employed until it was superseded by a word which the Gentile
converts would be more likely to employ, and which would, in fact, be
better and more expressive - the word church. The word "synagogue"
(συναγωγὴν sunagōgēn) would properly refer to the whole congregation,
considered as "assembled together," without respect to the question
whether all were truly pious or not; the word "church" (ἐκκλησία
ekklēsia) would refer to the assembly convened for worship as called
out, referring to the fact that they were called out from the world, and
convened as worshippers of God, and would, therefore, be more applicable
to a body of spiritual worshippers.

It is probable that the Christian church was modelled, in its general
arrangements, after the Jewish synagogue; but there would be obviously
some disadvantages in retaining the name, as applicable to Christian
worship. It would be difficult to avoid the associations connected with
the name, and hence it was better to adopt some other name which would
be free from this disadvantage, and on which might be engrafted all the
ideas which it was necessary to connect with the notion of the Christian
organization. Hence the word "church," liable to no such objection as
that of "synagogue," was soon adopted, and ultimately prevailed, though
the passage before us shows that the word "synagogue" would be in some
places, and for a time, employed to designate a Christian congregation.
We should express the idea here by saying. "If a man of this description
should come into the church."

A man with a gold ring - Indicative of rank or property. Rings were
common ornaments of the rich; and probably then, as now, of those who
desired to be esteemed to be rich. For proof that they were commonly
worn, see the quotations in Wetstein, in loc.

In goodly apparel - Rich and splendid dress. Compare [Luk
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019).

A poor man in vile raiment - The Greek here is, filthy, foul; the
meaning of the passage is, in sordid, shabby clothes. The reference here
seems to be, not to those who commonly attended on public worship, or
who were members of the church, but to those who might accidentally drop
in to witness the services of Christians. See [Co1
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#024).

[James 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jam 2:3</span></span>

And ye have respect to him that weareth the gay clothing - If you show
him superior attention on account of his rich and gay apparel, giving
him a seat by himself, and treating others with neglect or contempt.
Religion does not forbid proper respect to rank, to office, to age, or
to distinguished talents and services, though even in such cases it does
not require that we should feel that such persons have any peculiar
claims to salvation, or that they are not on a level with all others, as
sinners before God; it does not forbid that a man who has the means of
procuring for himself an eligible pew in a church should be permitted to
do so; but it requires that men shall be regarded and treated according
to their moral worth, and not according to their external adorning; that
all shall be considered as in fact on a level before God, and entitled
to the privileges which grow out of the worship of the Creator. A
stranger coming into any place of worship, no matter what his rank,
dress, or complexion, should be treated with respect, and everything
should be done that can be to win his heart to the service of God.

And say unto him, Sit thou here in a good place - Margin, as in Greek,
"well" or "seemly;" that is, in an honorable place near the pulpit; or
in some elevated place where he would be conspicuous. The meaning is,
you treat him with distinguished marks of respect on the first
appearance, merely from the indications that he is a rich man, without
knowing any thing about his character.

And say to the poor, Stand thou there - Without even the civility of
offering him a seat at all. This may be presumed not often to occur in a
Christian church; yet it practically does sometimes, when no disposition
is evinced to furnish a stranger with a seat.

Or sit here under my footstool - Perhaps some seats in the places of
worship were raised, so that even the footstool would be elevated above
a lower seat. The meaning is, that he would be treated as if he were not
worth the least attention.

[James 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jam 2:4</span></span>

Are ye not then partial in yourselves? - Among yourselves. Do you not
show that you are partial?

And are become judges of evil thoughts - There has been considerable
difference of opinion respecting this passage, yet the sense seems not
to be difficult. There are two ideas in it: one is, that they showed by
this conduct that they took it upon themselves to be judges, to
pronounce on the character of men who were strangers, and on their
claims to respect (Compare [Mat 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001));
the other is, that in doing this, they were not guided by just rules,
but that they did it under the influence of improper "thoughts." They
did it not from benevolence; not from a desire to do justice to all
according to their moral character; but from that improper feeling which
leads us to show honor to men on account of their external appearance,
rather than their real worth. The wrong in the case was in their
presuming to "judge" these strangers at all, as they practically did by
making this distinction, and then by doing it under the influence of
such an unjust rule of judgment. The sense is, that we have no right to
form a decisive judgment of men on their first appearance, as we do when
we treat one with respect and the other not; and that when we make up
our opinion in regard to them, it should be by some other means of
judging than the question whether they can wear gold rings, and dress
well, or not. Beza and Doddridge render this, "ye become judges who
reason ill."

[James 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jam 2:5</span></span>

Hearken, my beloved brethren - The apostle now proceeds to show that the
rich, as such, had no special claim on their favor, and that the poor in
fact might be made more entitled to esteem than they were. For a view of
the arguments by which he does this, compare the analysis of the
chapter.

Hath not God chosen the poor of this world? - Those who are poor so far
as this world is concerned, or those who have not wealth. This is the
first argument which the apostle suggests why the poor should not be
treated with neglect. It is, that God has had special reference to them
in choosing those who should be his children. The meaning is not that he
is not as willing to save the rich as the poor, for he has no
partiality; but that there are circumstances in the condition of the
poor which make it more likely that they will embrace the offers of the
gospel than the rich; and that in fact the great mass of believers is
taken from those who are in comparatively humble life. Compare the notes
at [Co1 1:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026). The fact that God has
chosen one to be an "heir of the kingdom" is as good a reason now why he
should not be treated with neglect, as it was in the times of the
apostles.

Rich in faith - Though poor in this world's goods, they are rich in a
higher and more important sense. They have faith in God their Saviour;
and in this world of trial and of sin, that is a more valuable
possession than piles of hoarded silver or gold. A man who has that is
sure that he will have all that is truly needful for him in this world
and the next; a man who has it not, though he may have the wealth of
Croesus, will be utterly without resources in respect to the great wants
of his existence.

"Give what thou wilt, without thee we are poor;

And with thee rich, take what thou wilt away."

Faith in God the Saviour will answer more purposes, and accomplish more
valuable ends for man, than the wealth of the Indies could: and this the
poor may have as well as the rich. Compare [Rev
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#009).

And heirs of the kingdom ... - Margin, "that." Compare the notes at [Mat
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003).

[James 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jam 2:6</span></span>

But ye have despised the poor - Koppe reads this as an interrogation:
"Do ye despise the poor?" Perhaps it might be understood somewhat
ironically: "You despise the poor, do you, and are disposed to honor the
rich! Look then, and see how the rich treat you, and see whether you
have so much occasion to regard them with any peculiar respect." The
object of the apostle is to fix the attention on the impropriety of that
partiality which many were disposed to show to the rich, by reminding
them that the rich had never evinced towards them any such treatment as
to lay the foundation of a claim to the honor which they were disposed
to render them.

Do not rich men oppress you? - Referring probably to something in their
conduct which existed particularly then. The meaning is not that they
oppressed the poor as such, but that they oppressed those whom James
addressed. It is probable that then, as since, a considerable portion of
those who were Christians were in fact poor, and that this would have
all the force of a personal appeal; but still the particular thought is,
that it was a characteristic of the rich and the great, whom they were
disposed peculiarly to honor, to oppress and crush the poor. The Greek
here is very expressive: "Do they not imperiously lord it over you?" The
statement here will apply with too much force to the rich in every age.

And draw you before the judgment-seats - That is, they are your
persecutors rather than your friends. It was undoubtedly the case that
many of the rich were engaged in persecuting Christians, and that on
various pretences they dragged them before the judicial tribunals.

[James 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jam 2:7</span></span>

Do they not blaspheme that worthy name? - This is another argument to
show that the rich had no special claim to the honor which they were
disposed to show them. The "worthy name" here referred to is, doubtless,
the name of the Saviour. The thing here affirmed would, of course,
accompany persecution. They who persecuted Christians, would revile the
name which they bore. This has always occurred. But besides this, it is
no improbable supposition that many of those who were not disposed to
engage in open persecution, would revile the name of Christ, by speaking
contemptuously of him and his religion. This has been sufficiently
common in every age of the world, to make the description here not
improper. And yet nothing has been more remarkable than the very thing
adverted to here by James, that notwithstanding this, many who profess
to be Christians have been more disposed to treat even such persons with
respect and attention than they have their own brethren, if they were
poor; that they have cultivated the favor, sought the friendship,
desired the smiles, aped the manners, and coveted the society of such
persons, rather than the friendship and the favor of their poorer
Christian brethren. Even though they are known to despise religion in
their hearts, and not to be sparing of their words of reproach and scorn
towards Christianity; though they are known to be blasphemers, and to
have the most thorough contempt for serious, spiritual religion, yet
there is many a professing Christian who would prefer to be at a party
given by such persons than at a prayer-meeting where their poorer
brethren are assembled; who would rather be known by the world to be the
associates and friends of such persons, than of those humble believers
who can make no boast of rank or wealth, and who are looked down upon
with contempt by the great and the gay.

[James 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jam 2:8</span></span>

If ye fulfil the royal law - That is, the law which he immediately
mentions requiring us to love our neighbor as ourselves. It is called a
"royal law," or kingly law, on account of its excellence or nobleness;
not because it is ordained by God as a king, but because it has some
such prominence and importance among other laws as a king has among
other men; that is, it is majestic, noble, worthy of veneration. It is a
law which ought to govern and direct us in all our intercourse with men
- as a king rules his subjects.

According to the Scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself -
[Lev 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018). Compare [Mat
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#019). See it explained by the
Saviour, in the parable of the good Samaritan, [Luk
10:25-37](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#025). In regard to its meaning,
see the notes at [Mat 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#019).

Ye do well - That is, "if you fairly comply with the spirit of this law,
you do all that is required of you in regulating your intercourse with
others. You are to regard all persons as your "neighbors," and are to
treat them according to their real worth; you are not to be influenced
in judging of them, or in your treatment of them, by their apparel, or
their complexion, or the circumstances of their birth, but by the fact
that they are fellow-beings." This is another reason why they should not
show partiality in their treatment of others, for if, in the true sense,
they regarded all others as "neighbors," they would treat no one with
neglect or contempt.

[James 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jam 2:9</span></span>

But if ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin - You transgress the
plain law of God, and do wrong. See the references on [Jam
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001).

And are convinced of the law as transgressors - Greek "By the law." The
word convinced is now used in a somewhat different sense from what it
was formerly. It now commonly refers to the impression made on a man's
mind by showing him the truth of a thing which before was doubted, or in
respect to which the evidence was not clear. A man who doubted the truth
of a report or a proposition may be convinced or satisfied of its truth;
a man who has done wrong, though he supposed he was doing what was
proper, may be convinced of his error. So a man may be convinced that he
is a sinner, though before he had no belief of it, and no concern about
it; and this may produce in his mind the feeling which is technically
known as conviction, producing deep distress and anguish. See the notes
at [Joh 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008). Here, however, the word
does not refer so much to the effect produced on the mind itself, as to
the fact that the law would hold such an one to be guilty; that is, the
law pronounces what is done to be wrong. Whether they would be
personally convinced of it, and troubled about it as convicted sinners,
would be a different question, and one to which the apostle does not
refer; for his object is not to show that they would be troubled about
it, but to show that the law of God condemned this course, and would
hold them to be guilty. The argument here is not from the personal
distress which this course would produce in their own minds, but from
the fact that the law of God condemned it.

[James 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jam 2:10</span></span>

For whosoever shall keep the whole law - All except the single point
referred to. The apostle does not say that this in fact ever did occur,
but he says that if it should, and yet a man should have failed in only
one particular, he must be judged to be guilty. The case supposed seems
to be that of one who claimed that he had kept the whole law. The
apostle says that even if this should be admitted for the time to be
true in all other respects, yet, if he had failed in any one particular
- in showing respect to persons, or in anything else - he could not but
be held to be a transgressor, The design of this is to show the
importance of yielding universal obedience, and to impress upon the mind
a sense of the enormity of sin from the fact that the violation of any
one precept is in fact an offence against the whole law of God. The
whole law here means all the law of God; all that he has required; all
that he has given to regulate us in our lives.

And yet offend in one point - In one respect; or shall violate any one
of the commands included in the general word law. The word offend here
means, properly, to stumble, to fall; then to err, or fail in duty. See
the notes at [Mat 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029); [Mat
26:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#031).

He is guilty of all - He is guilty of violating the law as a whole, or
of violating the law of God as such; he has rendered it impossible that
he should be justified and saved by the law. This does not affirm that
he is as guilty as if he had violated every law of God; or that all
sinners are of equal grade because all have violated some one or more of
the laws of God; but the meaning is, that he is guilty of violating the
law of God as such; he shows that be has not the true spirit of
obedience; he has exposed himself to the penalty of the law, and made it
impossible now to be saved by it. His acts of obedience in other
respects, no matter how many, will not screen him from the charge of
being a violator of the law, or from its penalty. He must be held and
treated as a transgressor for that offence, however upright he may be in
other respects, and must meet the penalty of the law as certainly as
though he had violated every commandment.

One portion of the law is as much binding as another, and if a man
violates any one plain commandment, he sets at nought the authority of
God. This is a simple principle which is everywhere recognised, and the
apostle means no more by it than occurs every day. A man who has stolen
a horse is held to be a violator of the law, no matter in how many other
respects he has kept it, and the law condemns him for it. He cannot
plead his obedience to the law in other things as a reason why he should
not be punished for this sin; but however upright he may have been in
general, even though it may have been through a long life, the law holds
him to be a transgressor, and condemns him. He is as really condemned,
and as much thrown from the protection of law, as though he had violated
every command. So of murder, arson, treason, or any other crime. The law
judges a man for what he has done in this specific case, and he cannot
plead in justification of it that he has been obedient in other things.

It follows, therefore, that if a man has been guilty of violating the
law of God in any one instance, or is not perfectly holy, he cannot be
justified and saved by it, though he should have obeyed it in every
other respect, any more than a man who has been guilty of murder can be
saved from the gallows because he has, in other respects, been a good
citizen, a kind father, an honest neighbor, or has been compassionate to
the poor and the needy. He cannot plead his act of truth in one case as
an offset to the sin of falsehood in another; he cannot defend himself
from the charge of dishonesty in one instance by the plea that he has
been honest in another; he cannot urge the fact that he has done a good
thing as a reason why he should not be punished for a bad one. He must
answer for the specific charge against him, and none of these other
things can be an offset against this one act of wrong. Let it be
remarked, also, in respect to our being justified by obedience to the
law, that no man can plead before God that he has kept all his law
except in one point. Who is there that has not, in spirit at least,
broken each one of the ten commandments? The sentiment here expressed by
James was not new with him. It was often expressed by the Jewish
writers, and seems to have been an admitted principle among the Jews.
See Wetstein, in loc., for examples.

[James 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jam 2:11</span></span>

For he that said, Do not commit adultery, said also, Do not kill - That
is, these are parts of the same law of God, and one is as obligatory as
the other. If, therefore, you violate either of these precepts, you
transgress the law of God as such, and must be held to be guilty of
violating it as a whole. The penalty of the law will be incurred,
whatever precept you violate.

[James 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jam 2:12</span></span>

So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law of
liberty - On the phrase, "the law of liberty," see the notes at [Jam
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#025). Compare the notes at [Jam
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#011). The meaning is, that in all our
conduct we are to act under the constant impression of the truth that we
are soon to be brought into judgment, and that the law by which we are
to be judged is that by which it is contemplated that we shall be set
free from the dominion of sin. In the rule which God has laid down in
his word, called "the law of liberty," or the rule by which true freedom
is to be secured, a system of religion is revealed by which it is
designed that man shall be emancipated not only from one sin, but from
all. Now, it is with reference to such a law that we are to be judged;
that is, we shall not be able to plead on our trial that we were under a
necessity of sinning, but we shall be judged under that law by which the
arrangement was made that we might be free from sin. If we might be free
from sin; if an arrangement was made by which we could have led holy
lives, then it will be proper that we shall be judged and condemned if
we are not righteous. The sense is, "In all your conduct, whatever you
do or say, remember that you are to be judged, or that you are to give
an impartial account; and remember also that the rule by which you are
to be judged is that by which provision is made for being delivered from
the dominion of sin, and brought into the freedom of the gospel." The
argument here seems to be, that he who habitually feels that he is soon
to be judged by a law under which it was contemplated that he might be,
and should be, free from the bondage of sin, has one of the strongest of
all inducements to lead a holy life.

[James 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jam 2:13</span></span>

For he shall have judgment without mercy, that hath showed no mercy -
This is obviously an equitable principle, and is one which is everywhere
found in the Bible. [Pro 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#013). "Whoso
stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself but
will not be heard." [Sa2 22:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#026),
"with the merciful thou wilt show thyself merciful, and with the froward
thou wilt show thyself unsavory." Compare [Psa
18:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#025); [Mat
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#015); [Mat
7:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001). The idea which the apostle
seems to design to convey here is, that there will certainly be a
judgment, and that we must expect that it will be conducted on equitable
principles; that no mercy is to be shown when the character is not such
that it will be proper that it should be; and that we should habitually
feel in our conduct that God will be impartial, and should frame our
lives accordingly.

And mercy rejoiceth against judgment - Margin, "glorieth." Greek Boasts,
glories, or exults. The idea is that of glorying over, as where one is
superior to another, or has gained a victory over another. The reference
all along here is to the judgment, the trial of the great day; and the
apostle is stating the principles on which the trial at that day will be
conducted - on which one class shall be condemned, and the other
acquitted and saved. In reference to one class, the wicked, he says that
where there has been no mercy shown to others - referring to this as one
evidence of piety - that is, where there is no true piety, there will be
judgment without mercy; in the other case there will be, as it were, a
triumph of mercy, or mercy will appear to have gained a victory over
judgment. Strict justice would indeed plead for their condemnation, but
the attribute of mercy will triumph, and they will be acquitted.

The attributes of mercy and justice would seem to come in conflict, but
mercy would prevail. This is a true statement of the plan of salvation,
and of what actually occurs in the redemption of a sinner. Justice
demands, as what is her due, that the sinner should be condemned; mercy
pleads that he may be saved - and mercy prevails. It is not uncommon
that there seems to be a conflict between the two. In the dispensations
of justice before human tribunals, this often occurs. Strict justice
demands the punishment of the offender; and yet there are cases when
mercy pleads, and when every man feels that it would be desirable that
pardon should be extended to the guilty, and when we always rejoice if
mercy triumphs. In such a case, for example, as that of Major Andre,
this is strikingly seen. On the one hand, there was the undoubted proof
that he was guilty; that he had been taken as a spy; that by the laws of
war he ought to be put to death; that as what he had done had tended to
the ruin of the American cause, and as such an act, if unpunished, would
always expose an army to surprise and destruction, he ought, in
accordance with the law of nations, to die.

On the other hand, there were his youth, his high attainments, his
honorable connections, his brilliant hopes, all pleading that he might
live, and that he might be pardoned. In the bosom of Washington, the
promptings of justice and mercy thus came into collision. Both could not
be gratified, and there seemed to be but one course to be pursued. His
sense of justice was shown in the act by which he signed the
death-warrant; his feelings of compassion in the fact that when he did
it his eyes poured forth a flood of tears. How every generous feeling of
our nature would have been gratified if mercy could have triumphed, and
the youthful and accomplished officer could have been spared! In the
plan of salvation, this does occur. Respect is done to justice, but
mercy triumphs. Justice indeed pleaded for the condemnation of the
sinner, but mercy interposed, and he is saved. Justice is not
disregarded, for the great Redeemer of mankind has done all that is
needful to uphold it; but there is the most free and full exercise of
mercy, and, while the justice of God is maintained, every benevolent
feeling in the breasts of all holy beings can be gratified in the
salvation of countless thousands.

[James 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jam 2:14</span></span>

What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith? - The
apostle here returns to the subject adverted to in [Jam
1:22-27](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#022), the importance of a practical
attention to the duties of religion, and the assurance that men cannot
be saved by a mere speculative opinion, or merely by holding correct
sentiments. He doubtless had in his eye those who abused the doctrine of
justification by faith, by holding that good works are unnecessary to
salvation, provided they maintain an orthodox belief. As this abuse
probably existed in the time of the apostles, and as the Holy Ghost saw
that there would be danger that in later times the great and glorious
doctrine of justification by faith would be thus abused, it was
important that the error should be rebuked, and that the doctrine should
be distinctly laid down that good works are necessary to salvation. The
apostle, therefore, in the question before us, implicitly asserts that
faith would not "profit" at all unless accompanied with a holy life, and
this doctrine he proceeds to illustrate in the following verses, See the
analysis of this chapter; and Introduction, Section 5, (2). In order to
a proper interpretation of this passage, it should be observed that the
stand-point from which the apostle views this subject is not before a
man is converted, inquiring in what way he may be justified before God,
or on what ground his sins may be forgiven; but it is after a man is
converted, showing that that faith can have no value which is not
followed by good works; that is, that it is not real faith, and that
good works are necessary if a man would have evidence that he is
justified. Thus understood, all that James says is in entire accordance
with what is taught elsewhere in the New Testament.

Can faith save him? - It is implied in this question that faith cannot
save him, for very often the most emphatic way of making an affirmation
is by asking a question. The meaning here is, that that faith which does
not produce good works, or which would not produce holy living if fairly
acted out, will save no man, for it is not genuine faith.

[James 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jam 2:15</span></span>

If a brother or sister be naked ... - The comparison in these verses is
very obvious and striking. The sense is, that faith in itself, without
the acts that correspond to it, and to which it would prompt, is as
cold, and heartless, and unmeaning, and useless, as it would be to say
to one who was destitute of the necessaries of life, depart in peace."
In itself considered, it might seem to have something that was good; but
it would answer none of the purposes of faith unless it should prompt to
action. In the case of one who was hungry or naked, what he wanted was
not good wishes or kind words merely, but the acts to which good wishes
and kind words prompt. And so in religion, what is wanted is not merely
the abstract state of mind which would be indicated by faith, but the
life of goodness to which it ought to lead. Good wishes and kind words,
in order to make them what they should be for the welfare of the world,
should be accompanied with corresponding action. So it is with faith. It
is not enough for salvation without the benevolent and holy acts to
which it would prompt, any more than the good wishes and kind words of
the benevolent are enough to satisfy the wants of the hungry, and to
clothe the naked, without correspondent action. Faith is not and cannot
be shown to be genuine, unless it is accompanied with corresponding
acts; as our good wishes for the poor and needy can be shown to be
genuine, when we have the means of aiding them, only by actually
ministering to their necessities. In the one case, our wishes would be
shown to be unmeaning and heartless; in the other, our faith would be
equally so. In regard to this passage, therefore, it may be observed:

\(1\) That in fact faith is of no more value, and has no more evidence
of genuineness when it is unaccompanied with good works, than such empty
wishes for the welfare of the poor would be when unaccompanied with the
means of relieving their wants. Faith is designed to lead to good works.
It is intended to produce a holy life; a life of activity in the service
of the Saviour. This is its very essence; it is what it always produces
when it is genuine. Religion is not designed to be a cold abstraction;
it is to be a living and vivifying principle.

\(2\) there is a great deal of that kindness and charity in the world
which is expressed by mere good wishes. If we really have not the means
of relieving the poor and the needy, then the expression of a kind wish
may be in itself an alleviation to their sorrows, for even sympathy in
such a case is of value, and it is much to us to know that others feel
for us; but if we have the means, and the object is a worthy one, then
such expressions are mere mockery, and aggravate rather than soothe the
feelings of the sufferer. Such wishes will neither clothe nor feed them;
and they will only make deeper the sorrows which we ought to heal. But
how much of this is there in the world, when the sufferer cannot but
feel that all these wishes, however kindly expressed, are hollow and
false, and when he cannot but feel that relief would be easy!

\(3\) in like manner there is much of this same kind of worthless faith
in the world - faith that is dead; faith that produces no good works;
faith that exerts no practical influence whatever on the life. The
individual professes indeed to believe the truths of the gospel; he may
be in the church of Christ; he would esteem it a gross calumny to be
spoken of as an infidel; but as to any influence which his faith exerts
over him, his life would be the same if he had never heard of the
gospel. There is not one of the truths of religion which is bodied forth
in his life; not a deed to which he is prompted by religion; not an act
which could not be accounted for on the supposition that he has no true
piety. In such a case, faith may with propriety be said to be dead.

Being alone - Margin, "by itself." The sense is, "being by itself:" that
is, destitute of any accompanying fruits or results, it shows that it is
dead. That which is alive bodies itself forth, produces effects, makes
itself visible; that which is dead produces no effect, and is as if it
were not.

[James 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jam 2:18</span></span>

Yea, a man may say ... - The word which is rendered "yea" (ἀλλὰ alla)
would be better rendered by "but." The apostle designs to introduce an
objection, not to make an affirmation. The sense is, "some one might
say," or, "to this it might be urged in reply." That is, it might
perhaps be said that religion is not always manifested in the same way,
or we should not suppose that, because it is not always exhibited in the
same form, it does not exist. One man may manifest it in one way, and
another in another, and still both have true piety. One may be
distinguished for his faith, and another for his works, and both may
have real religion. This objection would certainly have some
plausibility, and it was important to meet it. It would seem that all
religion was not to be manifested in the same way, as all virtue is not;
and that it might occur that one man might be particularly eminent for
one form of religion, and another for another; as one man may be
distinguished for zeal, and another for meekness, and another for
integrity, and another for truth, and another for his gifts in prayer,
and another for his large-hearted benevolence. To this the apostle
replies, that the two things referred to, faith and works, were not
independent things, which could exist separately, without the one
materially influencing another - as, for example, charity and chastity,
zeal and meekness; but that the one was the germ or source of the other,
and that the existence of the one was to be known only by its developing
itself in the form of the other. A man could not show that he possessed
the one unless it developed itself in the form of the other. In proof of
this, he could boldly appeal to anyone to show a case where faith
existed without works. He was himself willing to submit to this just
trial in regard to this point, and to demonstrate the existence of his
own faith by his works.

Thou hast faith, and I have works - You have one form or manifestation
of religion in an eminent or prominent degree, and I have another. You
are characterized particularly for one of the virtues of religion, and I
am for another; as one man may be particularly eminent for meekness, and
another for zeal, and another for benevolence, and each be a virtuous
man. The expression here is equivalent to saying, "One may have faith,
and another works."

Show me thy faith without thy works - That is, you who maintain that
faith is enough to prove the existence of religion; that a man may be
justified and saved by that alone, or where it does not develop itself
in holy living; or that all that is necessary in order to be saved is
merely to believe. Let the reality of any such faith as that be shown,
if it can be; let any real faith be shown to exist without a life of
good works, and the point will be settled. I, says the apostle, will
undertake to exhibit the evidence of my faith in a different way - in a
way about which there can be no doubt, and which is the appropriate
method. It is clear, if the common reading here is correct, that the
apostle meant to deny that true faith could be evinced without
appropriate works. It should be said, however, that there is a
difference of reading here of considerable importance. Many manuscripts
and printed editions of the New Testament, instead of "without" (works -
χωρίς chōris), read "from" or "by" (ἐκ ek), as in the other part of the
verse, "show me thy faith by thy works, and I will show thee my faith by
my works."

This reading is found in Walton, Wetstein, Mill, and in the received
text generally; the other (without) is found in many manuscripts, and in
the Vulgate, Syriac, Coptic, English, and Armenian versions; and is
adopted by Beza, Castalio, Grotius, Bengel, Hammond, Whitby, Drusius,
Griesbach, Tittman, and Hahn, and is now commonly received as the
correct reading. It may be added that this reading seems to be demanded
by the similar reading in [Jam 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#020),
"But wilt thou know that faith "without works" (χωρὶς τὼν ἔργων chōris
tōn ergōn) is dead," evidently implying that something had been said
before about "faith without works." This reading also is so natural, and
makes so good sense in the connection, that it would seem to be
demanded. Doddridge felt the difficulty in the other reading, and has
given a version of the passage which showed his great perplexity, and
which is one of the most unhappy that he ever made.

And I will show thee my faith by my works - I will furnish in this way
the best and most certain proof of the existence of faith. It is implied
here that true faith is adapted to lead to a holy life, and that such a
life would be the appropriate evidence of the existence of faith. By
their fruits the principles held by men are known. See the notes at [Mat
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016).

[James 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jam 2:19</span></span>

Thou believest that there is one God - One of the great and cardinal
doctrines of religion is here selected as an illustration of all. The
design of the apostle seems to have been to select one of the doctrines
of religion, the belief of which would - if mere belief in any doctrine
could - save the soul; and to show that even this might be held as an
article of faith by those who could be supposed by no one to have any
claim to the name of Christian. He selects, therefore, the great
fundamental doctrine of all religion, - the doctrine of the existence of
one Supreme Being, - and shows that if even this were held in such a way
as it might be, and as it was held by devils, it could not save men. The
apostle here is not to be supposed to be addressing such an one as Paul,
who held to the doctrine that we are justified by faith; nor is he to be
supposed to be combating the doctrine of Paul, as some have maintained,
(see the Introduction); but he is to be regarded as addressing one who
held, in the broadest and most unqualified sense, that provided there
was faith, a man would be saved. To this he replies, that even the
devils might have faith of a certain sort, and faith that would produce
sensible effects on them of a certain kind, and still it could not be
supposed that they had true religion, or that they would be saved. Why
might not the same thing occur in regard to man?

Thou doest well - So far as this is concerned, or so far as it goes. It
is a doctrine which ought to be held, for it is one of the great
fundamental truths of religion.

The devils - The "demons," - (τα δαιμόνια ta daimonia). There is,
properly, but one being spoken of in the New Testament as "the devil" -
ὁ διάβολος ho diabolos, and ὁ Σατᾶν ho Satan - though "demons" are
frequently spoken of in the plural number. They are represented as evil
spirits, subject to Satan, or under his control, and engaged with him in
carrying out his plans of wickedness. These spirits or demons were
supposed to wander in desert and desolate places, [Mat
12:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#043), or to dwell in the atmosphere,
(Notes, [Eph 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002)); they were thought
to have the power of working miracles, but not for good, ([Rev
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#014); compare [Joh
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#021)); to be hostile to mankind, [Joh
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044); to utter the pagan oracles, [Act
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#017); to lurk in the idols of the
heathen, [Co1 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020); and to take up
their abodes in the bodies of men, afflicting them with various kinds of
diseases, [Mat 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022); [Mat
9:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#034); [Mat
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#008); [Mat
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#018); [Mar
7:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#029); [Luk
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#033); [Luk
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#027), [Luk
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#030), et soepe. It is of these evil
spirits that the apostle speaks when he says that they believe.

Also believe - That is, particularly, they believe in the existence of
the one God. How far their knowledge may extend respecting God, we
cannot know; but they are never represented in the Scriptures as denying
his existence, or as doubting the great truths of religion. They are
never described as atheists. That is a sin of this world only. They are
not represented as sceptics. That, too, is a peculiar sin of the earth;
and probably, in all the universe besides, there are no beings but those
who dwell on this globe, who doubt or deny the existence of God, or the
other great truths of religion.

And tremble - The word here used (φρίσσουσιν phrissousin) occurs nowhere
else in the New Testament. It means, properly, to be rough, uneven,
jaggy, sc., with bristling hair; to bristle, to stand on end, as the
hair does in a fright; and then to shudder or quake with fear, etc. Here
the meaning is, that there was much more in the case referred to than
mere speculative faith. There was a faith that produced some effect, and
an effect of a very decided character. It did not, indeed, produce good
works, or a holy life, but it made it manifest that there was faith;
and, consequently, it followed that the existence of mere faith was not
all that was necessary to save men, or to make it certain that they
would be secure, unless it were held that the devils would be justified
and saved by it. If they might hold such faith, and still remain in
perdition, men might hold it, and go to perdition. A man should not
infer, therefore, because he has faith, even that faith in God which
will fill him with alarm, that therefore he is safe. He must have a
faith which will produce another effect altogether - that which will
lead to a holy life.

[James 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jam 2:20</span></span>

But wilt thou know - Will you have a full demonstration of it; will you
have the clearest proof in the case. The apostle evidently felt that the
instances to which he was about to refer, those of Abraham and Rahab,
were decisive.

O vain man - The reference by this language is to a man who held an
opinion that could not be defended. The word "vain" here used (κενε
kene) means properly "empty," as opposed to "full" - as empty hands,
having nothing in them; then fruitless, or without utility or success;
then false, fallacious. The meaning here, properly, would be "empty," in
the sense of being void of understanding; and this would be a mild and
gentle way of saying of one that he was foolish, or that he maintained
an argument that was without sense. James means, doubtless, to represent
it as a perfectly plain matter, a matter about which no man of sense
could have any reasonable doubt. If we must call a man foolish, as is
sometimes necessary, let us use as mild and inoffensive a term as
possible - a term which, while it will convey our meaning, will not
unnecessarily wound and irritate.

That faith without works is dead - That the faith which does not produce
good works is useless in the matter of salvation. He does not mean to
say that it would produce no effect, for in the case of the demons it
did produce trembling and alarm; but that it would be valueless in the
matter of salvation. The faith of Abraham and of Rahab was entirely
different from this.

[James 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jam 2:21</span></span>

Was not Abraham our father - Our progenitor, our ancestor; using the
word "father," as frequently occurs in the Bible, to denote a remote
ancestor. Compare the notes at [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001). A reference to his case would
have great weight with those who were Jews by birth, and probably most
of those to whom this Epistle was addressed were of this character. See
the Introduction.

Justified by works - That is, in the sense in which James is maintaining
that a man professing religion is to be justified by his works. He does
not affirm that the ground of acceptance with God is that we keep the
law, or are perfect; or that our good works make an atonement for our
sins, and that it is on their account that we are pardoned; nor does he
deny that it is necessary that a man should believe in order to be
saved. In this sense he does not deny that men are justified by faith;
and thus he does not contradict the doctrine of the apostle Paul. But he
does teach that where there are no good works, or where there is not a
holy life, there is no true religion; that that faith which is not
productive of good works is of no value; that if a man has that faith
only, it would be impossible that he could be regarded as justified, or
could be saved and that consequently, in that large sense, a man is
justified by his works that is, they are the evidence that he is a
justified man, or is regarded and treated as righteous by his Maker. The
point on which the apostle has his eye is the nature of saving faith;
and his design is to show that a mere faith which would produce no more
effect than that of the demons did, could not save.

In this he states no doctrine which contradicts that of Paul. The
evidence to which he appeals in regard to faith, is good works and a
holy life; and where that exists it shows that the faith is genuine. The
case of Abraham is one directly in point. He showed that he had that
kind of faith which was not dead. He gave the most affecting evidence
that his faith was of such a kind as to lead him to implicit obedience,
and to painful sacrifices. Such an act as that referred to - the act of
offering up his son - demonstrated, if anything could, that his faith
was genuine, and that his religion was deep and pure. In the sight of
heaven and earth it would justify him as a righteous man, or would prove
that he was a righteous man. In regard to the strength of his faith, and
the nature of his obedience in this sacrifice, see the notes at [Heb
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#019). That the apostle here cannot
refer to the act of justification as the term is commonly understood,
referring by that to the moment when he was accepted of God as a
righteous man, is clear from the fact that in a passage of the
Scriptures which he himself quotes, that is declared to be consequent on
his believing: "Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for
righteousness."

The act here referred to occurred long subsequent to that, and was thus
a fulfillment or confirmation of the declaration of Scripture, which
says that "he believed God." It showed that his faith was not merely
speculative, but was an active principle, leading to holy living. See
the notes at [Jam 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#023). This
demonstrates that what the apostle refers to here is the evidence by
which it is shown that a man's faith is genuine, and that he does not
refer to the question whether the act of justification, where a sinner
is converted, is solely in consequence of believing. Thus the case
proves what James purposes to prove, that the faith which justifies is
only that which leads to good works.

When he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar - This was long after
he believed, and was an act which, if any could, would show that his
faith was genuine and sincere. On the meaning of this passage, see the
notes at [Heb 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#017).

[James 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jam 2:22</span></span>

Seest thou - Margin, "Thou seest." Either rendering is correct, and the
sense is the same. The apostle means to say that this was so plain that
they could not but see it.

How faith wrought with his works - συνήργει sunērgei. Cooperated with.
The meaning of the word is, "to work together with anyone; to co
operate," [Co1 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#016); [Co2
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001); then to aid, or help, [Mar
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#020); to contribute to the production
of any result, where two or more persons or agents are united. Compare
[Rom 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028). The idea here is, that the
result in the case of Abraham, that is, his salvation, or his religion,
was secured, not by one of these things alone, but that both contributed
to it. The result which was reached, to wit, his acceptance with God,
could not have been obtained by either one of them separately, but both,
in some sense, entered into it. The apostle does not say that, in regard
to the merit which justifies, they came in for an equal share, for he
makes no affirmation on that point; he does not deny that in the sight
of God, who foresees and knows all things, he was regarded as a
justified man the moment he believed, but he looks at the result as it
was, at Abraham as he appeared under the trial of his faith, and says
that in that result there was to be seen the co-operation of faith and
good works. Both contributed to the end, as they do now in all cases
where there is true religion.

(By the somewhat unhappy term "merit," the author clearly means nothing
more than "principle," as is obvious from his acute and evangelical
comment on the verse; as well as from the admirable reconciliation of
Paul and James below.)

And by works was faith made perfect - Made complete, finished, or
entire. It was so carried out as to show its legitimate and fair
results. This does not mean that the faith in itself was defective
before this, and that the defect was remedied by good works; or that
there is any deficiency in what the right kind of faith can do in the
matter of justification, which is to be helped out by good works; but
that there was that kind of completion which a thing has when it is
fully developed, or is fairly carried out.

[James 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jam 2:23</span></span>

And the Scripture was fulfilled which saith - That is, the fair and full
meaning of the language of Scripture was expressed by this act, showing
in the highest sense that his faith was genuine; or the declaration that
he truly believed, was confirmed or established by this act. His faith
was shown to be genuine; and the fair meaning of the declaration that he
believed God was carried out in the subsequent act. The passage here
referred to occurs in [Gen 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006). That
which it is said Abraham believed, or in which he believed God, was
this: "This shall not be thine heir (namely, Eliezer of Damascus), but
he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels, shall be thine heir."
And again, "Look now toward heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able
to number them. And he said unto him, So shall thy seed be," [Jam
2:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#003). The act of confiding in these
promises, was that act of which it is said that "he believed in the
Lord; and he counted it to him for righteousness."

The act of offering his son on the altar by which James says this
Scripture was fulfilled, occurred some 20 years afterward. That act
confirmed or fulfilled the declaration. It showed that his faith was
genuine, and that the declaration that he believed in God was true; for
what could do more to confirm that, than a readiness to offer his own
son at the command of God? It cannot be supposed that James meant to say
that Abraham was justified by works without respect to faith, or to deny
that the primary round of his justification in the sight of God was
faith, for the very passage which he quotes shows that faith was the
primary consideration: "Abraham believed God, and it was imputed," etc.
The meaning, therefore, can only be, that this declaration received its
fair and full expression when Abraham, by an act of obedience of the
most striking character, long after he first exercised that faith by
which he was accepted of God, showed that his faith was genuine. It he
had not thus obeyed, his faith would have been inoperative and of no
value. As it was, his act showed that the declaration of the Scripture
that, he "believed" was well founded.

Abraham believed God, and it was imputed ... - See this passage fully
explained in the notes at [Rom 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003).

And he was called the friend of God - In virtue of his strong faith and
obedience. See [Ch2 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#007); "Art not
thou our God, who didst drive out the inhabitants of this land before
thy people Israel, and gavest it to the seed of Abraham thy friend
forever?" [Isa 41:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#008). "But thou,
Israel, art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my
friend." This was a most honorable appellation; but it is one which, in
all cases, will result from true faith and obedience.

[James 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jam 2:24</span></span>

Ye see then - From the course of reasoning pursued, and the example
referred to.

How that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only - Not by a
cold, abstract, inoperative faith. It must be by a faith that shall
produce good works, and whose existence will be shown to men by good
works. As justification takes place in the sight of God, it is by faith,
for he sees that the faith is genuine, and that it will produce good
works if the individual who exercises faith shall live; and he justifies
men in view of that faith, and of no other. If he sees that the faith is
merely speculative; that it is cold and dead, and would not produce good
works, the man is not justified in his sight. As a matter of fact,
therefore, it is only the faith that produces good works that justifies;
and good works, therefore, as the proper expression of the nature of
faith, foreseen by God as the certain result of faith, and actually
performed as seen by men, are necessary in order to justification. In
other words, no man will be justified who has not a faith which will
produce good works, and which is of an operative and practical
character. The ground of justification in the case is faith, and that
only; the evidence of it, the carrying it out, the proof of the
existence of the faith, is good works; and thus men are justified and
saved not by mere abstract and cold faith, but by a faith necessarily
connected with good works, and where good works perform an important
part. James, therefore, does not contradict Paul, but he contradicts a
false explanation of Paul's doctrine. He does not deny that a man is
justified in the sight of God by faith, for the very passage which he
quotes shows that he believes that; but he does deny that a man is
justified by a faith which would not produce good works, and which is
not expressed by good works; and thus he maintains, as Paul always did,
that nothing else than a holy life can show that a man is a true
Christian, and is accepted of God.

[James 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jam 2:25</span></span>

Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot justified by works? - In the same
sense in which Abraham was, as explained above - showing by her act that
her faith was genuine, and that it was not a mere cold and speculative
assent to the truths of religion. Her act showed that she truly believed
God. If that act had not been performed, the fact would have shown that
her faith was not genuine, and she could not have been justified. God
saw her faith as it was; he saw that it would produce acts of obedience,
and he accepted her as righteous. The act which she performed was the
public manifestation of her faith, the evidence that she was justified.
See the case of Rahab fully explained in the notes at [Heb
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#031). It may be observed here, that
we are not to suppose that everything in the life and character of this
woman is commended. She is commended for her faith, and for the fair
expression of it; a faith which, as it induced her to receive the
messengers of the true God, and to send them forth in peace, and as it
led her to identify herself with the people of God, was also
influential, we have every reason to suppose, in inducing her to abandon
her former course of life. When we commend the faith of a man who has
been a profane swearer, or an adulterer, or a robber, or a drunkard, we
do not commend his former life, or give a sanction to it. We commend
that which has induced him to abandon his evil course, and to turn to
the ways of righteousness. The more evil his former course has been, the
more wonderful, and the more worthy of commendation, is that faith by
which he is reformed and saved.

[James 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jam 2:26</span></span>

For as the body without the spirit is dead - Margin, "breath." The Greek
word πνεύμα pneuma is commonly used to denote spirit or soul, as
referring to the intelligent nature. The meaning here is the obvious
one, that the body is animated or kept alive by the presence of the
soul, and that when that is withdrawn, hope departs. The body has no
life independent of the presence of the soul.

So faith without works is dead also - There is as much necessity that
faith and works should be united to constitute true religion, as there
is that the body and soul should be united to constitute a living man.
If good works do not follow, it is clear that there is no true and
proper faith; none that justifies and saves. If faith produces no fruit
of good living, that fact proves that it is dead, that it has no power,
and that it is of no value. This shows that James was not arguing
against real and genuine faith, nor against its importance in
justification, but against the supposition that mere faith was all that
was necessary to save a man, whether it was accompanied by good works or
not. He maintains that if there is genuine faith it will always be
accompanied by good works, and that it is only that faith which can
justify and save. If it leads to no practical holiness of life, it is
like the body without the soul, and is of no value whatever. James and
Paul both agree in the necessity of true faith in order to salvation;
they both agree that the tendency of true faith is to produce a holy
life; they both agree that where there is not a holy life there is no
true religion, and that a man cannot be saved. We may learn, then, from
the whole doctrine of the New Testament on the subject, that unless we
believe in the Lord Jesus we cannot be justified before God; and that
unless our faith is of that kind which will produce holy living, it has
no more of the characteristics of true religion than a dead body has of
a living man.

Reconciliation of Paul and James.

At the close of the exposition of this chapter, it may be proper to make
a few additional remarks on the question in what way the statements of
James can be reconciled with those of Paul, on the subject of
justification. A difficulty has always been felt to exist on the
subject; and there are, perhaps, no readers of the New Testament who are
not perplexed with it. Infidels, and particularly Voltaire, have seized
the occasion which they supposed they found here to sneer against the
Scriptures, and to pronounce them to be contradictory. Luther felt the
difficulty to be so great that, in the early part of his career, he
regarded it as insuperable, and denied the inspiration of James, though
be afterwards changed his opinion, and believed that his Epistle was a
part of the inspired canon; and one of Luther's followers was so
displeased with the statements of James, as to charge him with willful
falsehood. - Dr. Dwight's Theology, Serm. lxviii. The question is,
whether their statements can be so reconciled, or can be shown to be so
consistent with each other, that it is proper to regard them both as
inspired men? Or, are their statements so opposite and contradictory,
that it cannot be believed that both were under the influences of an
infallible Spirit? In order to answer these questions, there are two
points to be considered:

I. What the real difficulty is; and,

II\. How the statements of the two writers can be reconciled, or whether
there is any way of explanation which will remove the difficulty.

I. What the difficulty is. This relates to two points - that James seems
to contradict Paul in express terms, and that both writers make use of
the same case to illustrate their opposite sentiments.

\(1\) that James seems to contradict Paul in express terms. The doctrine
of Paul on the subject of justification is stated in such language as
the following: "By the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be
justified in his sight," [Rom 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020).
"We conclude that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the
law," [Rom 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#028). "Being justified by
faith," [Rom 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001). "Knowing that a man
is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus
Christ," [Gal 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016). Compare [Rom
3:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024); [Gal
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#011); [Tit
3:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005). On the other hand, the
statement of James seems to be equally explicit that a man is not
justified by faith only, but that good works come in for an important
share in the matter. "Was not Abraham our father justified by works?"
[Jam 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#021). "Seest thou how faith
wrought with his works?" [Jam 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#022).
"Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith
only," [Jam 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#024).

\(2\) both writers refer to the same case to illustrate their views -
the case of Abraham. Thus Paul [Rom
4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#001) refers to it to prove that
justification is wholly by faith. "For if Abraham were justified by
works, he hath whereof to glory; but not before God. For what saith the
Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for
righteousness." And thus James [Jam
2:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#021) refers to it to prove that
justification is by works: "Was not Abraham our father justified by
works when he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar?"

The difficulty of reconciling these statements would be more clearly
seen if they occurred in the writings of the same author; by supposing,
for example, that the statements of James were appended to the fourth
chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and were to be read in connection
with that chapter. Who, the infidel would ask, would not be struck with
the contradiction? Who would undertake to harmonize statements so
contradictory? Yet the statements are equally contradictory, though they
occur in different writers, and especially when it is claimed for both
that they wrote under the influence of inspiration.

II\. The inquiry then is, how these apparently contradictory statements
may be reconciled, or whether there is any way of explanation that will
remove the difficulty. This inquiry resolves itself into two - whether
there is any theory that can be proposed that would relieve the
difficulty, and whether that theory can be shown to be well founded.

\(1\) is there any theory which would remove the diffficulty - any
explanation which can be given on this point which, if true, would show
that the two statements may be in accordance with each other and with
truth?

Before suggesting such an explanation, it may be further observed, that,
as all history has shown, the statements of Paul on the subject of
justification are liable to great abuse. All the forms of Antinomianism
have grown out of such abuse, and are only perverted statements of his
doctrine. It has been said, that if Christ has freed us from the
necessity of obeying the law in order to justification; if he has
fulfilled it in our stead, and borne its penalty, then the law is no
longer binding on those who are justified, and they are at liberty to
live as they please. It has been further said, that if we are saved by
faith alone, a man is safe the moment he believes, and good works are
therefore not necessary. It is possible that such views as these began
to prevail as early as the time of James, and, if so, it was proper that
there should be an authoritative apostolic statement to correct them,
and to check these growing abuses. If, therefore, James had, as it has
been supposed he had, any reference to the sentiments of Paul, it was
not to correct his sentiments, or to controvert them but it was to
correct the abuses which began already to flow from his doctrines, and
to show that the alleged inferences did not properly follow from the
opinions which he held; or, in other words, to show that the Christian
religion required men to lead holy lives, and that the faith by which it
was acknowledged that the sinner must be justified, was a faith which
was productive of good works.

Now, all that is necessary to reconcile the statements of Paul and
James, is to suppose that they contemplate the subject of justification
from different points of view, and with reference to different
inquiries. Paul looks at it before a man is converted, with reference to
the question how a sinner may be justified before God; James after a man
is converted, with reference to the question how he may show that he has
the genuine faith which justifies. Paul affirms that the sinner is
justified before God only by faith in the Lord Jesus, and not by his own
works; James affirms that it is not a mere speculative or dead faith
which justifies, but only a faith that is productive of good works, and
that its genuineness is seen only by good works. Paul affirms that
whatever else a man has, if he have not faith in the Lord Jesus, he
cannot be justified; James affirms that no matter what pretended faith a
man has, if it is not a faith which is adapted to produce good works, it
is of no value in the matter of justification. Supposing this to be the
true explanation, and that these are the "stand-points" from which they
view the subject, the reconciliation of these two writers is easy: for
it was and is still true, that if the question is asked how a sinner is
to be justified before God, the answer is to be that of Paul, that it is
by faith alone, "without the works of the law;" if the question be
asked, how it can be shown what is the kind of faith that justifies, the
answer is that of James, that it is only that which is productive of
holy living and practical obedience.

\(2\) Is this a true theory? Can it be shown to be in accordance with
the statements of the two writers? Would it be a proper explanation if
the same statements had been made by the same writer? That it is a
correct theory, or that it is an explanation founded in truth, will be
apparent if:

\(a\) the language used by the two writers will warrant it;

\(b\) if it accords with a fair interpretation of the declarations of
both writers; and,

\(c\) if, in fact, each of the two writers held respectively the same
doctrine on the subject.

\(a\) Will the language bear this explanation? That is, will the word
justify, as used by the two writers, admit of this explanation? That it
will, there need be no reasonable doubt; for both are speaking of the
way in which man, who is a sinner, may be regarded and treated by God as
if he were righteous - the true notion of justification. It is not of
justification in the sight of men that they speak, but of justification
in the sight of God. Both use the word "justify" in this sense - Paul as
affirming that it is only by faith that it can be done; James as
affirming, in addition not in contradiction, that it is by a faith that
produces holiness, and no other.

\(b\) Does this view accord with the fair interpretation of the
declarations of both writers?

In regard to Paul, there can be no doubt that this is the point from
which he contemplates the subject, to wit, with reference to the
question how a sinner may be justified. Thus, in the Epistle to the
Romans, where his principal statements on the subject occur, he shows,
first, that the Gentiles cannot be justified by the works of the law,
Rom. 1, and then that the same thing is true in regard to the Jews, Rom.
2-3, by demonstrating that both had violated the law given them, and
were transgressors, and then [Rom 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020)
draws his conclusion, "Therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no
flesh be justified in his sight" - the whole argument showing
conclusively that he is contemplating the subject before a man is
justified, and with reference to the question how he may be.

In regard to James, there can be as little doubt that the point of view
from which he contemplates the subject, is after a man professes to have
been justified by faith, with reference to the question what kind of
faith justifies, or how it may be shown that faith is genuine. This is
clear,

(aa) because the whole question is introduced by him with almost express
reference to that inquiry: "What doth it profit, my brethren, though a
man say he hath faith, and have not works? Can faith save him?" [Jam
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#014). That is, can such faith - can
this faith (ἡ πίστις hē pistis) save him? In other words, He must have a
different kind of faith in order to save him. The point of James" denial
is not that faith, if genuine, would save; but it is, that such a faith,
or a faith without works, would save.

(bb) That this is the very point which he discusses, is further shown by
his illustrations, [Jam 2:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#015), [Jam
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#019). He shows [Jam
2:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#015) that mere faith in religion
would be of no more value in regard to salvation, than if one were naked
and destitute of food, it would meet his wants to say, "Depart in peace,
be ye warmed and filled;" and then [Jam
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#019), that even the demons had a
certain kind of faith in one of the cardinal doctrines of religion, but
that it was a faith which was valueless - thus showing that his mind was
on the question what is true and genuine faith.

\(cc\) Then he shows by the case to which he refers [Jam
2:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#021) - the case of Abraham - that
this was the question before his mind. He refers not to the act when
Abraham first believed - the act by which as a sinner he was justified
before God; but to an act that occurred twenty years after - the
offering up of his son Isaac. See the notes at those verses. He affirms
that the faith of Abraham was of such a kind that it led him to obey the
will of God; that is, to good works. Though, as is implied in the
objection referred to above, he does refer to the same case to which
Paul referred - the case of Abraham - yet it is not to the same act in
Abraham. Paul [Rom 4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#001) refers to him
when he first believed, affirming that he was then justified by faith;
James refers indeed to an act of the same man, but occurring twenty
years after, showing that the faith by which he had been justified was
genuine. Abraham was, in fact, according to Paul, justified when he
believed, and, had he died then, he would have been saved; but according
to James, the faith which justified him was not a dead faith, but was
living and operative, as was shown by his readiness to offer his son on
the altar.

\(c\) Did each of these two writers in reality hold the same doctrine on
the subject? This will be seen, if it can be shown that James held to
the doctrine of justification by faith, as really as Paul did; and that
Paul held that good works were necessary to show the genuineness of
faith, as really as James did.

\(1\) they both agreed in holding the doctrine of justification by
faith. Of Paul's belief there can be no doubt. That James held the
doctrine is apparent from the fact that he quotes the very passage in
Genesis, [Gen 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006), and the one on
which Paul relies, [Rom 4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#001), as
expressing his own views - "Abraham believed God, and it was imputed
unto him for righteousness." The truth of this, James does not deny, but
affirms that the Scripture which made this declaration was fulfilled or
confirmed by the act to which he refers.

\(2\) they both agreed in holding that good works are necessary to show
the genuineness of faith. Of James" views on that point there can be no
doubt. That Paul held the same opinion is clear.

\(a\) from his own life, no man ever having been more solicitous to keep
the whole law of God than he was.

\(b\) From his constant exhortations and declarations, such as these:
"Created in Christ Jesus unto good works," [Eph
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010); "Charge them that are rich, that
they be rich in good works," [Ti1
6:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017); "In all things showing
thyself a pattern of good works," [Tit
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#007); "Who gave himself for us, that he
might purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works,"
[Tit 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#014); "These things I will that
thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God might be
careful to maintain good works," [Tit
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#008).

\(c\) It appears from the fact that Paul believed that the rewards of
heaven are to be apportioned according to our good works, or according
to our character and our attainments in the divine life. The title
indeed to eternal life is, according to him, in consequence of faith;
the measure of the reward is to be our holiness, or what we do. Thus he
says, [Co2 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010), "For we must all
appear before the judgment-seat of Christ, that every one may receive
the things done in his body." Thus also he says, [Co2
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#006), "He which soweth sparingly. shall
reap also sparingly; and he which soweth bountifully, shall reap also
bountifully." And thus also he says, [Rom
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#006), that God "will render to every
man according to his deeds." See also the influence which faith had on
Paul personally, as described in the third chapter of his Epistle to the
Philippians. If these things are so, then these two writers have not
contradicted each other, but, viewing the subject from different points,
they have together stated important truths which might have been made by
any one writer without contradiction; first, that it is only by faith
that a sinner can be justified - and second, that the faith which
justifies is that only which leads to a holy life, and that no other is
of value in saving the soul. Thus, on the one hand, men would be guarded
from depending on their own righteousness for eternal life; and, on the
other, from all the evils of Antinomianism. The great object of religion
would be secured - the sinner would be justified, and would become
personally holy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 3](jam003)

</div>
