<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer000)  [Next](jer002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 1:1</span></span>

The words of Jeremiah - The usual title of the prophetic books is "the
Word of the Lord," but the two books of Amos and Jeremiah are called the
words of those prophets, probably because they contain not merely the
words of those prophets, probably because they contain not merely
prophecies, but also the record of much which belongs to the personal
history of the writers. This title might therefore be translated the
"life of Jeremiah" or "acts of Jeremiah," though some understand by it a
collection of the prophecies of Jeremiah. One derivation of Jeremiah's
name is "God exalteth."

Hilkiah, may have been the high priest of that name.

That were - Or, who was, i. e., dwelt. The meaning is, that Jeremiah was
a priest who dwelt at Anathoth.

[Jeremiah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 1:2</span></span>

Came - literally, was (and in [Jer
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#004).md); the phrase implies that Jeremiah
possessed God's word from that time onward, not fitfully as coming and
going, but constantly.

The thirteenth year of his reign - According to the ordinary reckoning,
this would be 629 b.c., but if the Ptolemaic canon be right in putting
the capture of Jerusalem at 586 b.c., it would be two years later,
namely 627 b.c. However, according to the Assyrian chronology, it would
be 608 b.c. It was the year after that in which Josiah began his
reforms.

[Jeremiah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 1:3</span></span>

The whole period contained in this verse is no less than 40 years and 6
months, namely, 18 years under Josiah, two periods of 11 years each
under Jehoiakim and Zedekiah, and 3 months under each of the omitted
kings, Jehoahaz and Jeconiah.

In the fifth month - The capture of Jerusalem took place in the fourth
month, but its destruction was in the fifth month (see the marginal
references), the ninth day of which was subsequently kept as a fast-day
[Zac 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#003.md).

[Jeremiah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 1:4</span></span>

This history of Jeremiah's call to his office formed a part of his first
address to the people. He claimed to act by an external authority, and
to speak not his own words but those of Yahweh; and this even when
resisting the divine call (see [Jer
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#013.md); [Jer
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#007.md), [Jer
20:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#014).md).

[Jeremiah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 1:5</span></span>

Rather, "Before I formed thee in the belly." I approved of thee (as one
fit for the prophetic office)," and before thou camest forth from the
womb" I made thee holy (dedicated thee to holy uses); I have appointed
thee (now by this public call to be) "a prophet unto the nations."

Unto the nations - The privileges contained in this verse are so great
as in their full sense to be true only of Christ Himself, while to
Jeremiah they belong as being in so many particulars a type of Christ.

[Jeremiah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 1:6</span></span>

There is no resistance on Jeremiah's part, but he shrinks back alarmed.

I cannot speak - i. e., "I cannot prophesy," I have not those powers of
oratory necessary for success. The prophets of Israel were the national
preachers in religious matters, and their orators in political.

I am a child - This implies nothing very definite about Jeremiah's age.
Still the long duration of his prophetic mission makes it probable that
he was very young when called to the office, as also were Isaiah, Hosea,
Zechariah, and others.

[Jeremiah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 1:7</span></span>

Jeremiah suggested two difficulties, the first inexperience, the second
timidity. God now removes the first of these. Inexperience is no
obstacle where the duty is simple obedience His timidity is removed by
the promise given him in the next verse.

[Jeremiah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 1:9</span></span>

Touched - "Made it touch." This was the symbol of the bestowal of divine
grace and help, by which that want of eloquence, which the prophet had
pleaded as a disqualification, was removed.

[Jeremiah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 1:10</span></span>

I have ... set thee over - literally, I have made thee Pakeed, i. e.,
deputy. This title is given only to these invested with high authority
(e. g. [Gen 41:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#034.md); [Ch2
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#011.md); [Jer
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#001.md); [Jer
29:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#026).md). From God's side, the prophet
is a mere messenger, speaking what he is told, doing what he is
commanded. From man's side, he is God's vicegerent, with power "to root
out, and to pull down."

Root out ... pull down - In the Hebrew, the verbs present an instance of
the alliteration so common in the prophets, and agreeable to oriental
taste. The former signifies the destruction of anything planted, the
latter refers to buildings.

To throw down - More exactly, to tear in pieces. There are four words of
destruction, and but two words of restoration, as if the message were
chiefly of evil. And such was Jeremiah's message to his contemporaries.
Yet are all God's dealings finally for the good of His people. The
Babylonian exile was, for the moment, a time of chastisement; it also
became a time of national repentance (see [Jer
24:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#005).md).

[Jeremiah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 1:11</span></span>

What seest thou? - If we admit a supernatural element in prophecy,
visions would be the most simple means of communication between God and
man.

A rod of an almond tree - Many translate "a staff of almond wood." The
vision would thus signify that God - like a traveler, staff in hand -
was just about to set forth upon His journey of vengeance. But the
rendering of the King James Version is supported by [Gen
30:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#037.md). The word rendered "almond"
comes from a root signifying "to be awake;" and as the almond blossoms
in January, it seems to be awake while other trees are still Sleeping,
and therefore is a fit emblem of activity.

[Jeremiah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 1:12</span></span>

Hasten - Rather, I watch over "my word to perform it."

[Jeremiah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 1:13</span></span>

The first vision was for the support of the prophet's own faith during
his long struggle with his countrymen: the second explains to him the
general nature of his mission. He was to be the bearer of tidings of a
great national calamity about to break forth item the north. He sees a
caldron. It was a vessel of metal [Eze
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#011.md), large enough to prepare the
meal of a numerous community [Kg2
4:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#038.md), and broad at the top, as it was
also used for washing purposes [Psa
60:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008.md). This caldron was boiling
furiously.

The face ... - More correctly the margin, i. e toward the south. We must
suppose this caldron set upon a pile of inflammable materials. As they
consume it settles down unevenly, with the highest side toward the
north, so that its face is turned the other way and looks southward.
Should it still continue so to settle, the time must finally come when
it will be overturned, and will pour the whole mass of its boiling
contents upon the south.

[Jeremiah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 1:14</span></span>

Out of the north ... - The caldron represents the great military empires
upon the Euphrates. In Hezekiah's time, Nineveh was at their head; but
stormed by the armies of Cyaxares and Nabopalassar it is itself now the
victim whose limbs are seething in the caldron, and the seat of empire
has been transferred to Babylon. But whoever may for the time prevail,
the tide of passion and carnage is sure finally to pour itself upon
Judaea.

An evil shall break forth - "The evil shall be opened," shall show
itself, be disclosed from the north: that special evil, which from the
days of Micah [Mic 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012.md) all the
prophets had denounced upon the Jews if they lapsed into idolatry. At
present the caldron is fiercely boiling upon the Euphrates. As soon as
either of the parties struggling there gains the victory it will pour
the whole seething mass over other countries in the shape of an invading
army (see [Jer 25:17-26](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#017).md).

[Jeremiah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 1:15</span></span>

I will call - I am calling. The judgment has begun. God is summoning His
hosts to the war.

Families - The various races by which the provinces of the Babylonian
empire were populated.

They shall set every one his throne - The chiefs of these various races
come as God's ministers to hold solemn court, and give sentence in His
name (see [Jer 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#009).md). They therefore
set each one his throne in the usual place for administering justice,
namely, the entering in of the gates, where a large open space was
always left in cities for the purpose. Viewed in one light war is the
boiling caldron of human passion, upset by hazard, and bringing only
ruin in its course; in the other it is God sitting in judgment, with the
kings of the earth as His assessors, solemnly pronouncing sentence upon
the guilty.

Against all the walls ... - Sentence judicially pronounced, the nations
come to execute judgment by mounting as enemies upon her walls and
storming her cities.

[Jeremiah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 1:16</span></span>

In accordance with the custom of law courts, the crimes of the guilty
city are mentioned in the sentence. The charges brought against her are
three: first, the desertion of the true God; next, the offering incense
to false gods, and, lastly, the making obeisance to, or bowing down [Kg2
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#018.md) before images of human
workmanship.

[Jeremiah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 1:17</span></span>

Gird up thy loins - A symbol of preparation for earnest exertion, and
implying also firm purpose, and some degree of alacrit

Be not dismayed ... - literally, "be not dismayed at their faces, lest I
dismay thee before their faces." Naturally despondent and
self-distrustful, there was yet no feebleness in Jeremiah's character.
There was in him a moral superiority of the will, which made him, at any
cost to himself, faithfully discharge whatever his conscience told him
was his duty.

[Jeremiah 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 1:18</span></span>

Metaphorically the walls and fortifications of the city represent the
prophet's power of patiently enduring the attacks of his enemies; while
the iron pillar, supporting the whole weight of the roof [Jdg
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#029.md); [Kg1
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#021).md), signifies that no trials or
sufferings would crush his steadfast will.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 2](jer002.md)

</div>
