<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer002)  [Next](jer004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001)

[Jeremiah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 3:1</span></span>

They say - Or, That is to say. The prophet has completed his survey of
Israel's conduct, and draws the conclusion that as an adulterous wife
could not be taken back by her husband, so Israel has forfeited her part
in the covenant with God. Apparently the opening word, which literally
means "to say," only introduces the quotation in the margin.

Yet return again to me - Or, "and thinkest thou to return unto me!" The
whole argument is not of mercy, but is the proof that after her repeated
adulteries, Israel could not again take her place as wife. To think of
returning to God, with the marriage-law unrepealed, was folly.

[Jeremiah 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 3:2</span></span>

These words are not the language of consolation to the
conscience-stricken, but of vehement expostulation with hardened
sinners. They prove, therefore, the truth of the interpretation put upon
the preceding verse.

As the Arabian ... - The freebooting propensities of the Bedouin had
passed in ancient times into a proverb. As eager as the desert-tribes
were for plunder, so was Israel for idolatry.

[Jeremiah 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 3:4</span></span>

Or, Hast thou Not from this time called "me, My Father, thou art the"
husband "of my youth?" i. e., from the time of Josiah's reforms in his
eighteenth year, in opposition to "of old time" [Jer
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#020).

[Jeremiah 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 3:5</span></span>

Rather, "Will he, the young husband," retain, "keep up His anger
forever!" These words should be joined to [Jer
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#004).

Behold ... - Rather, "Behold, thou hast spoken" thus, but thou hast
"done evil things" persistently. The King James Version translates as if
Judah's words and deeds were both evil. Really her words were fair, but
her deeds proved them to be false.

And here ends the prophecy, most interesting as showing what was the
general nature of Jeremiah's exhortations to his countrymen, during the
14 years of Josiah's reign. He sets before them God and Israel united by
a covenant of marriage, to the conditions of which Yahweh is ever true,
while Israel practices with zest every form of idolatry. Therefore, the
divine blessing is withheld. It is an honest and manly warning, and the
great lesson it teaches us is, that with God nothing avails but a real
and heartfelt repentance followed by a life of holiness and sincere
devotion to His service.

Jer. 3:6-4:4 - "The Call to Repentance"

The former prophecy ended with the denunciation of God's perpetual anger
because of Israel's obstinate persistence in sin. Now there is an
invitation to repentance, and the assurance of forgiveness. The argument
is as follows: Israel had been guilty of apostasy, and therefore God bad
put her away. Unwarned by this example her more guilty sister Judah
persists in the same sins [Jer 3:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#006).
Israel therefore is invited to, return to the marriage-covenant by
repentance [Jer 3:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#012), in which case
she and Judah, accepted upon the like condition, shall become joint
members of a spiritual theocracy. [Jer
3:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#015). The repentance which God
requires must be real Jer. 3:19-4:4.

[Jeremiah 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 3:6</span></span>

Backsliding Israel - The original is very strong: Hast thou seen
Apostasy? i. e., Israel: as though Israel were the very personificatiom
of the denial of God.

She is gone up - Rather, she goes; it is her habitual practice.

[Jeremiah 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 3:7</span></span>

Or, "And I said (i. e., within myself), After she has done all these
things, she will return to me." But she did not return.

Treacherous - literally, "Falsehood," i. e., false, faithless. The
character of the two sisters is plainly marked. Samaria is apostate; she
abandons Yahweh's worship altogether. Judah maintains the form only; her
secret desires are set upon the orgies of pagan worship.

[Jeremiah 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 3:8</span></span>

Rather, "And I saw" that because apostate "Israel" had "committed
adultery, I had put her away, and given her" the writing of her
divorcement, "yet" false "Judah her sister feared not."...The
expression, "For all the causes whereby," is probably the actual formula
with which writings of divorcement commenced.

[Jeremiah 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 3:9</span></span>

Lightness - Others render as in the margin.

Defiled - Rather, profaned. The land especially consecrated to Yahweh's
service was treated by Judah as a common land.

[Jeremiah 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 3:10</span></span>

Her treacherous sister Judith - These words are a sort of refrain,
thrice [Jer 3:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#007), [Jer
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#010) repeated before God finally
pronounces Judah more culpable than Israel.

[Jeremiah 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 3:11</span></span>

Hath justified herself - Judah had had the benefit of the warning given
by Israel's example. Both abandon Yahweh's service for idolatry, but
Israel is simply "apostate," Judah is also false.

The verse is important,

\(1\) as accounting for the destruction of Jerusalem so soon after the
pious reign of Josiah. Manasseh's crimes had defiled the land, but it
was by rejecting the reforms of Josiah that the people finally profaned
it, and sealed their doom:

\(2\) As showing that it is not by the acts of its government that a
nation stands or falls. Ahaz and Manasseh lent the weight of their
influence to the cause of idolatry: Hezekiah and Josiah to the cause of
truth. But the nation had to determine which should prevail. Excepting a
remnant it embraced idolatry, and brought upon itself ruin: in the
remnant the nation again revived [Jer
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#005), [Jer
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#007).

[Jeremiah 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 3:12</span></span>

The north - The ten tribes, settled by Salmanezer in the north of
Assyria.

I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you - literally, I will not
cause my face "to fall upon you:" i. e., "I will not receive you with
averted looks." The "and" before this clause should be omitted, as also
before the next clause, "I will not keep ..."

I will not keep - All God's promises and threats are conditional upon
man's conduct.

[Jeremiah 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 3:13</span></span>

Acknowledge - literally, "know thy iniquity;" know that thy doings are
iniquitous.

Scattered thy ways - Wandered in search of those idolatries which
foreign nations practice.

[Jeremiah 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 3:14</span></span>

Children ... married - The twofold relationship gives a double certainty
of acceptance. As children, they were sure of a father's love, as a wife
they might hope for a revival of past affection from the husband of
their youth.

One of a city, and two of a family - The family (in Hebrew) is far
larger than a city, as it embraces all the descendants of a common
ancestor. Thus, the tribe of Judah was divided into only four or five
families. However national the apostasy, it does not involve in its
guilt the few who are faithful, and the promises are still their
rightful possession.

To Zion - To the true Church. The fulfillment of the promise began with
the return to Palestine after the Babylonian exile, but is complete only
in Christianity.

[Jeremiah 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 3:15</span></span>

Pastors - "Kings, rulers" (compare [Jer
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#008)). Not military usurpers [Hos
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#004), but true servants of God, as
David [Sa1 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#014).

[Jeremiah 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 3:16</span></span>

In those days - This and the phrase "the latter days," had become under
the Messianic teaching of the prophets a regular formula for the time of
Christ's coming, when all the nation's hopes would be fulfilled.

The ark was the center of the Mosaic economy, containing within it the
two tables' of the Law as the conditions of the covenant and having over
it, upon the mercy-seat, the Shechinah as the visible sign of God's
presence. But "in those days" the symbol must pass away, because God
will then dwell in His people by the gift of the Holy Spirit [Co1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016), and the terms of the covenant
will be written on their hearts [Jer
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033).

Neither shall they visit it - Rather, neither shall they miss it; i. e.,
they will not trouble about it, nor regret its loss.

Neither shall that be done anymore - Rather, "neither shall it (the ark)
be made anymore;" it shall not be renewed or repaired, because the
tabernacle of God will be one "made without hands" [Heb
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011), even the heart of His believing
people.

[Jeremiah 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 3:17</span></span>

The throne of the Lord - Yahweh's throne shall not be the ark, but
Jerusalem, i. e., the Christian Church [Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002); [Gal
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026).

To Jerusalem - The Septuagint and Syriac are probably right in omitting
this word.

Imagination ... - Stubbornness (margin). A word always used in a bad
sense, for "obstinacy."

[Jeremiah 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 3:18</span></span>

With - To (margin). The prophet has just described the return of the ten
tribes [Jer 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#014), etc. Israel is
represented as the first to repent, and Judah must go to her, in order
that they may come together back to the holy land, divided no longer
into Jews and Israelites, but merged into one people.

Out of the land of the north - The objection that the Jews were not
carried like the Israelites into the northern provinces of Assyria [Jer
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#012), but into Babylonia,
misinterprets the whole prophecy, the gist of which is that in case of
Israel's repentance, Judah must humbly seek her out, and be content
henceforward to take the inferior place, as having been the more guilty
(see [Jer 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#011)).

[Jeremiah 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 3:19</span></span>

But I - (emphatic). "And I." The emphasis lies in the abundant goodness
of God contrasted with Israel's waywardness.

How ...? - Rather, How ...! i. e., How gloriously! With what honor will
I place thee among the children!

Goodly ... of the hosts ... - Rather, "a heritage of the chief beauty of
nations." The general sense is, that Israel "possesses the most
beautiful territory of any nation."

And I said - This clause is not the answer to a difficulty, as in the
King James Version, but completes the description of God's loving
purpose. "I said within myself that I would treat thee as a son, and
give thee a glorious inheritance: I also said, that ye would return my
love, would call me Father, and be untrue to me no more."

[Jeremiah 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 3:20</span></span>

Surely as - Rather: "Just as."

[Jeremiah 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 3:21</span></span>

Upon the high places - Upon those bare table-lands, which previously had
been the scene of Israel's idolatries [Jer
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#002). The prophet supposes the offer of
mercy to Israel if repentant to have been accepted, and describes
Israel's agony of grief now that she is convinced of her sins.

Weeping and supplications - literally, "the weeping of earliest prayers
for mercy."

For they have ... - Rather, because "they hare perverted their way,"
literally, made it crooked. It gives the reason of their cry for mercy.

[Jeremiah 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 3:22</span></span>

Yahweh's answer to their prayer in [Jer
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#021) is immediately followed by their
acceptance of the offer of divine mercy.

For - Rather, because ... This profession of faith gives the reason why
they return to Yahweh. The whole description is most graphically
conceived. The people weeping upon the hills: God's gracious voice
bidding them return: the glad cry of the penitents exclaiming that they
come: the profession of faith won from them by the divine love; these
form altogether a most touching picture of a national repentance.

[Jeremiah 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 3:23</span></span>

Rather, Surely "in vain from the hills" is the revelry of the mountains.
The penitents contrast in it the uselessness of idol-worship with the
salvation which Yahweh gives to His people.

[Jeremiah 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 3:24</span></span>

For ... - And. It is the continuation of the thought in [Jer
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#023). Idolatry was there described as
unprofitable, here as ruinous and hurtful.

Shame - literally, the shame (Bosheth, personified), that is, "Baal."
The names "Bosheth" and "Baal" are constantly interchanged. Compare [Jdg
6:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#031).

Their flocks and their herds - The temperate and sober enjoyments
connected with Yahweh's sacrifices led to no excess, whereas in
idol-worship the people, after sitting down "to eat and drink, rose up
to play," and wasted both health and substance in licentious revelry.

Their sons ... - This probably refers to human sacrifices.

[Jeremiah 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 3:25</span></span>

We lie down ... - Or, We will lie down: we are ready to throw ourselves
upon the ground in bitter humiliation.

Covereth - literally, shall cover us. We will hide our face from others.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 4](jer004)

</div>
