<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 John Index](jo1)  
  [Previous](jo1000)  [Next](jo1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001)

This short chapter embraces the following subjects:

I. A strong affirmation that the Son of God, or the "Life," had appeared
in the flesh, [Jo1 1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001). The evidence
of this, the writer says, was that he had seen him, heard him, handled
him; that is, he had had all the evidence which could be furnished by
the senses. His declaration on this point he repeats, by putting the
statement into a variety of forms, for he seems to regard it as
essential to true religion.

II\. He says that he wrote to them, in order that they might have
fellowship with him in the belief of this truth, and might partake of
the joy which flows from the doctrine that the Son of God has actually
come in the flesh, [Jo1 1:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003).

III\. He states that the sum and substance of the whole message which he
had to bring to them was, that God is light, and that if we profess to
have fellowship with him we must walk in the light, [Jo1
1:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005).

\(a\) In God is no darkness, no impurity, no sin, [Jo1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005).

\(b\) If we are in darkness, if we are ignorant and sinful, it proves
that we cannot have any fellowship with him, [Jo1
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#006).

\(c\) If we walk in the light as he is in the light, if we partake of
his character and spirit, then we shall have fellowship one with
another, and we may believe that the blood of Christ will cleanse us
from all sin, [Jo1 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007).

\(d\) Yet we are to guard ourselves from one point of danger, we are not
to allow ourselves to feel that we have "no" sin. We are to bear with us
the constant recollection that we are sinners, and are to permit that
fact to produce its proper impression on our minds, [Jo1
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008), [Jo1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#010).

\(e\) Yet we are not to be desponding though we do feel this, but are to
remember, that if we will truly confess our sins he will be found
faithful to his promises, and just to the general arrangements of grace,
by which our sins may be forgiven, [Jo1
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009).

[1 John 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo1 1:1</span></span>

That which was from the beginning - There can be no doubt that the
reference here is to the Lord Jesus Christ, or the "Word" that was made
flesh. See the notes at [Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001). This
is such language as John would use respecting him, and indeed the phrase
"the beginning," as applicable to the Lord Jesus, is unique to John in
the writings of the New Testament: and the language here may be regarded
as one proof that this Epistle was written by him, for it is just such
an expression as "he" would use, but not such as one would be likely to
adopt who should attempt to palm off his own writings as those of John.
One who should have attempted that would have been likely to introduce
the name "John" in the beginning of the Epistle, or in some way to have
claimed his authority. The apostle, in speaking of "that which was from
the beginning," uses a word in the neuter gender instead of the
masculine, (ὅ ho.) It is not to be supposed, I think, that he meant to
apply this term "directly" to the Son of God, for if he had he would
have used the masculine pronoun; but though he had the Son of God in
view, and meant to make a strong affirmation respecting him, yet the
particular thing here referred to was "whatever" there was respecting
that incarnate Saviour that furnished testimony to any of the senses, or
that pertained to his character and doctrine, he had borne witness to.

He was looking rather at the evidence that he was incarnate; the proofs
that he was manifested; and he says that those proofs had been subjected
to the trial of the senses, and he had borne witness to them, and now
did it again. This is what is referred to, it seems to me, by the phrase
"that which," (ὅ ho.) The sense may be this: "Whatever there was
respecting the Word of life, or him who is the living Word, the
incarnate Son of God, from the very beginning, from the time when he was
first manifested in the flesh; whatever there was respecting his exalted
nature, his dignity, his character, that could be subjected to the
testimony of the senses, to be the object of sight, or hearing, or
touch, that I was permitted to see, and that I declare to you respecting
him." John claims to be a competent witness in reference to everything
which occurred as a manifestation of what the Son of God was.

If this be the correct interpretation, then the phrase "from the
beginning" (ἀπ ̓ ἀρχῆς ap' archēs does not here refer to his eternity,
or his being in the beginning of all things, as the phrase "in the
beginning" (ἐν ἀρχῇ en archē) does in [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001); but rather means from the very
commencement of his manifestation as the Son of God, the very first
indications on earth of what he was as the Messiah. When the writer says
[Jo1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003) that he "declares" this to
them, it seems to me that he has not reference merely to what he would
say in this Epistle, for he does not go extensively into it here, but
that he supposes that they had his Gospel in their possession, and that
he also means to refer to that, or presumes that they were familiar with
the testimony which he had borne in that Gospel respecting the evidence
that the "Word became flesh." Many have indeed supposed that this
Epistle accompanied the Gospel when it was published, and was either a
part of it that became subsequently detached from it, or was a letter
that accompanied it. See Hug, Introduction P. II. Section 68. There is,
it seems to me, no certain evidence of that; but no one can doubt that
he supposed that those to whom he wrote had access to that Gospel, and
that he refers here to the testimony which he had borne in that
respecting the incarnate Word.

Which we have heard - John was with the Saviour through the whole of his
ministry, and he has recorded more that the Saviour said than either of
the other evangelists. It is on what he said of himself that he grounds
much of the evidence that he was the Son of God.

Which we have seen with our eyes - That is, pertaining to his person,
and to what he did. "I have seen him; seen what he was as a man; how he
appeared on earth; and I have seen whatever there was in his works to
indicate his character and origin." John professes here to have seen
enough in this respect to furnish evidence that he was the Son of God.
It is not hearsay on which he relies, but he had the testimony of his
own eyes in the case. Compare the notes at [Pe2
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#016).

Which we have looked upon - The word used here seems designed to be more
emphatic or intensive than the one occurring before. He had just said
that he had "seen him with his eyes," but he evidently designs to
include an idea in this word which would imply something more than mere
beholding or seeing. The additional idea which is couched in this word
seems to be that of desire or pleasure; that is, that he had looked on
him with desire, or satisfaction, or with the pleasure with which one
beholds a beloved object. Compare [Mat
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#007); [Luk
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#024); [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014); [Joh
11:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#045). See Robinson, Lexicon. There
was an intense and earnest gaze, as when we behold one whom we have
desired to see, or when one goes out purposely to look on an object. The
evidences of the incarnation of the Son of God had been subjected to
such an intense and earnest gaze.

And our hands have handled - That is, the evidence that he was a man was
subjected to the sense of touch. It was not merely that he had been seen
by the eye, for then it might be pretended that this was a mere
appearance assumed without reality; or that what occurred might have
been a mere optical illusion; but the evidence that he appeared in the
flesh was subjected to more senses than one; to the fact that his voice
was heard; that he was seen with the eyes; that the most intense
scrutiny had been employed; and, lastly, that he had been actually
touched and handled, showing that it could not have been a mere
appearance, an assumed form, but that it was a reality. This kind of
proof that the Son of God had appeared in the flesh, or that he was
truly and properly a man, is repeatedly referred to in the New
Testament. [Luk 24:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039); "behold my
hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me and see; for a spirit
hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have." Compare [Joh
20:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#025). There is evident allusion
here to the opinion which early prevailed, which was held by the
Docetes, that the Son of God did not truly and really become a man, but
that there was only an appearance assumed, or that he seemed to be a
man. See the Introduction, Section 3. It was evidently with reference to
this opinion, which began early to prevail, that the apostle dwells on
this point, and repeats the idea so much, and shows by a reference to
all the senses which could take any cognizance in the case, that he was
truly and properly a man. The amount of it is, that we have the same
evidence that he was properly a man which we can have in the case of any
other human being; the evidence on which we constantly act, and in which
we cannot believe that our senses deceive us.

Of the Word of life - Respecting, or pertaining to, the Word of life.
"That is, whatever there was pertaining to the Word of life, which was
manifested from the beginning in his speech and actions, of which the
senses could take cognizance, and which would furnish the evidence that
he was truly incarnate, that we have declared unto you.' The phrase "the
Word of life," means the Word in which life resided, or which was the
source and fountain of life. See the notes at [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001), [Joh
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003). The reference is undoubtedly to
the Lord Jesus Christ.

[1 John 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jo1 1:2</span></span>

For the life was manifested - Was made manifest or visible unto us. He
who was the life was made known to people by the incarnation. He
appeared among people so that they could see him and hear him. Though
originally with God, and dwelling with him, [Joh
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001), yet he came forth and appeared
among people. Compare the [Rom 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)
note; [Ti1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016) note. He is the great
source of all life, and he appeared on the earth, and we had an
opportunity of seeing and knowing what he was.

And we have seen it - This repetition, or turning over the thought, is
designed to express the idea with emphasis, and is much in the manner of
John. See [Joh 1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001). He is
particularly desirous of impressing on them the thought that he had been
a personal witness of what the Saviour was, having had every opportunity
of knowing it from long and familiar contact with him.

And bear witness - We testify in regard to it. John was satisfied that
his own character was known to be such that credit would be given to
what he said. He felt that he was known to be a man of truth, and hence
he never doubts that faith would be put in all his statements. See [Joh
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#035); [Joh
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#024); [Rev
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#002); [Jo3
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#012).

And shew unto you that eternal life - That is, we declare unto you what
that life was - what was the nature and rank of him who was the life,
and how he appeared when on earth. He here attributes eternity to the
Son of God - implying that he had always been with the Father.

Which was with the Father - Always before the manifestation on the
earth. See [Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001). "The word was
with God." This passage demonstrates the pre-existence of the Son of
God, and proves that he was eternal. Before he was manifested on earth
he had an existence to which the word life could be applied, and that
was eternal. He is the Author of eternal life to us.

And was manifested unto us - In the flesh; as a man. He who was the life
appeared unto people. The idea of John evidently is,

\(1\) that the Being here referred to was forever with God;

\(2\) that it was proper before the incarnation that the word life
should be given to him as descriptive of his nature;

\(3\) that there was a manifestation of him who was thus called life, on
earth; that he appeared among people; that he had a real existence here,
and not a merely assumed appearance; and,

\(4\) that the true characteristics of this incarnate Being could be
borne testimony to by those who had seen him, and who had been long with
him. This second verse should be regarded as a parenthesis.

[1 John 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jo1 1:3</span></span>

That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you - We announce it,
or make it known unto you - referring either to what he purposes to say
in this Epistle, or more probably embracing all that he had written
respecting him, and supposing that his Gospel was in their hands. He
means to call their attention to all the testimony which he had borne on
the subject, in order to counteract the errors which began to prevail.

That ye may have fellowship with us - With us the apostles; with us who
actually saw him, and conversed with him. That is, he wished that they
might have the same belief, and the same hope, and the same joy which he
himself had, arising from the fact that the Son of God had become
incarnate, and had appeared among people. To "have fellowship," means to
have anything in common with others; to partake of it; to share it with
them, (see the notes at [Act 2:42](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#042));
and the idea here is, that the apostle wished that they might share with
him all the peace and happiness which resulted from the fact that the
Son of God had appeared in human form in behalf of men. The object of
the apostle in what he wrote was, that they might have the same views of
the Saviour which he had, and partake of the same hope and joy. This is
the true notion of fellowship in religion.

And truly our fellowship is with the Father - With God the Father. That
is, there was something in common with him and God; something of which
he and God partook together, or which they shared. This cannot, of
course, mean that his nature was the same as that of God, or that in all
things he shared with God, or that in anything he was equal with God;
but it means that he partook, in some respects, of the feelings, the
views, the aims, the joys which God has. There was a union in feeling,
and affection, and desire, and plan, and this was to him a source of
joy. He had an attachment to the same things, loved the same truth,
desired the same objects, and was engaged in the same work; and the
consciousness of this, and the joy which attended it, was what was meant
by fellowship. Compare the [Co1 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#016)
note; [Co2 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#014) note. The fellowship
which Christians have with God relates to the following points:

\(1\) Attachment to the same truths, and the same objects; love for the
same principles, and the same beings.

\(2\) the same kind of happiness, though not in the same degree. The
happiness of God is found in holiness, truth, purity, justice, mercy,
benevolence. The happiness of the Christian is of the same kind that God
has; the same kind that angels have; the same kind that he will himself
have in heaven - for the joy of heaven is only that which the Christian
has now, expanded to the utmost capacity of the soul, and freed from all
that now interferes with it, and prolonged to eternity.

\(3\) Employment, or cooperation with God. There is a sphere in which
God works alone, and in which we can have no cooperation, no fellowship
with him. In the work of creation; in upholding all things; in the
government of the universe; in the transmission of light from world to
world; in the return of the seasons, the rising and setting of the sun,
the storms, the tides, the flight of the comet, we can have no joint
agency, no cooperation with him. There God works alone. But there is
also a large sphere in which he admits us graciously to a cooperation
with him, and in which, unless we work, his agency will not be put
forth. This is seen when the farmer sows his grain; when the surgeon
binds up a wound; when we take the medicine which God has appointed as a
means of restoration to health. So in the moral world. In our efforts to
save our own souls and the souls of others, God graciously works with
us; and unless we work, the object is not accomplished. This cooperation
is referred to in such passages as these: "We are laborers together
(συνεργοί sunergoi) with God," [Co1
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009). "The Lord working with them,"
[Mar 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#020). "We then as workers
together with him," [Co2 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001). "That we
might be fellow-helpers to the truth," [Jo3
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#008). In all such cases, while the
efficiency is of God - alike in exciting us to effort, and in crowning
the effort with success - it is still true that if our efforts were not
put forth, the work would not be done. In this department God would not
work by himself alone; he would not secure the result by miracle.

\(4\) we have fellowship with God by direct communion with him, in
prayer, in meditation, and in the ordinances of religion. Of this all
true Christians are sensible, and this constitutes no small part of
their special joy. The nature of this, and the happiness resulting from
it, is much of the same nature as the communion of friend with friend -
of one mind with another kindred mind - that to which we owe no small
part of our happiness in this world.

\(5\) the Christian will have fellowship with his God and Saviour in the
triumphs of the latter day, when the scenes of the judgment shall occur,
and when the Redeemer shall appear, that he may be admired and adored by
assembled worlds. Compare the notes at [Th2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#010). See also [Mat
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028); [Rev
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#021).

And with his Son Jesus Christ - That is, in like manner there is much
which we have in common with the Saviour - in character, in feeling, in
desire, in spirit, in plan. There is a union with him in these things -
and the consciousness of this gives peace and joy.

(There is a real union between Christ and his people, which lies at the
foundation of this fellowship. Without this union there can be no
communion. But a "union with Christ in these things, i. e., in character
and feeling, etc." is nothing more than the union which subsists between
any chief and his followers; and why the apostle Paul, or others after
him, should reckon this a great mystery, is not easily comprehended.
[Eph 5:32](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#032); [Col
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#027). For a full view of the subject,
see the author's notes, with the supplementary note at [Rom
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010).)

[1 John 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jo1 1:4</span></span>

And these things write we unto you - These things respecting him who was
manifested in the flesh, and respecting the results which flow from
that.

That your joy may be full - This is almost the same language which the
Saviour used when addressing his disciples as he was about to leave
them, [Joh 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#011); and there can be
little doubt that John had that declaration in remembrance when he
uttered this remark. See the notes at that passage. The sense here is,
that full and clear views of the Lord Jesus, and the fellowship with him
and with each other, which would follow from that, would be a source of
happiness. Their joy would be complete if they had that; for their real
happiness was to be found in their Saviour. The best editions of the
Greek Testament now read "your joy," instead of the common reading "our
joy."

[1 John 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jo1 1:5</span></span>

This then is the message which we have heard of him - This is the
substance of the announcement (ἐπαγγελία epangelia) which we have
received of him, or which he made to us. The message here refers to what
he communicated as the sum of the revelation which he made to man. The
phrase "of him" (απ ̓ αὐτου ap' autou) does not mean respecting him, or
about him, but from him; that is, this is what we received from his
preaching; from all that he said. The peculiarity, the substance of all
that he said, may be summed up in the declaration that God is light, and
in the consequences which follow from this doctrine. He came as the
messenger of Him who is light; he came to inculcate and defend the
truths which flow from that central doctrine, in regard to sin, to the
danger and duty of man, to the way of recovery, and to the rules by
which men ought to live.

That God is light - Light, in the Scriptures, is the emblem of purity,
truth, knowledge, prosperity, and happiness - as darkness is of the
opposite. John here says that "God is light" - φῶς phōs - not the light,
or a light, but light itself; that is, he is himself all light, and is
the source and fountain of light in all worlds. He is perfectly pure,
without any admixture of sin. He has all knowledge, with no admixture of
ignorance on any subject. He is infinitely happy, with nothing to make
him miserable. He is infinitely true, never stating or countenancing
error; he is blessed in all his ways, never knowing the darkness of
disappointment and adversity. Compare the [Jam
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017) note; [Joh
1:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004) note; [Ti1
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016) note.

And in him is no darkness at all - This language is much in the manner
of John, not only affirming that a thing is so, but guarding it so that
no mistake could possibly be made as to what he meant. Compare [Joh
1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001). The expression here is designed
to affirm that God is absolutely perfect; that there is nothing in him
which is in any way imperfect, or which would dim or mar the pure
splendor of his character, not even as much as the smallest spot would
on the sun. The language is probably designed to guard the mind from an
error to which it is prone, that of charging God with being the Author
of the sin and misery which exist on the earth; and the apostle seems to
design to teach that whatever was the source of sin and misery, it was
not in any sense to be charged on God. This doctrine that God is a pure
light, John lays down as the substance of all that he had to teach; of
all that he had learned from him who was made flesh. It is, in fact, the
fountain of all just views of truth on the subject of religion, and all
proper views of religion take their origin from this.

[1 John 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jo1 1:6</span></span>

If we say that we have fellowship uith him - If we reckon ourselves
among his friends, or, in other words, if we profess to be like him: for
a profession of religion involves the idea of having fellowship with
God, (compare the notes at [Jo1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003)),
and he who professes that should be like him.

And walk in darkness - Live in sin and error. To "walk in darkness" now
commonly denotes to be in doubt about our religious state, in
contradistinction from living in the enjoyment of religion. That is not,
however, probably the whole idea here. The leading thought is, that if
we live in sin, it is a proof that our profession of religion is false.
Desirable as it is to have the comforts of religion, yet it is not
always true that they who do not are not true Christians, nor is it true
by any means that they intend to deceive the world.

We lie - We are false professors; we are deceived if we think that we
can have fellowship with God, and yet live in the practice of sin. As
God is pure, so must we be, if we would be his friends. This does not
mean necessarily that they meant to deceive, but that there was an
irreconcilable contradiction between a life of sin and fellowship with
God.

And do not the truth - Do not act truly. The profession is a false one.
Compare the notes at [Joh 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#022). To do
the truth is to act in accordance with truth; and the expression here
means that such an one could not be a Christian. And yet how many there
are who are living in known sin who profess to be Christians! How many
whose minds are dark on the whole subject of religion, who have never
known anything of the real peace and joy which it imparts, who
nevertheless entertain the belief that they are the friends of God, and
are going to heaven! They trust in a name, in forms, in conformity to
external rites, and have never known anything of the internal peace and
purity which religion imparts, and in fact have never had any true
fellowship with that God who is light, and in whom there is no darkness
at all. Religion is light; religion is peace, purity, joy; and though
there are eases where for a time a true Christian may be left to
darkness, and have no spiritual joy, and be in doubt about his
salvation, yet still it is a great truth, that unless we know by
personal experience what it is to walk habitually in the light, to have
the comforts of religion, and to experience in our own souls the
influences which make the heart pure, and which bring us into conformity
to the God who is light, we can have no true religion. All else is but a
name, which will not avail us on the final day.

[1 John 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jo1 1:7</span></span>

But if we walk in the light - Compare the notes at [Jo1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005). Walking in the light may include
the three following things:

\(1\) Leading lives of holiness and purity; that is, the Christian must
be characteristically a holy man, a light in the world, by his example.

\(2\) walking in the truth; that is, embracing the truth in opposition
to all error of paganism and infidelity, and having clear, spiritual
views of truth, such as the unrenewed never have. See [Co2
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006); [Co1
2:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009); [Eph
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018).

\(3\) enjoying the comforts of religion; that is, having the joy which
religion is fitted to impart, and which it does impart to its true
friends, [Psa 94:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#019); [Isa
57:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#008); [Co2
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#003); [Co2
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#011). Compare the notes at [Joh
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#035).

As he is in the light - In the same kind of light that he has. The
measure of light which we may have is not the same in degree, but it is
of the same kind. The true Christian in his character and feelings
resembles God.

We have fellowship one with another - As we all partake of his feelings
and views, we shall resemble each other. Loving the same God, embracing
the same views of religion, and living for the same ends, we shall of
course have much that is common to us all, and thus shall have
fellowship with each other.

And the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin - See
the sentiment here expressed fully explained in the notes at [Heb
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014). When it is said that his blood
cleanses us from all sin, the expression must mean one of two things -
either that it is through that blood that all past sin is forgiven, or
that that blood will ultimately purify us from all transgression, and
make us perfectly holy. The general meaning is plain, that in regard to
any and every sin of which we may be conscious, there is efficacy in
that blood to remove it, and to make us wholly pure. There is no stain
made by sin so deep that the blood of Christ cannot take it entirely
away from the soul. The connection here, or the reason why this is
introduced here, seems to be this: The apostle is stating the substance
of the message which he had received, [Jo1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005). The first or leading part of it
was, that God is light, and in him is no darkness, and that his religion
requires that all his friends should resemble him by their walking in
the light. Another, and a material part of the same message was, that
provision was made in his religion for cleansing the soul from sin, and
making it like God. No system of religion intended for man could be
adapted to his condition which did not contain this provision, and this
did contain it in the most full and ample manner. Of course, however, it
is meant that that blood cleanses from all sin only on the conditions on
which its efficacy can be made available to man - by repentance for the
past, and by a cordial reception of the Saviour through faith.

[1 John 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jo1 1:8</span></span>

If we say that we have no sin - It is not improbable that the apostle
here makes allusion to some error which was then beginning to prevail in
the church. Some have supposed that the allusion is to the sect of the
Nicolaitanes, and to the views which they maintained, particularly that
nothing was forbidden to the children of God under the gospel, and that
in the freedom conferred on Christians they were at liberty to do what
they pleased, [Rev 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#006), [Rev
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#015). It is not certain, however, that
the allusion is to them, and it is not necessary to suppose that there
is reference to any particular sect that existed at that time. The
object of the apostle is to show that it is implied in the very nature
of the gospel that we are sinners, and that if, on any pretence, we
denied that fact, we utterly deceived ourselves. In all ages there have
been those who have attempted, on some pretence, to justify their
conduct; who have felt that they did not need a Saviour; who have
maintained that they had a right to do what they pleased; or who, on
pretence of being perfectly sanctified, have held that they live without
the commission of sin. To meet these, and all similar cases, the apostle
affirms that it is a great elementary truth, which on no pretence is to
be denied, that we are all sinners. We are at all times, and in all
circumstances, to admit the painful and humiliating truth that we are
transgressors of the law of God, and that we need, even in our best
services, the cleansing of the blood of Jesus Christ. The fair
interpretation of the declaration here will apply not only to those who
maintain that they have not been guilty of sin in the past, but also to
those who profess to have become perfectly sanctified, and to live
without sin. In any and every way, if we say that we have no sin, we
deceive ourselves. Compare the notes at [Jam
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002).

We deceive ourselves - We have wrong views about our character. This
does not mean that the self-deception is willful, but that it in fact
exists. No man knows himself who supposes that in all respects he is
perfectly pure.

And the truth is not in us - On this subject. A man who should maintain
that he had never committed sin, could have no just views of the truth
in regard to himself, and would show that he was in utter error. In like
manner, according to the obvious interpretation of this passage, he who
maintains that he is wholly sanctified, and lives without any sin, shows
that he is deceived in regard to himself, and that the truth, in this
respect, is not in him. He may hold the truth on other subjects, but he
does not on this. The very nature of the Christian religion supposes
that we feel ourselves to be sinners, and that we should be ever ready
to acknowledge it. A man who claims that he is absolutely perfect, that
he is holy as God is holy, must know little of his own heart. Who, after
all his reasoning on the subject, would dare to go out under the open
heaven, at midnight, and lift up his hands and his eyes toward the
stars, and say that he had no sin to confess - that he was as pure as
the God that made those stars?

[1 John 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jo1 1:9</span></span>

If we confess our sins - Pardon in the Scriptures, always supposes that
there is confession, and there is no promise that it will be imparted
unless a full acknowledgment has been made. Compare Ps. 51; [Psa
32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001);; [Luk
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#018) ff; [Luk
7:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#041) ff; [Pro
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#013).

He is faithful - To his promises. He will do what he has assured us he
will do in remitting them.

And just to forgive us our sins - The word "just" here cannot be used in
a strict and proper sense, since the forgiveness of sins is never an act
of justice, but is an act of mercy. If it were an act of justice it
could be demanded or enforced, and that is the same as to say that it is
not forgiveness, for in that case there could have been no sin to be
pardoned. But the word "just" is often used in a larger sense, as
denoting upright, equitable, acting properly in the circumstances of the
case, etc. Compare the notes at [Mat
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#019). Here the word may be used in one
of the following senses:

\(1\) Either as referring to his general excellence of character, or his
disposition to do what is proper; that is, he is one who will act in
every way as becomes God; or,

\(2\) that he will be just in the sense that he will be true to his
promises; or that, since he has promised to pardon sinners, he will be
found faithfully to adhere to those engagements; or perhaps,

\(3\) that he will be just to his Son in the covenant of redemption,
since, now that an atonement has been made by him, and a way has been
opened through his sufferings by which God can consistently pardon, and
with a view and an understanding that he might and would pardon, it
would be an act of injustice to him if he did not pardon those who
believe on him.

Viewed in either aspect, we may have the fullest assurance that God is
ready to pardon us if we exercise true repentance and faith. No one can
come to God without finding him ready to do all that is appropriate for
a God to do in pardoning transgressors; no one who will not, in fact,
receive forgiveness if he repents, and believes, and makes confession;
no one who will not find that God is just to his Son in the covenant of
redemption, in pardoning and saving all who put their trust in the
merits of his sacrifice.

And to cleanse us from all unrighteousness - By forgiving all that is
past, treating us as if we were righteous, and ultimately by removing
all the stains of guilt from the soul.

[1 John 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jo1 1:10</span></span>

If we say that we have not sinned - In times that are past. Some perhaps
might be disposed to say this; and as the apostle is careful to guard
every point, he here states that if a man should take the ground that
his past life had been wholly upright, it would prove that he had no
true religion. The statement here respecting the past seems to prove
that when, in [Jo1 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008), he refers to
the present - "if we say we have no sin" - he meant to say that if a man
should claim to be perfect, or to be wholly sanctified, it would
demonstrate that he deceived himself; and the two statements go to prove
that neither in reference to the past nor the present can anyone lay
claim to perfection.

We make him a liar - Because he has everywhere affirmed the depravity of
all the race. Compare the notes at Rom. 1; 2; 3. On no point have his
declarations been more positive and uniform than on the fact of the
universal sinfulness of man. Compare [Gen
6:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#011); [Job
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#004); [Job
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#016); [Psa
14:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001); [Psa
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005); [Psa
58:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#003); [Rom
3:9-20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#009); [Gal
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#021).

And his word is not in us - His truth; that is, we have no true
religion. The whole system of Christianity is based on the fact that man
is a fallen being, and needs a Saviour; and unless a man admits that, of
course he cannot be a Christian.

Remarks On 1 John 1

\(1\) The importance of the doctrine of the incarnation of the Son of
God, [Jo1 1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001). On that doctrine the
apostle lays great stress; begins his Epistle with it; presents it in a
great variety of forms; dwells upon it as if he would not have it
forgotten or misunderstood. It has all the importance which he attached
to it, for.

\(a\) it is the most wonderful of all the events of which we have any
knowledge;

\(b\) it is the most deeply connected with our welfare.

\(2\) the intense interest which true piety always takes in this
doctrine, [Jo1 1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001). The feelings of
John on the subject are substantially the feelings of all true
Christians. The world passes it by in unbelief, or as if it were of no
importance; but no true Christian can look at the fact that the Son of
God became incarnate but with the deepest emotion.

\(3\) it is an object of ardent desire with true Christians that all
others should share their joys, [Jo1
1:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003). There is nothing selfish, or
narrow, or exclusive in true religion; but every sincere Christian who
is happy desires that all others should be happy too.

\(4\) wherever there is true fellowship with God, there is with all true
Christians, [Jo1 1:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003). There is but
one church, one family of God; and as all true Christians have
fellowship with God, they must have with each other.

\(5\) wherever there is true fellowship with Christians, there is with
God himself, [Jo1 1:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003). If we love
his people, share their joys, labor with them in promoting his cause,
and love the things which they love, we shall show that we love him.
There is but one God, and one church; and if all the members love each
other, they will love their common God and Saviour. An evidence,
therefore, that we love Christians, becomes an evidence that we love
God.

\(6\) it is a great privilege to be a Christian, [Jo1
1:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003). If we are Christians, we are
associated with:

\(a\) God the Father;

\(b\) with his Son Jesus Christ;

\(c\) with all his redeemed on earth and in heaven;

\(d\) with all holy angels.

There is one bond of fellowship that unites all together; and what a
privilege it is to be united in the eternal bonds of friendship with all
the holy minds in the universe!

\(7\) if God is "light" [Jo1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005), then
all that occurs is reconcilable with the idea that he is worthy of
confidence. What he does may seem to be dark to us, but we may be
assured that it is all light with him. A cloud may come between us and
the sun, but beyond the cloud the sun shines with undimmed splendor, and
soon the cloud itself will pass away. At midnight it is dark to us, but
it is not because the sun is shorn of his beams, or is extinguished. He
will rise again upon our hemisphere in the fullness of his glory, and
all the darkness of the cloud and of midnight is reconcilable with the
idea that the sun is a bright orb, and that in him is no darkness at
all. So with God. We may be under a cloud of sorrow and of trouble, but
above that the glory of God shines with splendor, and soon that cloud
will pass away, and reveal him in the fullness of his beauty and truth.

\(8\) we should, therefore, at all times exercise a cheerful confidence
in God, [Jo1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005). Who supposes that
the sun is never again to shine when the cloud passes over it, or when
the shades of midnight have settled down upon the world? We confide in
that sun that it will shine again when the cloud has passed off, and
when the shades of night have been driven away. So let us confide in
God, for with more absolute certainty we shall yet see him to be light,
and shall come to a world where there is no cloud.

\(9\) we may look cheerfully onward to heaven, [Jo1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005). There all is light. There we
shall see God as He is. Well may we then bear with our darkness a little
longer, for soon we shall be ushered into a world where there is no need
of the sun or the stars; where there is no darkness, no night.

\(10\) Religion is elevating in its nature, [Jo1
1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#006). It brings us from a world of
darkness to a world of light. It scatters the rays of light on a
thousand dark subjects, and gives promise that all that is now obscure
will yet become clear as noonday. Wherever there is true religion, the
mind emerges more and more into light; the scales of ignorance and error
pass away.

\(11\) there is no sin so great that it may not be removed by the blood
of the atonement, [Jo1 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007), "last
clause." This blood has shown its efficacy in the pardon of all the
great sinners who have applied to it, and its efficacy is as great now
as it was when it was applied to the first sinner that was saved. No
one, therefore, however great his sins, needs to hesitate about applying
to the blood of the cross, or fear that his sins are so great that they
cannot be taken away!

\(12\) the Christian will yet be made wholly pure, [Jo1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007), "last clause." It is of the
nature of that blood which the Redeemer shed that it ultimately cleanses
the soul entirely from sin. The prospect before the true Christian that
he will become perfectly holy is absolute; and whatever else may befall
him, he is sure that he will yet be holy as God is holy.

\(13\) there is no use in attempting to conceal our offences, [Jo1
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008). They are known, all known, to one
Being, and they will at some future period all be disclosed. We cannot
hope to evade punishment by hiding them; we cannot hope for impunity
because we suppose they may be passed over as if unobserved. No man can
escape on the presumption either that his sins are unknown, or that they
are unworthy of notice.

\(14\) it is manly to make confession when we have sinned, [Jo1
1:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009). All meanness was in doing the
wrong, not in confessing it; what we should be ashamed of is that we are
guilty, not that confession is to be made. When a wrong has been done,
there is no nobleness in trying to conceal it; and as there is no
nobleness in such an attempt, so there could be no safety.

\(15\) peace of mind, when wrong has been done, can be found only in
confession, [Jo1 1:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009). That is what
nature prompts to when we have done wrong, if we would find peace, and
that the religion of grace demands. When a man has done wrong, the least
that he can do is to make confession; and when that is done and the
wrong is pardoned, all is done that can be to restore peace to the soul.

\(16\) the "ease" of salvation, [Jo1
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009). What more easy terms of salvation
could we desire than an acknowledgment of our sins? No painful sacrifice
is demanded; no penance, pilgrimage, or voluntary scourging; all that is
required is that there should be an acknowledgment of sin at the foot of
the cross, and if this is done with a true heart the offender will be
saved. If a man is not willing to do this, why should he be saved? How
can he be?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 2](jo1002)

</div>
