<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 John Index](jo1)  
  [Previous](jo1002)  [Next](jo1004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001)

[1 John](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jo1 3:0</span></span>

This chapter embraces the following subjects:

I. The fact that Christians are now the sons of God, [Jo1
3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001).

\(1\) we are the sons of God, and this will explain the reason why the
world does not appreciate our character, or understand the reasons of
our conduct, [Jo1 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001).

\(2\) the consequences of sustaining that relation to God, or of being
regarded as His sons.

\(a\) We shall be like him when he appears, [Jo1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002).

\(b\) We shall purify ourselves under the influence of this hope, [Jo1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#003).

II\. The fact that he who is an adopted child of God does not commit
sin, [Jo1 3:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#004).

\(1\) all sin is the transgression of the law, [Jo1
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#004);

\(2\) Christ was manifested to take away our sins, [Jo1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#005);

\(3\) he that commits sin is of the devil, [Jo1
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#008); and,

\(4\) as a matter of fact, he who is of God does not commit sin, [Jo1
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#007), [Jo1
3:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009).

III\. True religion will be manifested by love to the Christian
brotherhood, [Jo1 3:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#010).

\(1\) as a man who is not righteous cannot be a true Christian, neither
can he who does not love his brother, [Jo1
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#010).

\(2\) it is the solemn command of the Saviour that his followers should
love one another, [Jo1 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#011).

\(3\) the importance of this is seen by the opposite conduct of Cain,
[Jo1 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#012).

\(4\) love to the brethren furnishes the most certain evidence that we
have passed from death unto life, [Jo1
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#014).

\(5\) a man who hates another is in fact a murderer, and, of course,
cannot be a true child of God, [Jo1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#015).

\(6\) we should be stimulated to the love of the brethren by the example
of the Saviour, who laid down his life for us, [Jo1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#016).

\(7\) if we see a brother in want, and have the means of aiding him, and
do not do it, we cannot have the love of God dwelling in us, [Jo1
3:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#017).

IV\. We may have evidence that we love God by the consciousness of our
feelings toward him, as well as by outward acts toward his friends, [Jo1
3:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#019).

V. If we keep His commandments our prayers will be answered, [Jo1
3:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#022).

\(1\) there is an assurance that we shall receive what we need if we ask
it, and keep his commandments, [Jo1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#022).

\(2\) the particular commandments on which the efficacy of prayer so
much depends, are:

\(a\) that we believe on the name of the Saviour, and,

\(b\) that we love the Christian brotherhood, [Jo1
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#023).

VI\. We may know that we abide in God by the spirit which he has given
us, as well as by keeping his commandments, [Jo1
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#024).

This chapter, therefore, is occupied mainly with stating what are the
evidences of true piety; and, in order to determine this question, there
is perhaps no part of the Bible that may be studied with more profit
than this portion of the writings of John.

[1 John 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo1 3:1</span></span>

Behold, what manner of love - What love, in "kind" and in "degree." In
kind the most tender and the most ennobling, in adopting us into His
family, and in permitting us to address Him as our Father; in "degree"
the most exalted, since there is no higher love that can be shown than
in adopting a poor and friendless orphan, and giving him a parent and a
home. Even God could bestow upon us no more valuable token of affection
than that we should be adopted into His family, and permitted to regard
Him as our Father. When we remember how insignificant we are as
creatures, and how ungrateful, rebellious, and vile we have been as
sinners, we may well be amazed at the love which would adopt us into the
holy family of God, so that we may be regarded and treated as the
children of the Most High. A prince could manifest no higher love for a
wandering, ragged, vicious orphan boy, found in the streets, than by
adopting him into his own family, and admitting him to the same
privileges and honors as his own sons; and yet this would be a trifle
compared with the honor which God has bestowed on us.

The Father hath bestowed upon us - God, regarded as a Father, or as at
the head of the universe considered as one family.

That we should be called the sons of God - That is, that we should "be"
the sons of God - the word "called" being often used in the sense of "to
be." On the nature and privileges of adoption, see the [Rom
8:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015) notes; [Co2
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#018) note, and practical remarks on
that chapter.

Therefore the world knoweth us not - Does not understand our principles;
the reasons of our conduct; the sources of our comforts and joys. The
people of the world regard us as fanatics or enthusiasts; as foolish in
abandoning the pleasures and pursuits which they engage in; as
renouncing certain happiness for that which is uncertain; as cherishing
false and delusive hopes in regard to the future, and as practicing
needless austerities, with nothing to compensate for the pleasures which
are abandoned. There is nothing which the frivolous, the ambitious, and
the selfish "less" understand than they do the elements which go into
the Christian's character, and the nature and source of the Christian's
joys.

Because it knew him not - It did not know the Lord Jesus Christ. That
is, the world had no right views of the real character of the Lord Jesus
when he was on the earth. They mistook him for an enthusiast or an
impostor; and it is no wonder that, having wholly mistaken his
character, they should mistake ours. On the fact that the world did not
know him, see the [Co1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008) note; [Act
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#017) note. Compare [Joh
17:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#025). On the fact that Christians may
be expected to be regarded and treated as their Saviour was, see the
notes at [Joh 15:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#018). Compare [Mat
10:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#024).

[1 John 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jo1 3:2</span></span>

Beloved, now are we the sons of God - We now in fact sustain this rank
and dignity, and on that we may reflect with pleasure and gratitude. It
is in itself an exalted honor, and may be contemplated as such, whatever
may be true in regard to what is to come. In the dignity and the
privileges which we now enjoy, we may find a grateful subject of
reflection, and a cause of thankfulness, even if we should look to
nothing beyond, or when we contemplate the fact by itself.

And it doth not yet appear what we shall be - It is not fully revealed
what we shall be hereafter; what will be the full result of being
regarded as the children of God. There are, indeed, certain things which
may be inferred as following from this. There is enough to animate us
with hope, and to sustain us in the trials of life. There is one thing
which is clear, that we shall be like the Son of God; but what is fully
involved in this is not made known. Perhaps,

\(1\) it could not be so revealed that we could understand it, for that
state may be so unlike the present that no words would fully convey the
conception to our minds. Perhaps,

\(2\) it may be necessary to our condition here, as on probation, that
no more light should be furnished in regard to the future than to
stimulate us to make efforts to reach a world where all is light. For an
illustration of the sentiment expressed here by the apostle, compare the
notes at [Pe2 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#004).

But we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him - It is
revealed to us that we shall be made like Christ; that is, in the bodies
with which we shall be raised up, in character, in happiness, in glory.
Compare the [Phi 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021) note; [Co2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018) note. This is enough to satisfy
the Christian in his prospects for the future world. To be like Christ
is the object of his supreme aim. For that he lives, and all his
aspirations in regard to the coming world may be summed up in this -
that he wishes to be like the glorified Son of God, and to share his
honors and his joys. See the notes at [Phi
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010).

For we shall see him as he is - It is clearly implied here that there
will be an influence in beholding the Saviour as he is, which will tend
to make us like him, or to transform us into his likeness. See the
nature of this influence explained in the notes at [Co2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018).

[1 John 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jo1 3:3</span></span>

And every man that hath this hope in him - This hope of seeing the
Saviour, and of being made like him; that is, every true Christian. On
the nature and influence of hope, see the notes at [Rom
8:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024).

Purifieth himself - Makes himself holy. That is, under the influence of
this hope of being like the Saviour, he puts forth those efforts in
struggling against sin, and in overcoming his evil propensities, which
are necessary to make him pure. The apostle would not deny that for the
success of these efforts we are dependent on divine aid; but he brings
into view, as is often done in the sacred writings, the agency of man
himself as essentially connected with success. Compare [Phi
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012). The particular thought here is,
that the hope of being like Christ, and of being permitted to dwell with
him, will lead a man to earnest efforts to become holy, and will be
actually followed by such a result.

Even as he is pure - The same kind of purity here, the same degree
hereafter. That is, the tendency of such a hope is to make him holy now,
though he may be imperfect; the effect will be to make him "perfectly"
holy in the world to come. It cannot be shown from this passage that the
apostle meant to teach that anyone actually becomes as pure in the
present life as the Saviour is, that is, becomes perfectly holy; for all
that is fairly implied in it is, that those who have this hope in them
aim at the same purity, and will ultimately obtain it. But the apostle
does not say that it is attained in this world. If the passage did teach
this, it would teach it respecting everyone who has this hope, and then
the doctrine would be that no one can be a Christian who does not become
absolutely perfect on earth; that is, not that some Christians may
become perfect here, but that all actually do. But none, it is presumed,
will hold this to be a true doctrine. A true Christian does not, indeed,
habitually and willfully sin; but no one can pretend that all Christians
attain to a state of sinless perfection on earth, or are, in fact, as
pure as the Saviour was. But unless the passage proves that every
Christian becomes absolutely perfect in the present life, it does not
prove that in fact any do. It proves:

\(1\) that the tendency, or the fair influence of this hope, is to make
the Christian pure;

\(2\) that all who cherish it will, in fact, aim to become as holy as
the Saviour was; and,

\(3\) that this object will, at some future period, be accomplished.
There is a world where all who are redeemed shall be perfectly holy.

[1 John 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jo1 3:4</span></span>

Whosoever committeth sin transgresseth also the law - The law of God
given to man as a rule of life. The object of the apostle here is to
excite them to holiness, and to deter them from committing sin, perhaps
in view of the fact stated in [Jo1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#003), that everyone who has the hope of
heaven will aim to be holy like the Saviour. To confirm this, he shows
them that, as a matter of fact, those who are born of God do lead lives
of obedience, [Jo1 3:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#005); and this he
introduces by showing what is the nature of sin, in the verse before us.
The considerations by which he would deter them from indulging in sin
are the following:

\(a\) all sin is a violation of the law of God, [Jo1
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#004);

\(b\) the very object of the coming of Christ was to deliver people from
sin, [Jo1 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#005);

\(c\) those who are true Christians do not habitually sin, [Jo1
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#006);

\(d\) those who sin cannot be true Christians, but are of the devil,
[Jo1 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#008); and,

\(e\) he who is born of God has a germ or principle of true piety in
him, and cannot sin, [Jo1 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009).

It seems evident that the apostle is here combating an opinion which
then existed that people might sin, and yet be true Christians, [Jo1
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#007); and he apprehended that there was
danger that this opinion would become prevalent. On what ground this
opinion was held is unknown. Perhaps it was held that all that was
necessary to constitute religion was to embrace the doctrines of
Christianity, or to be orthodox in the faith; perhaps that it was not
expected that people would become holy in this life, and therefore they
might indulge in acts of sin; perhaps that Christ came to modify and
relax the law, and that the freedoM which he procured for them was
freedom to indulge in whatever people chose; perhaps that, since
Christians were heirs of all things, they had a right to enjoy all
things; perhaps that the passions of people were so strong that they
could not be restrained, and that therefore it was not wrong to give
indulgence to the propensities with which our Creator has formed us. All
these opinions have been held under various forms of Antinomianism, and
it is not at all improbable that some or all of them prevailed in the
time of John. The argument which he urges would be applicable to any of
them. The consideration which he here states is, that all sin is a
transgression of law, and that he who commits it, under whatever
pretence, is to be held as a transgressor of the law. The literal
rendering of this passage is, "He who doeth sin (ἁμαρτίαν hamartian )
doeth also transgression" - ἀνομίαν anomian. Sin is the generic term
embracing all that would be wrong. The word transgression (ἀνομία
anomia) is a specific term, showing where the wrong lay, to wit, in
violating the law.

For sin is the transgression of the law - That is, all sin involves this
as a consequence that it is a violation of the law. The object of the
apostle is not so much to define sin, as to deter from its commission by
stating what is its essential nature - though he has in fact given the
best definition of it that could be given. The essential idea is, that
God has given a law to people to regulate their conduct, and that
whatever is a departure from that law in any way is held to be sin. The
law measures our duty, and measures therefore the degree of guilt when
it is not obeyed. The law determines what is right in all cases, and, of
course, what is wrong when it is not complied with. The law is the
expression of what is the will of God as to what we shall do; and when
that is not done, there is sin. The law determines what we shall love or
not love; when our passions and appetites shall be bounded and
restrained, and to what extent they may be indulged; what shall be our
motives and aims in living; how we shall act toward God and toward
people; and whenever, in any of these respects, its requirements are not
complied with, there is sin.

This will include everything in relation to which the law is given, and
will embrace what we "omit" to do when the law has commanded a thing to
be done, as well as a "positive" act of transgression where the law has
forbidden a thing. This idea is properly found in the original word
rendered "transgression of the law" - ἀνομία anomia. This word occurs in
the New Testament only in the following places: [Mat
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023); [Mat
13:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#041); [Mat
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#028); [Mat
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012); [Rom
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#007); [Rom
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019); [Th2
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#007); [Tit
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#014); [Heb
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#009); [Heb
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#012); [Heb
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#017), in all which places it is
rendered "iniquity" and "iniquities;" in [Co2
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014), where it is rendered
"unrighteousness;" and in the verse before us twice. It properly means
lawlessness, in the sense that the requirements of the law are not
conformed to, or complied with; that is, either by not obeying it, or by
positively violating it. When a parent commands a child to do a thing,
and he does not do it, he is as really guilty of violating the law as
when he does a thing which is positively forbidden. This important
verse, therefore, may be considered in two aspects - as a definition of
the nature of sin, and as an argument against indulgence in it, or
against committing it.

I. As a definition of the nature of sin. It teaches.

\(a\) that there is a rule of law by which the conduct of mankind is to
be regulated and governed, and to which it is to be conformed.

\(b\) That there is sin in all cases where that law is not complied
with; and that all who do not comply with it are guilty before God.

\(c\) That the particular thing which determines the guilt of sin, and
which measures it, is that it is a departure from law, and consequently
that there is no sin where there is no departure from law.

The essential thing is, that the law has not been respected and obeyed,
and sin derives its character and aggravation from that fact. No one can
reasonably doubt as to the accuracy of this definition of sin. It is
founded on the fact:

\(a\) that God has an absolute right to prescribe what we may and may
not do;

\(b\) that it is to be presumed that what he prescribes will be in
accordance with what is right; and,

\(c\) that nothing else in fact constitutes sin. Sin can consist in
nothing else. It does not consist of a particular height of stature, or
a particular complexion; of a feeble intellect, or an intellect made
feeble, as the result of any former apostasy; of any constitutional
propensity, or any disposition founded in our nature as creatures.

For none of these things do our consciences condemn us; and however we
may lament them, we have no consciousness of wrong.

(In these remarks the author has in view the doctrine of original sin,
or imputed sin, which he thinks as absurd as sin of stature or
complexion. His views will be found at large in the notes at Rom. 5
throughout, and by comparing these with the supplementary notes on the
same place, the reader will be able to form his own opinion. There does
not seem to be anything affecting the point in this passage.)

II\. As an argument against the commission of sin. This argument may be
considered as consisting of two things - the wrong that is done by the
violation of law, and the exposure to the penalty.

\(1\) the wrong itself. This wrong, as an argument to deter from sin,
arises mainly from two things:

\(a\) because sin is a violation of the will of God, and it is in itself
wrong to disregard that will; and,

\(b\) because it is to be presumed that when God has given law there is
a good reason why he has done it.

\(2\) the fact that the law has a penalty is an argument for not
violating the law.

All law has a penalty; that is, there is some suffering, disadvantage,
forfeit of privileges, etc., which the violation of law draws in its
train, and which is to be regarded as an expression of the sense which
the lawgiver entertains of the value of his law, and of the evil of
disobeying it. Many of these penalties of the violation of the divine
law are seen in this life, and all will be certain to occur sooner or
later, in this world or in the world to come. With such views of the law
and of sin - of his obligations, and of the evils of disobedience - a
Christian should not, and will not, deliberately and habitually violate
the law of God.

[1 John 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jo1 3:5</span></span>

And ye know that he was manifested - The Lord Jesus, the Son of God.
"You know that he became incarnate, or appeared among people, for the
very purpose of putting an end to sin," [Mat
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021). Compare the notes at [Ti1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016). This is the "second" argument in
this paragraph, [Jo1 3:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#004), by which
the apostle would deter us from sin. The argument is a clear one, and is
perhaps the strongest that can be made to bear on the mind of a true
Christian - that the Lord Jesus saw sin to be so great an evil, that he
came into our world, and gave himself to the bitter sorrows of death on
the cross, to redeem us from it.

To take away our sins - The essential argument here is, that the whole
work of Christ was designed to deliver us from the dominion of sin, not
to furnish us the means of indulgence in it; and that, therefore, we
should be deterred from it by all that Christ has done and suffered for
us. He perverts the whole design of the coming of the Saviour who
supposes that his work was in any degree designed to procure for his
followers the indulgences of sin, or who so interprets the methods of
his grace as to suppose that it is now lawful for him to indulge his
guilty passions. The argument essentially is this:

\(1\) That we profess to be the followers of Christ, and should carry
out his ends and views in coming into the world;

\(2\) that the great and leading purpose of his coming was to set us
free from the bondage of transgression;

\(3\) that in doing this he gave himself up to a life of poverty, and
shame, and sorrow, and to a most bitter death on the cross; and,

\(4\) that we should not indulge in that from which he came to deliver
us, and which cost him so much toil and such a death. How could we
indulge in that which has brought heavy calamity upon the head of a
father, or which has pierced a sister's heart with many sorrows? Still
more, how can we be so ungrateful and hardhearted as to indulge in that
which crushed our Redeemer in death?

And in him is no sin - An additional consideration to show that we
should be holy. As he was perfectly pure and spotless, so should all his
followers aim to be; and none can truly pretend to be his who do not
desire and design to become like him. On the personal holiness of the
Lord Jesus, see the [Heb 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026) note,
and [Pe1 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#023) note.

[1 John 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jo1 3:6</span></span>

Whosoever abideth in him - See [Jo1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#006). The word here employed (μένων
menōn) properly means to remain, to continue, to abide. It is used of
persons remaining or dwelling in a place, in the sense of abiding there
permanently, or lodging there, and this is the common meaning of the
word, [Mat 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#011); [Mat
26:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#038); [Mar
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#010); [Luk
1:56](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#056), "et saepe." In the writings of
John, however, it is quite a favorite word to denote the relation which
one sustains to another, in the sense of being united to him, or
remaining with him in affection and love; being with him in heart and
mind and will, as one makes his home in a dwelling. The sense seems to
be that we have some sort of relation to him similar to that which we
have to our home; that is, some fixed and permanent attachment to him.
We live in him; we remain steadfast in our attachment to him, as we do
to our own home. For the use of the word in John, in whose writings it
so frequently occurs, see [Joh 5:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#038);
[Joh 6:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#056); [Joh
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010), [Joh
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#017); [Joh
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#027); [Jo1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#006), [Jo1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#010), [Jo1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#014), [Jo1
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#017), [Jo1
2:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027); [Jo1
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#006), [Jo1
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#024); [Jo1
4:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#012), [Jo1
4:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#015). In the passage before us, as
in his writings generally, it refers to one who lives the life of a
Christian, as if he were always with Christ, and abode with him. It
refers to the Christian considered as adhering steadfastly to the
Saviour, and not as following him with transitory feelings, emotions,
and raptures.

(See the supplementary note at [Rom
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010). We abide in Christ by union with
him. The phrase expresses the continuance of the union; of which see in
the note as above. Scott explains, "whoever abides in Christ as one with
him and as maintaining communion with him. ')

It does not of itself necessarily mean that he will always do this; that
is, it does not prove the doctrine of the perseverance of the saints,
but it refers to the adherence to the Saviour as a continuous state of
mind, or as having permanency; meaning that there is a life of continued
faith in him. It is of a person thus attached to the Saviour that the
apostle makes the important declaration in the passage before us, that
he does not sin. This is the third argument to show that the child of
God should be pure; and the substance of the argument is, that "as a
matter of fact" the child of God is not a sinner.

Sinneth not - There has been much difference of opinion in regard to
this expression, and the similar declaration in [Jo1
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009). Not a few have maintained that it
teaches the "doctrine of perfection," or that Christians may live
entirely without sin; and some have held that the apostle meant to teach
that this is always the characteristic of the true Christian. Against
the interpretation, however, which supposes that it teaches that the
Christian is absolutely perfect, and lives wholly without sin, there are
three insuperable objections:

\(1\) If it teaches that doctrine at all, it teaches that all Christians
are perfect; "whosoever abideth in him," "whosoever is born of God," "he
cannot sin," [Jo1 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009).

\(2\) this is not true, and cannot be held to be true by those who have
any just views of what the children of God have been and are. Who can
maintain that Abraham, or Isaac, or Jacob; that Moses, David, or Job;
that Peter, John, or Paul, were absolutely perfect, and were never,
after their regeneration, guilty of an act of sin? Certainly they never
affirmed it of themselves, nor does the sacred record attribute to them
any such perfection. And who can affirm this of all who give evidence of
true piety in the world? Who can of themselves? Are we to come to the
painful conclusion that all who are not absolutely perfect in thought,
word, and deed, are destitute of any religion, and are to be set down as
hypocrites or self-deceivers? And yet, unless this passage proves that
"all" who have been born again are absolutely perfect, it will not prove
it of anyone, for the affirmation is not made of a part, or of what any
favored individual may be, but of what everyone is in fact who is born
of God.

\(3\) this interpretation is not necessary to a fair exposition of the
passage. The language used is such as would be employed by any writer if
he designed to say of one that he is not characteristically a sinner;
that he is a good man; that he does not commit habitual and willful
transgression. Such language is common throughout the Bible, when it is
said of one man that he is a saint, and of another that he is a sinner;
of one that he is righteous, and of another that he is wicked; of one
that he obeys the law of God, and of another that he does not. John
expresses it strongly, but he affirms no more in fact than is affirmed
elsewhere. The passage teaches, indeed, most important truths in regard
to the true Christian; and the fair and proper meaning may be summed up
in the following particulars:

\(a\) He who is born again does not sin habitually, or is not habitually
a sinner. If he does wrong, it is when he is overtaken by temptation,
and the act is against the habitual inclination and purpose of his soul.
If a man sins habitually, it proves that he has never been renewed.

\(b\) That he who is born again does not do wrong deliberately and by
design. He means to do right. He is not willfully and deliberately a
sinner. If a man deliberately and intentionally does wrong, he shows
that he is not actuated by the spirit of religion. It is true that when
one does wrong, or commits sin, there is a momentary assent of the will;
but it is under the influence of passion, or excitement, or temptation,
or provocation, and not as the result of a deliberate plan or purpose of
the soul. A man who deliberately and intentionally does a wrong thing,
shows that he is not a true Christian; and if this were all that is
understood by "perfection," then there would be many who are perfect,
for there are many, very many Christians, who cannot recollect an
instance for many years in which they have intentionally and
deliberately done a wrong thing. Yet these very Christians see much
corruption in their own hearts over which to mourn, and against which
they earnestly strive; in comparing themselves with the perfect law of
God, and with the perfect example of the Saviour, they see much in which
they come short.

\(c\) He who is born again will not sin finally, or will not fall away.
"His seed remaineth in him," [Jo1 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009).
See the notes at that verse. There is a principle of grace by which he
will ultimately be restrained and recovered. This, it seems to me, is
fairly implied in the language used by John; for if a person might be a
Christian, and yet wholly fall away and perish, how could it be said
with any truth that such a man "sinneth not;" how that "he doth not
commit sin;" how that "his seed remaineth in him, and he cannot sin?"
Just the contrary would be true if this were so.

Whosoever sinneth - That is, as explained above, habitually,
deliberately, characteristically, and finally. - Doddridge. "Who
habitually and avowedly sinneth."

Hath not seen him, nor known him - Has had no just views of the Saviour,
or of the nature of true religion. In other words, cannot be a true
Christian.

[1 John 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jo1 3:7</span></span>

Little children - Notes at [Jo1 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001).

Let no man deceive you - That is, in the matter under consideration; to
wit, by persuading you that a man may live in sinful practices, and yet
be a true child of God. From this it is clear that the apostle supposed
there were some who would attempt to do this, and it was to counteract
their arts that he made these positive statements in regard to the
nature of true religion.

He that doeth righteousness is righteous - This is laid down as a great
and undeniable principle in religion - a maxim which none could dispute,
and as important as it is plain. And it is worthy of all the emphasis
which the apostle lays on it. The man who does righteousness, or leads
an upright life, is a righteous man, and no other one is. No matter how
any one may claim that he is justified by faith; no matter how he may
conform to the external duties and rites of religion; no matter how
zealous he may be for orthodoxy, or for the order of the church; no
matter what visions and raptures he may have, or of what peace and joy
in his soul he may boast; no matter how little he may fear death, or
hope for heaven - unless he is in fact a righteous man, in the proper
sense of the term, he cannot be a child of God. Compare [Mat
7:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016). If he is, in the proper sense
of the word, a man who keeps the law of God, and leads a holy life, he
is righteous, for that is religion. Such a man, however, will always
feel that his claim to be regarded as a righteous man is not to be
traced to what he is in himself, but to what he owes to the grace of
God.

Even as he is righteous - See the notes at [Jo1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#003). Not necessarily in this world to
the same degree, but with the same kind of righteousness. Hereafter he
will become wholly free from all sin, like his God and Saviour, [Jo1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002).

[1 John 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jo1 3:8</span></span>

He that committeth sin - Habitually, willfully, characteristically.

Is of the devil - This cannot mean that no one who commits any sin, or
who is not absolutely perfect, can be a Christian, for this would cut
off the great mass, even according to the belief of those who hold that
the Christian may be perfectly holy, from all claim to the Christian
character. But what the apostle here says is true in two senses:

\(1\) That all who commit sin, even true believers, so far as they are
imperfect, in this respect resemble Satan, and are under his influence,
since sin, just so far as it exists at all, makes us resemble him.

\(2\) all who habitually and characteristically sin are of the devil."
This latter was evidently the principal idea in the mind of the apostle.
His object here is to show that those who sinned, in the sense in which
it would seem some maintained that the children of God might sin, could
have no real evidence of piety, but really belonged to Satan.

For the devil sinneth from the beginning - The beginning of the world;
or from the first account we have of him. It does not mean that he
sinned from the beginning of his existence, for he was made holy like
the other angels. Notes, [Jde 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#006). The
meaning is, that he introduced sin into the universe, and that he has
continued to practice it ever since. The word sinneth here implies
continued and habitual sin. He did not commit one act of sin and then
reform; but he has continued, and still continues, his course of sin.
This may confirm what has been already said about the kind of sin that
John refers to. He speaks of sinning habitually, continuously,
willfully; and anyone who does this shows that he is under the influence
of him whose characteristic it has been and is to sin.

For this purpose the Son of God was manifested - Became incarnate, and
appeared among people, [Jo1 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#005).
Compare the notes at [Ti1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016).

That he might destroy the works of the devil - All his plans of
wickedness, and his control over the hearts of people. Compare the [Mat
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029) note; [Mar
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#024) note; [Heb
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014) note. The argument here is, that
as the Son of God came to destroy all the works of the devil, he cannot
be his true follower who lives in sin.

[1 John 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jo1 3:9</span></span>

Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin - This passage must either
mean that they who are born of God, that is, who are true Christians, do
not sin habitually and characteristically, or that everyone who is a
true Christian is absolutely perfect, and never commits any sin. If it
can be used as referring to the doctrine of absolute perfection at all,
it proves, not that Christians may be perfect, or that a "portion" of
them are, but that all are. But who can maintain this? Who can believe
that John meant to affirm this? Nothing can be clearer than that the
passage has not this meaning, and that John did not teach a doctrine so
contrary to the current strain of the Scriptures, and to fact; and if he
did not teach this, then in this whole passage he refers to those who
are habitually and characteristically righteous.

For his seed remaineth in him - There is much obscurity in this
expression, though the general sense is clear, which is, that there is
something abiding in the heart of the true Christian which the apostle
here calls "seed," which will prevent his sinning. The word "his" in
this phrase, "his seed," may refer either to the individual himself - in
the sense that this can now be properly called "his," inasmuch as it is
a part of himself, or a principle abiding in him; or it may refer to God
- in the sense that what is here called "seed" is "his," that is, he has
implanted it, or it is a germ of divine origin. Robinson (Lex.)
understands it in the latter sense, and so also do Macknight, Doddridge,
Lucke, and others, and this is probably the true interpretation. The
word "seed" (σπέρμα sperma) means properly seed sown, as of grain,
plants, trees; then anything that resembles it, anything which
germinates, or which springs up, or is produced.

It is applied in the New Testament to the word of God, or the gospel, as
that which produces effects in the heart and life similar to what seed
that is sown does. Compare [Mat 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#026),
[Mat 13:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#037). Augustin, Clemens,
(Alex.,) Grotius, Rosenmuller, Benson, and Bloomfield, suppose that this
is the signification of the word here. The proper idea, according to
this, is that the seed referred to is truth, which God has implanted or
sown in the heart, from which it may be expected that the fruits of
righteousness will grow. But that which abides in the heart of a
Christian is not the naked word of God; the mere gospel, or mere truth;
it is rather that word as made vital and efficacious by the influence of
his Spirit; the germ of the divine life; the principles of true piety in
the soul. Compare the words of Virgil: Igneus est illi vigor et
coelestis origo semini. The exact idea here, as it seems to me, is not
that the "seed" refers to "the word of God," as Augustin and others
suppose, or to "the Spirit of God," but to the germ of piety which has
been produced in the heart "by" the word and Spirit of God, and which
may be regarded as having been implanted there by God himself, and which
may be expected to produce holiness in the life. There is, probably, as
Lucke supposes, an allusion in the word to the fact that we are begotten
(Ὁ γεγεννημένος Ho gegennēmenos of God. The word "remaineth" - μένει
menei, compare the notes at [Jo1 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#006) -
is a favorite expression of John. The expression here used by John, thus
explained, would seem to imply two things:

\(1\) that the germ or seed of religion implanted in the soul abides
there as a constant, vital principle, so that he who is born of God
cannot become habitually a sinner; and,

\(2\) that it will so continue to live there that he will not fall away
and perish. The idea is clearly that the germ or principle of piety so
permanently abides in the soul, that he who is renewed never can become
again characteristically a sinner.

And he cannot sin - Not merely he will not, but he cannot; that is, in
the sense referred to. This cannot mean that one who is renewed has not
physical ability to do wrong, for every moral agent has; nor can it mean
that no one who is a true Christian never does, in fact, do wrong in
thought, word, or deed, for no one could seriously maintain that: but it
must mean that there is somehow a certainty as absolute "as if" it were
physically impossible, that those who are born of God will not be
characteristically and habitually sinners; that they will not sin in
such a sense as to lose all true religion and be numbered with
transgressors; that they will not fall away and perish. Unless this
passage teaches that no one who is renewed ever can sin in any sense; or
that everyone who becomes a Christian is, and must be, absolutely and
always perfect, no words could more clearly prove that true Christians
will never fall from grace and perish. How can what the apostle here
says be true, if a real Christian can fall away and become again a
sinner?

Because he is born of God - Or begotten of God. God has given him, by
the new birth, real, spiritual life, and that life can never become
extinct.

[1 John 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jo1 3:10</span></span>

In this the children of God are manifest ... - That is, this furnishes a
test of their true character. The test is found in doing righteousness,
and in the love of the brethren. The former he had illustrated; the
latter he now proceeds to illustrate. The general idea is, that if a
person is not truly a righteous person, and does not love the brethren,
he cannot be a child of God. Perhaps by the phrase in this, using a
pronoun in the singular number, he means to intimate that an important
part of righteousness consists in brotherly love.

Whosoever doeth not righteousness, is not of God - In [Jo1
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#007), he had said that "he that doeth
righteousness is of God."

If that is true, then what he here affirms must be true also, that a man
who does not righteousness is not of God. The general idea is the same,
that no one can be a true Christian who is not in fact a righteous man.

Neither he that loveth not his brother - The illustration of this point
continues to [Jo1 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#018). The general
sense is, that brotherly love is essential to the Christian character,
and that he who does not possess it cannot be a Christian. On the nature
and importance of brotherly love as an evidence of piety, see the notes
at [Joh 13:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034).

[1 John 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jo1 3:11</span></span>

For this is the message - Margin, "commandment." In the received text,
this is ἀγγελία angelia - "a message brought;" in several manuscripts,
and in later editions, it is ἐπαγγελία epangelia - "annunciation,
announcement;" an order given, or a commandment, [Act
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#021). It is not very material which
reading is followed. The word "command" or "rule" would express the
sense with sufficient clearness. The reference is to the law given by
the Saviour as a permanent direction to his disciples.

That ye heard from the beginning, that we should love one another - See
the [Joh 13:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034) notes; [Jo1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#007) note.

[1 John 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jo1 3:12</span></span>

Not as Cain - Not manifesting the spirit which Cain did. His was a most
remarkable and striking instance of a want of love to a brother, and the
case was well adapted to illustrate the propriety of the duty which the
apostle is enjoining. See [Gen 4:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#004).

Who was of that wicked one - Of the devil; that is, he was under his
influence, and acted from his instigation.

And wherefore slew he him? - Because his own works were evil, and his
brother's righteous." He acted under the influence of envy. He was
dissatisfied that his own offering was not accepted, and that his
brother's was. The apostle seems desirous to guard those to whom he
wrote against the indulgence of any feelings that were the opposite of
love; from anything like envy toward more highly favored brethren, by
showing to what this would lead if fairly acted out, as in the case of
Cain. A large part of the crimes of the earth have been caused, as in
the murder of Abel, by the want of brotherly love. Nothing but love
would be necessary to put an end to the crimes, and consequently to a
large part of the misery, of the world.

[1 John 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jo1 3:13</span></span>

Marvel not - Do not think it so unusual, or so little to be expected, as
to excite astonishment.

If the world hate you - The emphasis here is to be placed on the word
"you." The apostle had just adverted to the fact that Cain hated Abel,
his brother, without cause, and he says that they were not to deem it
strange if the world hated them in like manner. The Saviour [Joh
15:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#017) introduced these subjects in
the same connection. In enjoining the duty of brotherly love on his
disciples, he adverts to the fact that they must expect to be hated by
the world, and tells them to remember that the world hated him before it
hated them. The object of all this was to show more clearly the
necessity of strong and tender mutual affection among Christians, since
they could hope for none from the world. See the notes at [Joh
15:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#018).

[1 John 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jo1 3:14</span></span>

We know that we have passed from death unto life - From spiritual death
(Notes, [Eph 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001)) to spiritual life;
that is, that we are true Christians.

Because we love the brethren - The sentiment here is, that it is an
infallible evidence of true piety if we love the followers of Christ as
such. See this sentiment illustrated in the notes at [Joh
13:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#035). But how easy it would seem to
be to apply such a test of piety as this! Who cannot judge accurately of
his own feelings, and determine whether he loves a Christian because he
bears the name and image of the Saviour - loves him the more just in
proportion as he bears that image? Who cannot, if he chooses, look
beyond the narrow bounds of his own sect, and determine whether he is
pleased with the true Christian character wherever it may be found, and
whether he would prefer to find his friends among those who bear the
name and the image of the Son of God, than among the people of the
world? The Saviour meant that his followers should be known by this
badge of discipleship all over the world, [Joh
13:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034). John says, in carrying out
the sentiment, that Christians, by this test, may know "among
themselves" whether they have any true religion.

He that loveth not his brother abideth in death - He remains dead in
sins; that is, he has never been converted. Compare the notes at [Jo1
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#006). As love to the Christian
brotherhood is essential to true piety, it follows that he who has not
that remains unconverted, or is in a state of spiritual death. He is by
nature dead in sin, and unless he has evidence that he is brought out of
that state, he "remains" or "abides" in it.

[1 John 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jo1 3:15</span></span>

Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer ... - That is, he has the
spirit of a murderer; he has that which, if it were acted out, would
lead him to commit murder, as it did Cain. The private malice, the
secret grudge, the envy which is cherished in the heart, is murderous in
its tendency, and were it not for the outward restraints of human laws,
and the dread of punishment, it would often lead to the act of murder.
The apostle does not say that he who hates his brother, though he does
not in fact commit murder, is guilty to the same degree as if he had
actually done it; but he evidently means to say that the spirit which
would lead to murder is there, and that God will hold him responsible
for it. Nothing is missing but the removal of outward restraints to lead
to the commission of the open deed, and God judges people as he sees
them to be "in their hearts." What a fearful declaration, then, is this!
How many real murderers there are on the earth besides those who are
detected and punished, and besides those open violators of the laws of
God and man who go at large! And who is them that should not feel
humbled and penitent in view of his own heart, and grateful for that
sovereign mercy which has restrained him from open acts of guilt - for
who is there who has not at some period of his life, and perhaps often,
indulged in feelings of hatred, and envy, and malice toward others,
which, if acted out, would have led to the commission of the awful crime
of taking human life? Any man may well shudder at the remembrance of the
secret sins of his own heart, and at the thought of what he would have
been but for the restraining grace of God. And how wonderful is that
grace which, in the case of the true Christian, not only restrains and
checks, but which effectually subdues all these feelings, and implants
in their place the principles of love!

[1 John 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jo1 3:16</span></span>

Hereby perceive we the love of God - The words "of God" are not in the
original, and should not have been introduced into the translation,
though they are found in the Latin Vulgate, and in the Genevan versions,
and in one manuscript. They would naturally convey the idea that "God"
laid down his life for us; or that God himself, in his divine nature,
suffered. But this idea is not expressed in this passage as it is in the
original, and of course no argument can be derived from it either to
prove that Christ is God, or that the divine nature is capable of
suffering. The original is much more expressive and emphatic than it is
with this addition: "By this we know love;" that is, we know what true
love is; we see a most affecting and striking illustration of its
nature. "Love itself" - its real nature, its power, its sacrifices, its
influences - was seen in its highest form, when the Son of God gave
himself to die on a cross. For an illustration of the sentiment, see the
notes at [Joh 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016); [Joh
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#013).

Because he laid down his life for us - There can be no doubt that the
Saviour is here referred to, though his name is not mentioned
particularly. There are several instances in the New Testament where he
is mentioned under the general appellation "he," as one who was well
known, and about whom the writers were accustomed to speak.

And we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren - For the good of
our fellow Christians, if it be necessary. That is, circumstances may
occur where it would be proper to do it, and we ought always to be ready
to do it. The spirit which led the Saviour to sacrifice his life for the
good of the church, should lead us to do the same thing for our brethren
if circumstances should require it. That this is a correct principle no
one can doubt; for:

\(1\) the Saviour did it, and we are bound to imitate his example, and
to possess his spirit;

\(2\) the prophets, apostles, and martyrs did it, laying down their
lives in the cause of truth, and for the good of the church and the
world; and,

\(3\) it has always been held that it is right and proper, in certain
circumstances, for a man to lay down his life for the good of others.

So we speak of the patriot who sacrifices his life for the good of his
country; so we feel in the case of a shipwreck, that it may be the duty
of a captain to sacrifice his life for the good of his passengers and
crew; so in case of a pestilential disease, a physician should not
regard his own life, if he may save others; and so we always hold the
man up to honor who is willing to jeopard his own life on noble
principles of self-denial for the good of his fellow-men. In what cases
this should occur the apostle does not state; but the general principle
would seem to be, that it is to be done when a greater good would result
from our self-sacrifice than from carefully guarding our own lives.
Thus, in the case of a patriot, his death, in the circumstances, might
be of greater value to his country than his life would be; or, his
exposing himself to death would be a greater service to his country,
than if that should not be done.

Thus, the Saviour laid down his life for the good of mankind; thus the
apostles exposed their lives to constant peril in extending the
principles of religion; and thus the martyrs surrendered their lives in
the cause of the church and of truth. In like manner, we ought to be
ready to hazard our lives, and even to lay them down, if in that way we
may promote the cause of truth, and the salvation of sinners, or serve
our Christian brethren. In what way this injunction was understood by
the primitive Christians, may be perceived from what the world is
reported to have said of them, "Behold, how they love one another; they
are ready to die for one another." - Tertullian, Apol. c. 39. So
Eusebius (Eccl. His. vii. 22) says of Christians, that "in a time of
plague they visited one another, and not only hazarded their lives, but
actually lost them in their zeal to preserve the lives of others." We
are not indeed to throw away our lives; we are not to expose them in a
rash, reckless, imprudent manner; but when, in the discharge of duty, we
are placed in a situation where life is exposed to danger, we are not to
shrink from the duty, or to run away from it. Perhaps the following
would embrace the principal instances of the duty here enjoined by the
apostle:

\(1\) We ought to have such love for the church that we should be
willing to die for it, as patriot is willing to die for his country.

\(2\) we ought to have such love for Christians as to be willing to
jeopard our lives to aid them - as in case of a pestilence or plague, or
when they are in danger by fire, or flood, or foes.

\(3\) we ought to have such love for the truth as to be willing to
sacrifice our lives rather than deny it.

\(4\) we ought to have such love for the cause of our Master as to be
willing to cross oceans, and snows, and sands; to visit distant and
barbarous regions, though at imminent risk of our lives, and though with
the prospect that we shall never see our country again.

\(5\) we ought to have such love for the church that we shall engage
heartily and constantly in services of labor and self-sacrifice on its
account, until, our work being done, exhausted nature shall sink to rest
in the grave. In one word, we should regard ourselves as devoted to the
service of the Redeemer, living or dying to be found engaged in his
cause. If a case should actually occur where the question would arise
whether a man would abandon his Christian brother or die, he ought not
to hesitate; in all cases he should regard his life as consecrated to
the cause of Sion and its friends. Once, in the times of primitive
piety, there was much of this spirit in the world; how little, it is to
be feared, does it prevail now!

[1 John 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jo1 3:17</span></span>

But whoso hath this world's good - Has property - called "this world's
good," or a good pertaining to this world, because it is of value to us
only as it meets our wants this side of the grave; and perhaps also
because it is sought supremely by the people of the world. The general
meaning of this verse, in connection with the previous verse, is, that
if we ought to be willing to lay down our lives for others, we ought to
be willing to make those comparatively smaller sacrifices which are
necessary to relieve them in their distresses; and that if we are
unwilling to do this, we can have no evidence that the love of God
dwells in us.

And seeth his brother have need - Need of food, of raiment, of shelter;
or sick, and poor, and unable to provide for his own wants and those of
his family.

And shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him - The bowels, or
"upper viscera," embracing the heart, and the region of the chest
generally, are in the Scriptures represented as the seat of mercy,
piety, and compassion, because when the mind feels compassion it is that
part which is affected. Compare the notes at [Isa
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#011).

How dwelleth the love of God in him? - How can a man love God who does
not love those who bear his image? See the notes at [Jo1
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#020). On the general sentiment here,
see the notes at [Jam 2:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#014). The
meaning is plain, that we cannot have evidence of piety unless we are
ready to do good to others, especially to our Christian brethren. See
the [Mat 25:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#045) note; [Gal
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010) note.

[1 John 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jo1 3:18</span></span>

My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue - By mere
profession; by merely sayinG that we love each other. See [Pe1
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#022).

But in deed and in truth - In such acts as shall show that our professed
love is sincere and real. Let us do the deed of love, whether anything
is said about it or not. See the notes at [Mat
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#003).

[1 John 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jo1 3:19</span></span>

And hereby - Greek, "by this;" that is, by the fact that we have true
love to others, and that we manifest it by a readiness to make
sacrifices to do them good.

We know that we are of the truth - That we are not deceived in what we
profess to be; that is, that we are true Christians. To be of the truth
stands opposed to cherishing false and delusive hopes.

And shall assure our hearts before him - Before God, or before the
Saviour. In the margin, as in the Greek, the word rendered "shall
assure," is "persuade." The Greek word is used as meaning to "persuade,"
e. g., to the reception and belief of truth; then to persuade anyone who
has unkind or prejudiced feelings toward us, or to bring over to kind
feelings, "to conciliate," and thus to pacify or quiet. The meaning here
seems to be, that we shall in this way allay the doubts and trouble of
our minds, and produce a state of quiet and peace, to wit, by the
evidence that we are of the truth. Our consciences are often restless
and troubled in view of past guilt; but, in thus furnishing the evidence
of true piety by love to others, we shall pacify an accusing mind, and
conciliate our own hearts, and persuade or convince ourselves that we
are truly the children of God. See Robinson, Lexicon, sub voce πείθω
peithō, I. b. In other words, though a person's heart may condemn him as
guilty, and though he knows that God sees and condemns the sins of his
past life, yet the agitations and alarms of his mind may be calmed down
and soothed by evidence that he is a child of God, and that he will not
be finally condemned. A true Christian does not attempt to conceal the
fact that there is much for which his own heart and conscience might
justly accuse him but he finds, notwithstanding all this, evidence that
he is a child of God, and he is persuaded that all will be well.

[1 John 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jo1 3:20</span></span>

For if our heart condemn us - We cannot hope for peace from any
expectation that our own hearts will never accuse us, or that we
ourselves can approve of all that we have done. The reference here is
not so much to our past lives, as to our present conduct and deportment.
The object is to induce Christians so to live that their hearts will not
condemn them for any secret sins, while the outward deportment may be
unsullied. The general sentiment is, that if they should so live that
their own hearts would condemn them for present insincerity and
hypocrisy, they could have no hope of peace, for God knows all that is
in the heart. In view of the past - when the heart accuses us of what we
have done - we may find peace by such evidences of piety as shall allay
the troubles of an agitated soul, [Jo1
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009), but we cannot have such peace if
our hearts condemn us for the indulgence of secret sins, now that we
profess to be Christians. If our hearts condemn us for present
insincerity, and for secret sins, we can never "persuade" or soothe them
by any external act of piety. In view of the consciousness of past
guilt, we may find peace; we can find none if there is a present purpose
to indulge in sin.

God is greater than our heart, and knoweth all things - We cannot hope
to find peace by hiding anything from his view, or by any supposition
that he is not acquainted with the sins for which our consciences
trouble us. He knows all the sins of which we are conscious, and sees
all their guilt and aggravation as clearly as we do. He knows more than
this. He knows all the sins which we have forgotten; all those acts
which we endeavor to persuade ourselves are not sinful, but which are
evil in his sight; and all those aggravations attending our sins which
it is impossible for us fully and distinctly to conceive. He is more
disposed to condemn sin than we are; he looks on it with less allowance
than we do. We cannot hope, then, for a calm mind in any supposition
that God does not see our sins as clearly as we do, or in any hope that
he will look on them with more favor and indulgence. Peace cannot be
found in the indulgence of sin in the hope that God will not perceive or
regard it, for we can sooner deceive ourselves than we can him; and
while therefore, [Jo1 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#019), in
reference to the past, we can only "persuade" our hearts, or soothe
their agitated feelings by evidence that we are of the truth now, and
that our sins are forgiven; in reference to the present and the future,
the heart can be kept calm only by such a course of life that our own
hearts and our God shall approve the manner in which we live.

[1 John 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jo1 3:21</span></span>

Beloved, if our heart condemn us not - If we so live as to have an
approving conscience - that is, if we indulge in no secret sin; if we
discharge faithfully every known duty; if we submit without complaining
to all the allotments of Divine Providence.

Then have we confidence toward God - Compare the [Jo1
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#019); [Jo1
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#028) notes; [Act
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#016) note. The apostle evidently does
not mean that we have confidence toward God on the ground of what we do,
as if it were meritorious, or as if it constituted a claim to his favor;
but that we may so live as to have evidence of personal piety, and that
we may look forward with a confident hope that we shall be accepted of
him in the great day. The word here rendered "confidence" - παῤῥησίαν
parrēsian - means properly "boldness;" usually boldness or openness in
speaking our sentiments. See the notes at [Jo1
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#028). The confidence or boldness which
we have toward our Maker is founded solely on the evidence that he will
graciously accept us as pardoned sinners; not in the belief that we
deserve his favor.

[1 John 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jo1 3:22</span></span>

And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him - If we are truly his children,
and ask in a proper manner. See the notes at [Mat
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007). Compare [Mar
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#024); [Luk
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#009); [Luk
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001) ff; [Joh
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#013); [Joh
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#007); [Jo1
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#014). The declaration here made must
be understood with these limitations:

\(1\) that we ask in a proper manner, [Jam
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#003); and,

\(2\) that the thing asked shall be such as will be consistent for God
to give; that is, such as he shall see to be best for us, [Jo1
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#014). See the notes at this latter
passage.

Because we keep his commandments - Not that this is the meritorious
ground of our being heard, but that it furnishes evidence that we are
his children, and he hears his children as such.

And do those things that are pleasing in his sight - As a parent is
disposed to bestow favors on obedient, affectionate, and dutiful
children, so God is on those who please him by their obedience and
submission to his will. We can have no hope that he will hear us unless
we do so live as to please him.

[1 John 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jo1 3:23</span></span>

And this is his commandment - His commandment, by way of eminence; the
leading, principal thing which he enjoins on us; the commandment which
lies at the foundation of all true obedience.

That we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ - See the
notes at [Mar 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016). Compare [Joh
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#001); [Act
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#031).

And love one another ... - This follows from the other, and hence they
are mentioned as together constituting his commandment. Notes, [Joh
13:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#035).

[1 John 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jo1 3:24</span></span>

And he that keepeth his commandments ... - See the notes at [Joh
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023).

And hereby we know that he abideth in us - That is, this is another
certain evidence that we are true Christians. The Saviour had promised
[Joh 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023) that he would come and take
up his abode with his people. John says that we have proof that he does
this by the Spirit which he has given us. That is, the Holy Spirit is
imparted to his people to enlighten their minds; to elevate their
affections; to sustain them in times of trial; to quicken them in the
performance of duty; and to imbue them with the temper and spirit of the
Lord Jesus. When these effects exist, we may be certain that the Spirit
of God is with us; for these are the "fruits" of that Spirit, or these
are the effects which he produces in the lives of men. Compare the notes
at [Gal 5:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022). On the evidence of
piety here referred to, see the notes at [Rom
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009), [Rom
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#014), [Rom
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#016). No man can be a true Christian
in whom that Spirit does not constantly dwell, or to whom he is not
"given." And yet no one can determine that the Spirit dwells in him,
except by the "effects" produced in his heart and life. In the following
chapter, the apostle pursues the subject suggested here, and shows that
we should examine ourselves closely, to see whether the "Spirit" to
which we trust, as furnishing evidence of piety, is truly the Spirit of
God, or is a spirit of delusion.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 4](jo1004)

</div>
