<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job036)  [Next](job038) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 37](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#001)

[Job 37:1](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 37:1</span></span>

At this also - That is, in view of the thunderstorm, for it is that
which Elihu is describing. This description was commenced in [Job
36:29](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#029), and is continued to [Job
37:5](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#005), and should not have been
separated by the division into chapters. Elihu sees a tempest rising.
The clouds gather, the lightnings flash, the thunder rolls, and he is
awed as with the conscious presence of God. There is nowhere to be found
a more graphic and impressive description of a thunder-storm than this;
compare Herder on Hebrew Poetry, vol. i., 85ff, by Marsh, Burlington,
1833.

My heart trembleth - With fear. He refers to the palpitation or
increased action of the heart produced by alarm.

And is moved out of his place - That is, by violent palpitation. The
heart seems to leave its calm resting place, and to burst away because
of fright. The increased action of the heart under the effects of fear,
as described here by Elihu, has been experienced by all. The "cause" of
this increased action is supposed to be this. The immediate effect of
fear is on the extremities of the nerves of the system, which are
diffused ever the whole body. The first effect is to prevent the
circulation of the blood to the extremities, and to drive it back to the
heart, and thus to produce paleness. The blood thus driven back on the
heart produces an increased action there to propel it through the lungs
and the arteries, thus causing at the same time the increased effort of
the heart, and the rapid action of the lungs, and of course the quick
breathing and the palpitation observed in fear. See Scheutzer, Physica.
Sacra, in loc. An expression similar to that which occurs here, is used
by Shakespeare, in Macbeth:

"Why do I yield to that suggestion,

Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair,

And make ray seated heart knock at my ribs

Against the use of nature."

[Job 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 37:2</span></span>

Hear attentively - Margin, as in Hebrew "hear in hearing;" that is, bear
with attention. It has been supposed by many, and not without
probability, that the tempest was already seen rising, out of which God
was to address Job Job 38, and that Elihu here calls the special
attention of his hearers to the gathering storm, and to the low
muttering thunder in the distance.

The noise of his voice - Thunder is often represented as the voice of
God, and this was one of the most natural of all suppositions when its
nature was little understood, and is at all times a beautiful poetic
conception; see the whole of [Psa
29:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001). The word rendered "noise"
(רגז rôgez), means properly "commotion," that which is fitted to produce
perturbation, or disquiet (see [Job
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#017), [Job
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#026); [Isa
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#003)), and is used here to denote the
commotion, or "raging" of thunder.

And the sound - The word used here (הגה hegeh) means properly a
"muttering growling" - as of thunder. It is often used to denote
sighing, moaning, and meditation, in contradistinction from clear
enunciation. Here it refers to the thunder which seems to mutter or
growl in the sky.

[Job 37:3](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 37:3</span></span>

He directeth it under the whole heaven - It is under the control of God,
and he directs it where he pleases. It is not confined to one spot, but
seems to be complaining from every part of the heavens.

And his lightning - Margin, as in Hebrew "light." There can be no doubt
that the lightning is intended.

Unto the ends of the earth - Margin, as in Hebrew "wings." The word
wings is given to the earth from the idea of its being spread out or
expanded like the wings of a bird; compare [Job
38:13](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#013); [Eze
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#002). The earth was spoken of as an
expanse or plain that had corners or boundaries (see [Isa
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012), note; [Isa
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#016), note; [Isa
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#005), note), and the meaning here is,
that God spread the lightning at pleasure over the whole of that vast
expanse.

[Job 37:4](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 37:4</span></span>

After it a voice roareth - After the lightning; that is, the flash is
seen before the thunder is heard. This is apparent to all, the interval
between the lightning and the hearing of the thunder depending on the
distance. Lucretius, who has referred to the same fact, compares this
with what occurs when a woodman is seen at a distance to wield an axe.
The glance of the axe is seen long before the sound of the blow is
heard:

Sed tonitrum fit uti post antibus accipiamus,

Fulgere quam cernunt ocuil, quia semper ad aures

Tardius adveniunt, quam visum, guam moveant res.

Nunc etiam licet id cognoscere, caedere si quem

Ancipiti videas ferro procul arboris actum.

Ante fit, ut cernas ictum, quam plaga per aures

Det sonitum: Sic fulgorem quoque cernimus ante.

Lib. vi.

He thundereth with the voice of his excellency - That is, with a voice
of majesty and grandeur.

And he will not stay them - That is, he will not hold back the rain,
hail, and other things which accompany the storm, when he begins to
thunder. "Rosenmuller." Or, according to others, he will not hold back
and restrain the lightnings when the thunder commences. But the
connection seems rather to demand that we should understand it of the
usual accompaniments of a storm - the wind, hail, rain, etc. Herder
renders it, "We cannot explore his thunderings." Prof. Lee, "And none
can trace them, though their voice be heard." According to him, the
meaning is, that "great and terrific as this exhibition of God's power
is, still the progress of these, his ministers, cannot be followed by
the mortal eye." But the usual interpretation given to the Hebrew word
is that of "holding back," or "retarding," and this idea accords well
with the connection.

[Job 37:5](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 37:5</span></span>

God thundereth marvelously - He thunders in a wonderful manner. The idea
is, that the voice of his thunder is an amazing exhibition of his
majesty and power.

Great things doeth he, which we cannot comprehend - That is, not only in
regard to the thunder and the tempest, but in other things. The
description of the storm properly ends here, and in the subsequent
verses Elihu proceeds to specify various other phenomena, which were
wholly incomprehensible by man. The reference here to the storm, and to
the other grand and incomprehensible phenomena of nature, is a most
appropriate introduction to the manifestation of God himself as
described in the next chapter, and could not but have done much to
prepare Job and his friends for that sublime close of the controversy.

The passage before us [Job 36:29-33](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#029);
[Job 37:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#001), is probably the earliest
description of a thunderstorm on record. A tempest is a phenomenon which
must early have attracted attention, and which we may expect to find
described or alluded to in all early poetry. It may be interesting,
therefore, to compare this description of a storm, in probably the
oldest poem in the world, with what has been furnished by the masters of
song in ancient and modern times, and we shall find that in sublimity
and beauty the Hebrew poet will suffer nothing in comparison. In one
respect, which constitutes the chief sublimity of the description. he
surpasses them all: I mean in the recognition of God. In the Hebrew
description. God is every where in the storm He excites it; he holds the
lightnings in both hands; he directs it where he pleases; he makes it
the instrument of his pleasure and of executing his purposes. Sublime,
therefore, as is the description of the storm itself, furious as is the
tempest; bright as is the lightning: and heavy and awful as is the roar
of the thunder, yet the description derives its chief sublimity from the
fact that "God" presides over all, riding on the tempest and directing
the storm as he pleases. Other poets have rarely attempted to give this
direction to the thoughts in their description of a tempest, if we may
except Klopstock, and they fall, therefore, far below the sacred poet.
The following is the description of a storm by Elihu, according to the
exposition which I have given:

Who can understand the outspreading of the clouds,

And the fearful thunderings in his pavilion?

Behold, he spreadeth his light upon it;

He also covereth the depths of the sea.

By these he executeth judgment upon the people,

By these he giveth food in abundance.

With his hands he covereth the lightning,

And commandeth it where to strike.

He pointeth out to his friends -

The collecting of his wrath is upon the wicked.

At this also my heart palpitates,

And is moved out of its place.

Hear, O hear, the thunder of his voice!

The muttering thunder that goes from his mouth!

He directeth it under the whole heaven.

And his lightning to the end of the earth.

After it, the thunder roareth;

He thundereth with the voice of his majesty,

And he will not restrain the tempest when his voice is heard.

God thundereth marvelously with his voice;

He doeth wonders, which we cannot comprehend.

The following is the description of a Tempest by Aeschylus, in the
Prometh. Desm., beginning,

\- Χθὼν αεσάλευται;

Βρυχία δ ̓ ἠχὼ παραμυκᾶται

Βροντῆς, κ.τ.λ.

\- Chthōn sesaleutai;

Bruchia d' ēchō paramukatai

Brontēs, etc.

\- "I feel in very deed

The firm earth rock: the thunder's deepening roar

Rolls with redoubled rage; the bickering flames

Flash thick; the eddying sands are whirled on high;

In dreadful opposition, the wild winds

Rend the vex'd air; the boisterous billows rise

Confounding earth and sky: the impetuous storm

Rolls all its terrible fury."

Potter

Ovid's description is the following:

Aethera conscendit, vultumque sequentia traxit

Nubila; queis nimbos, immistaque fulgura ventis

Addidit, et tonitrus, et inevitabile fulmen.

Meta. ii.

The description of a storm by Lucretius, is the following:

Praeterea persaepe niger quoque per mare nimbus

Ut picis e coelo demissum flumen, in undas

Sic cadit, et fertur tenebris, procul et trahit atram

Fulminibus gravidam tempestatem, atque procellis.

Ignibus ac ventis cum primus ipse repletus:

In terris quoque ut horrescant ae tecta requirant.

S c igitur sutpranostrum caput esso putandum est

Tempestatem altam. Neque enim caligine tanta

Obruerat terras, nisi inaedificata superne

Multa forent multis exempto nubila sole.

Lib. vi.

The well-known description of the storm by Virgil is as follows:

Nimborum in patriam, loca foeta furentibus austris,

Aeoliam venit. Hic vasto Rex Aeolus antro

Luctantis ventos tempestatesque sonoras

Imperio premit, ac vinelis et carcere frenat.

Illi indignantes, magno cum murmure, montis

Circum claustra fremunt. Celsa sedet Aeolus arce,

Sceptra tenens: molliitque animos, et temperat iras.

\- Venti, velut agmine facto.

Qua data petra, ruunt, et terras turbine perflant.

Incubuere mari, totumque a sedibus imis,

Una Eurusque Notusque ruunt, creberque procelis

Africus, et vastos volvunt ad litora fluctus.

Aeneid i. 51-57, 82-86.

One of the most sublime descriptions of a storm to be found any where,
is furnished by Klopstock. It contains a beautiful recognition of the
presence and majesty of God, and a most tender and affecting description
of the protection which his friends experience when the storm rushes by.
It is in the Fruhlingsfeier - a poem which is regarded by many as his
masterpiece. A small portion of it I will transcribe:

Wolken stromen herauf!

Sichtbar ist; der komant, der Ewige!

Nun schweben sie, rauschen sie, wirbeln die Winde!

Wie beugt sich der Wald! Wie hebet sich det Strom!

Sichtbar, wie du es Sterblichen seyn kannst,

Ja, das bist du, sichtbar, Unendlicher!

Zurnest du, Herr,

Weil Nacht dein Gewand ist?

Diese Nacht ist Segen der Erde.

Vater, du Zurnest nicht!

Seht ihr den Zeugendes Nahen, den zucken den Strahi?

Hort ihr Jehovah's Donner?

Hort ihr ihn? hort ihr ihn.

Der erschtternden Donner des Herrn?

Herr! Herr! Gott!

Barmhertzig, und gnadig!

Angebetet, gepriesen,

Sey dein herrlicher Name!

Und die Gowitterwinde! Sie tragen den Donner!

Wie sie rauschen! Wie sie mit lawter Woge den Wald du: chstromen!

Und nun schwiegen sie. Langsam wandelt

Die schwartze Wolke.

Seht ihr den neurn Zeugen des Nahen, den fliegenden Strahl!

Horet ihr hoch in Wolke den Donner dex Herrn?

Er ruft: Jehova! Jehova!

Und der geschmetterte Wald dampft!

Abet nicht unsre Hutte

Unser Vater gebot

Seinem Verderber,

Vor unsrer Hutte voruberzugehn!

[Job 37:6](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 37:6</span></span>

For he saith to the snow - That is, the snow is produced by the command
of God, and is a proof of his wisdom and greatness. The idea is, that;
the formation of snow was an illustration of the wisdom of God, and
should teach people to regard him with reverence. It is not to be
supposed that the laws by which snow is formed in the atmosphere were
understood in the time of Elihu. The fact that it seemed to be the
effect of the immediate creation of God, was the principal idea in the
mind of Elihu in illustrating his wisdom. But it is not less fitted to
excite our admiration of his wisdom now that the laws by which it is
produced are better understood; and in fact the knowledge of those laws
is adapted to elevate our conceptions of the wisdom and majesty of Him
who formed them. The investigations and discoveries of science do not
diminish the proofs of the Creator's wisdom and greatness. but every new
discovery tends to change blind admiration to intelligent devotion; to
transform wonder to praise. On the formation of snow, see the notes at
[Job 38:22](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#022).

Be thou on the earth - There is a strong resemblance between this
passage and the sublime command in [Gen
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003), "And God said, Let there be
light, and there was light." Each of them is expressive of the creative
power of God, and of the ease with which he accomplishes his purposes.

Likewise to the small rain - Margin, "and to the shower of rain, and to
the showers of rain of his strength." The word which is used here in the
Hebrew (גשׁם geshem), means "rain" in general, and the phrase "small
rain" ( גשׁם ( מטר mâṭâr geshem), seems to be used to denote the "rain"
simply, without reference to its violence, or to its being copious. The
following phrase, "the great rain of his strength" (עזוּ מטרות גשׁם
geshem mâṭârôt ‛ôzû) refers to the rain when it has increased to a
copious shower. The idea before the mind of Elihu seems to have been
that of a shower, as it commences and increases until it pours down
torrents, and the meaning is, that alike in the one case and the other,
the rain was under the command of God, and obeyed his will. The whole
description here is that which pertains to winter, and Elihu refers
doubtless to the copious rains which fell at that season of the year.

[Job 37:7](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 37:7</span></span>

He sealeth up the hand of every man - That is, in the winter, when the
snow is on the ground, when the streams are frozen, and when the labors
of the husbandman cease. The idea of "sealing up the hand" is derived
from the common purpose of a seal, to make fast, to close up, to secure
(compare [Job 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#007), note; [Job
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#016), note), and the sense is, that
the hands can no more be used in ordinary toil. Every man in the snow
and rain of winter is prevented from going abroad to his accustomed
toil, and is, as it were, sealed up in his dwelling. The idea is
exquisitely beautiful. God confines human beings and beasts in their
houses or caves, until the winter has passed by.

That all men may know his work - The Septuagint renders this," That
every man may know his own weakness" - ἀσθένειαν astheneian. Various
interpretations have been given of the passage, but our common version
has probably expressed in the main the true sense, that God thus
interrupts the labors of man, and confines him in his home, that he may
feel his dependence on God, and may recognize the constant agency of his
Creator. The Hebrew literally is "For the knowledge of all the men of
his making;" that is, that all the people whom he has created may have
knowledge. The changing seasons thus keep before us the constant
evidence of the unceasing agency of God in his works, and prevent the
feeling which we might have, if everything was uniform that the universe
was under the control of "fate." As it is, the succession of the
seasons, the snow, the rain, the dew, and the sunshine, all bear marks
of being under the control of an intelligent Being, and are so regulated
that we need not forget that his unceasing agency is constantly round
about us. It may be added, that when the farmer in the winter is laid
aside from his usual toil, and confined to his dwelling, it is a
favorable time for him to meditate on the works of God, and to acquaint
himself with his Creator. The labors of man are thus interrupted; the
busy affairs of life come to a pause, and while nature is silent around
us, and the earth wrapped in her fleecy mantle forbids the labor of the
husbandman, everything invites to the contemplation of the Creator, and
of the works of his hands. The winter, therefore, might be improved by
every farmer to enlarge his knowledge of God, and should be regarded as
a season wisely appointed for him to cultivate his understanding and
improve his heart.

[Job 37:8](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 37:8</span></span>

Then the beasts go into dens - In the winter. This fact appears to have
been early observed, that in the season of cold the wild animals
withdrew into caves, and that many of them became torpid. This fact
Elihu adverts to as an illustration of the wisdom and greatness of God.
The proof of his superintending care was seen in the fact that they
withdrew from the cold in which they would perish, and that provision is
made for their continuance in life at a time when they cannot obtain the
food by which they ordinarily subsist. In that torpid and inactive
state, they need little food, and remain often for months with almost no
nourishment.

[Job 37:9](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 37:9</span></span>

Out of the south - Margin, "chamber." Jerome, "ab interioribus - from
the interior," or "inner places." Septuagint, ἐκ ταυείων ek taueiōn -
"from their chambers issue sorrows" - ὀωύνας othunas. The Hebrew word
used here (חדר cheder) denotes properly "an apartment," or "chamber,"
especially an inner apartment, or a chamber in the interior of a house
or tent: [Gen 43:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#030); [Jdg
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#009), [Jdg
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#012). Hence, it means a bed-chamber,
[Sa2 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#007), or a female apartment or
harem, [Sol 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#004); [Sol
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#004). In [Job
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#009), it is connected with the "south"
- "the chambers of the south" (see the notes at that place), and means
some remote, hidden regions in that quarter. There can be little doubt
that the word "south "is here also to be understood, as it stands in
contrast with a word which properly denotes the north. Still there may
have been reference to a supposed opinion that whirlwinds had their
origin in deep, hollow caves, and that they were owing to the winds
which were supposed to be pent up there, and which raged tumultuously
until they broke open the doors of their prison, and then poured forth
with violence over the earth; compare the description of the storm in
Virgil, as quoted above in [Job 37:5](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#005).
There are frequent allusions in the Scriptures to the fact that
whirlwinds come from the South; see the notes at [Isa
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001); compare [Zac
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#014). Savary says of the south wind,
which blows in Egypt from February to May, that it fills the atmosphere
with a fine dust, rendering breathing difficult, and that it is filled
with an injurious vapor. Sometimes it appears in the form of a furious
whirlwind, which advances with great rapidity, and which is highly
dangerous to those who traverse the desert. It drives before it clouds
of burning sand; the horizon appears covered with a thick veil, and the
sun appears red as blood. Occasionally whole caravans are buried by it
in the sand. It is possible that there may be reference to such a
whirlwind in the passage before us; compare Burder, in Rosenmuller's
Alte u. neue Morgenland. No. 765.

The whirlwind - See [Job 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#019), note;
[Job 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#022), note.

And cold out of the north - Margin, "scattering" winds. The Hebrew word
used here (מזרים mezâriym) means literally, "the scattering," and is
hence used for the north winds, says Gesenius which scatter the clouds,
and bring severe cold. Umbreit thinks the word is used to denote the
north, because we seem to see the north winds strewed on the clouds.
Probably the reference is to the north wind as scattering the snow or
hail on the ground. Heated winds come from the south; but those which
scatter the snow, and are the source of cold, come from the north. In
all places north of the equator it is true that the winds from the
northern quarter are the source of cold. The idea of Elihu is, that all
these things are under the control of God, and that these various
arrangements for heat and cold are striking proofs of his greatness.

[Job 37:10](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 37:10</span></span>

By the breath of God frost is given - Not by the violent north wind, or
by the whirlwind of the south, but God seems to "breathe" in a gentle
manner, and the earth is covered with hoary frost. It appears in a still
night, when there is no storm or tempest, and descends upon the earth as
silently as if it were produced by mere breathing. Frost is congealed or
frozen dew. On the formation and cause of dew, see the notes at [Job
38:28](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#028). The figure is poetical and
beautiful. The slight motion of the air, even when the frost appears,
seems to be caused by the breathing of God.

And the breadth of the waters is straitened - That is, is contracted by
the cold; or is frozen over. The waters are "compressed" into a solid
mass (במוצק bemûtsaq), or are in a state of "pressure" or "compression"
- or so the word used here means. What were before expanded rivers or
arms of the sea, are now compressed into solid masses of ice. This,
also, is proof of the greatness and power of God, for though the cause
was not understood by Elihu, yet there was no doubt that it was produced
by his agency. Though the laws by which this occurs are now better
understood than they were then, it is no less clearly seen that it is by
his agency; and all the light which we obtain in regard to the laws by
which these things occur, only serve to exalt our conceptions of the
wisdom and greatness of God.

[Job 37:11](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 37:11</span></span>

Also by watering - Very various interpretations have been given of this
phrase. Herder renders it, "His brightness rendeth the clouds." Umbreit,
Und Heiterkeit vertreibt die Wolke - "and serenity or clearness drives
away the clouds." Prof. Lee, "For irrigation is the thick cloud
stretched out." Rosenmuller, "Splendor dispels the clouds." Luther, "The
thick clouds divide themselves that it may be clear." Coverdale, "The
clouds do their labor in giving moistness." The Vulgate, "The grain
desires the clouds," and the Septuagint, "The cloud forms the chosen" -
ἐκλεκτον eklekton. This variety of interpretation arises from the
uncertainty of the meaning of the original word - ברי berı̂y. According
to the Chaldee and the rabbis, this word means "clearness, serenity" of
the heavens, and then the whole clause is to be rendered, "serenity
dispelleth the cloud." Or the word may be formed of the preposition ב
(be), and רי rı̂y, meaning "watering" or "rain," the same as רוי reviy.
The word does not occur elsewhere in Hebrew, and hence, it is not easy
to determine its meaning. The weight of authority is in favor of
serenity, or clearness - meaning that the thick, dark cloud is driven
away by the serenity or clearness of the atmosphere - as where the clear
sky seems to light up the heavens and to drive away the clouds. This
idea seems, also, to be demanded by the parallelism, and is also more
poetical than that in the common version.

Wearieth - Or removes, or scatters. The verb used here (טרח ṭârach)
occurs nowhere else in the Scriptures, though nouns derived from the
verb are found in [Isa 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#014), rendered
"trouble," and [Deu 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#012), rendered
"cumbrance." In Arabic it means "to cast down, to project," and hence,
to lay upon as a burden. But the word may mean to impel, drive forward,
and hence, the idea that the dark thick cloud is propelled or driven
forward by the serenity of the sky. This "appears" to be so, and hence,
the poetic idea as it occurred to Elihu.

He scattereth his bright cloud - Margin, "the cloud of his light." The
idea seems to be, that "his light," that is, the light which God causes
to shine as the tempest passes off, seems to scatter or disperse the
cloud. The image before the mind of Elihu probably was, that of a
departing shower, when the light seems to rise behind it, and as it were
to expel the cloud or to drive it away. We are not to suppose that this
is philosophically correct, but Elihu represents it as it appeared, and
the image is wholly poetical.

[Job 37:12](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 37:12</span></span>

And it is turned round about - The word here rendered "it" (הוא hû') may
refer either to the "cloud," and then it will mean that it is driven
about at the pleasure of God; or it may refer to God, and then it will
mean that "he" drives it about at pleasure. The sense is not materially
varied. The use of the Hebrew participle rendered "turned about" (in
Hithpael), would rather imply that it refers to the cloud. The sense
then is, that it turns itself round about - referring to the appearance
of a cloud in the sky that rolls itself about from one place to another.

By his counsels - By the counsels or purposes of God. It is not by any
agency or power of its own, but it is by laws such as he has appointed,
and so as to accomplish his will. The object is to keep up the idea that
God presides over, and directs all these things. The word which is
rendered "counsels" (תחבולה tachebûlâh) means properly a "steering,
guidance, management," [Pro 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#014). It
is usually applied to the act of steering, as a vessel, and then to
prudent management, wise counsel, skillful measures. It is rendered
"wise counsels," and "counsels," [Pro
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#005); [Pro
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#014); [Pro
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#005); [Pro
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#006), and "good advice," [Pro
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#018). It does not elsewhere occur in
the Scriptures. The word is derived from חבל chebel, "a rope," or חבל
chôbêl, "a sailor, pilot," and hence, the idea of "steering," or
"directing." The meaning is, that the movements of the clouds are
entirely under the "direction" of God, as the vessel is of the pilot or
helmsman. The Septuagint appears not to have understood the meaning of
the word, and have not attempted to translate it. They retain it in
their version, writing it, θεεβουλαθὼq theeboulathōth, showing, among
other instances, how the Hebrew was "pronounced" by them.

That they may do whatsoever he commandeth them - See [Psa
147:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#017). The idea is, that even the
clouds, which appear so capricious in their movements, are really under
the direction of God, and are accomplishing his purposes. They do not
move at haphazard, but they are under the control of one who intends to
accomplish important purposes by them. Elihu had made this observation
respecting the lightning [Job
36:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#030), and he now says that the
same thing was true of the clouds. The investigations of science have
only served to confirm this, and to show that even the movements of the
clouds are regulated by laws which have been ordained by a Being of
infinite intelligence.

[Job 37:13](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 37:13</span></span>

He causeth it to come - That is, the rain, or the storm. It is entirely
under the hand of God, like the lightning [Job
36:30](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#030), and designed to accomplish his
purposes of mercy and of justice.

Whether for correction - Margin, as in Hebrew "a rod." The rod is often
used as an emblem of punishment. The idea is, that God, when he pleases,
can send the rain upon the earth for the purpose of executing
punishment. So he did on the old world [Gen
7:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011), and so the overflowing flood
is often now sent to sweep away the works of man, to lay waste his
fields, and to cut off the wicked.

Or for his land - When necessary to render the land productive. He
waters it by timely rains. It is called "his land," meaning that the
earth belongs to the Lord, and that he cultivates it as his own; [Psa
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001).

Or for mercy - In kindness and benignity to the world. But for this, the
earth would become baked and parched, and all vegetation would expire.
The idea is, that the rains are entirely under the control of God, and
that he can make use of them to accomplish his various purposes - to
execute his judgments, or to express his benignity and love. These
various uses to which the lightning, the storm, and the rain could be
made subservient under the divine direction. seem to have been one of
the main ideas in the mind of Elihu, showing the supremacy and the
majesty of God.

[Job 37:14](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 37:14</span></span>

Hearken unto this, O Job - That is, to the lesson which such events are
fitted to convey respecting God.

Stand still - In a posture of reverence and attention. The object is to
secure a calm contemplation of the works of God, so that the mind might
be filled with suitable reverence for him.

[Job 37:15](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 37:15</span></span>

Dost thou know when God disposed them? - That is, the winds, the clouds,
the cold, the snow, the sky, etc. The question refers to the manner in
which God arranges and governs them, rather than to the time when it was
done. So the Hebrew implies, and so the connection demands. The question
was not whether Job knew "when" all this was done, but whether he could
explain "how" it was that God thus arranged and ordered the things
referred to. Elihu asks him whether he could explain the manner in which
the balancings of the clouds were preserved; in which the lightnings
were directed; in which his garments were warm, and in which God had
made and sustained the sky? The Septuagint renders this, "We know that
God hath disposed his works that he hath made light out of darkness."

And caused the light of his cloud to shine - That is, Canst thou explain
the cause of lightning? Canst thou tell how it is that it seems to break
out of a dark cloud? Where has it been concealed? And by what laws is it
now brought forth? Elihu assumes that all this was done by the agency of
God, and since, as he assumes to be true, it was impossible for people
to explain the manner in which it was done, his object is to show that
profound veneration should be shown for a God who works in this manner.
Somewhat more is known now of the laws by which lightning is produced
than there was in the time of Job; but the question may still be asked
of man, and is as much fitted to produce awe and veneration as it was
then, whether he understands the way in which God produces the bright
lightning from the dark bosom of a cloud. Can he tell what is the exact
agency of the Most High in it? Can he explain all the laws by which it
is done?

[Job 37:16](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 37:16</span></span>

Dost thou know the balancings of the clouds? - That is, Dost thou know
how the clouds are poised and suspended in the air? The difficulty to be
explained was, that the clouds, so full of water, did not fail to the
earth, but remained suspended in the atmosphere. They were poised and
moved about by some unseen hand. Elihu asks what kept them there; what
prevented their falling to the earth; what preserved the equilibrium so
that they did not all roll together. The phenomena of the clouds would
be among the first that would attract the attention of man, and in the
early times of Job it is not to be supposed that the subject could be
explained. Elihu assumes that they were held in the sky by the power of
God, but what was the nature of his agency, he says, man could not
understand, and hence, he infers that God should be regarded with
profound veneration. We know more of the facts and laws respecting the
clouds than was understood then, but our knowledge in this, as in all
other things, is fitted only to exalt our conceptions of the Deity, and
to change blind wonder into intelligent adoration.

The causes of the suspension of the clouds are thus stated in the
Edinburgh Encyclopedia, Art. Meteorology: "When different portions of
the atmosphere are intermixed so as to produce a deposition of
moisture;" (compare the notes at [Job
38:28](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#028)), "the consequence will be the
formation of a cloud. This cloud, from its increased specific gravity,
will have a tendency to sink downward; and were the lower strata of the
air of the same temperature with the cloud, and saturated with moisture,
it would continue to descend until it reached the surface of the earth -
in the form of rain, or what is commonly called mist. In general,
however, the cloud in its descent passes through a warmer region, when
the condensed moisture again passes into a vapor, and consequently
ascends until it reaches a temperature sufficiently low to recondense
it, when it will begin again to sink. This oscillation will continue
until the cloud settles at the point where the temperature and humidity
are such as that the condensed moisture begins to be dissipated, and
which is found on an average to be between two and three miles above the
surface of the earth." By such laws the "balancing" of the clouds is
secured, and thus is shown the wisdom of Him that is "perfect in
knowledge."

The wondrous works of him that is perfect in knowledge - Particularly in
the matter under consideration. He who can command the lightning, and
hold the clouds suspended in the air, Elihu infers must be perfect in
knowledge. To a Being who can do this, everything must be known. The
reasoning of Elihu here is well-founded, and is not less forcible now
than it was in the time of Job.

[Job 37:17](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 37:17</span></span>

How thy garments are warm - What is the reason that the garments which
we wear produce warmth? This, it would seem, was one of the
philosophical questions which were asked at that time, and which it was
difficult to explain. Perhaps it has never occurred to most persons to
ask this apparently simple question, and if the inquiry were proposed to
them, plain as it seems to be, they would find it as difficult to give
an answer as Elihu supposed it would be for Job. Of the fact here
referred to that the garments became oppressive when a sultry wind came
from the south, there could be no dispute. But what was the precise
difficulty in explaining the fact, is not so clear. Some suppose that
Elihu asks this question sarcastically, as meaning that Job could not
explain the simplest matters and the plainest facts; but there is every
reason to think that the question was proposed with entire seriousness,
and that it was supposed to involve real difficulty. It seems probable
that the difficulty was not so much to explain why the garments should
become oppressive in a burning or sultry atmosphere, as to show how the
heated air itself was produced It was difficult to explain why cold came
out of the north [Job 37:9](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#009); how the
clouds were suspended, and the lightnings caused [Job
37:11](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#011), [Job
37:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#015); and it was not less
difficult to show what produced uncomfortable heat when the storms from
the north were allayed; when the earth became quiet, and when the
breezes blowed from the south. This would be a fair question for
investigation, and we may readily suppose that the causes then were not
fully known.

When he quieteth the earth - When the piercing blast from the north dies
away, and the wind comes round to the south, producing a more gentle,
but a sultry air. It was true not only that the whirlwind came from the
south [Job 37:9](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#009), but also that the
heated burning air came also from that quarter, [Luk
12:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#055). We know the reason to be that
the equatorial regions are warmer than those at the north, and
especially that in the regions where Job lived the air becomes heated by
passing over extended plains of sand, but there is no reason to suppose
that this was fully understood at the time referred to here.

[Job 37:18](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 37:18</span></span>

Hast thou with him spread out the sky? - That is, wert thou employed
with God in performing that vast work, that thou canst explain how it
was done? Elihu here speaks of the sky as it appears, and as it is often
spoken of, as an expanse or solid body spread out over our heads, and as
sustained by some cause which is unknown. Sometimes in the Scriptures it
is spoken of as a curtain (Notes, [Isa
40:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022)); sometimes as a "firmament," or
a solid body spread out (Septuagint, [Gen
1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006)); sometimes as a fixture in
which the stars are placed (Notes, [Isa
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#004)), and sometimes as a scroll that
may be rolled up, or as a garment, [Psa
102:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#026). There is no reason to suppose
that the true cause of the appearance of an expanse was understood at
that time, but probably the prevailing impression was that the sky was
solid and was a fixture in which the stars were held. Many of the
ancients supposed that there were concentric spheres, which were
transparent but solid, and that these spheres revolved around the earth
carrying the heavenly bodies with them. In one of these spheres, they
supposed, was the sun; in another the moon; in another the fixed stars;
in another the planets; and it was the harmonious movement of these
concentric and transparent orbs which it was supposed produced the
"music of the spheres."

Which is strong - Firm, compact. Elihu evidently supposed that it was
solid. It was so firm that it was self-sustained.

And as a molten looking-glass - As a mirror that is made by being fused
or cast. The word "glass" is not in the original, the Hebrew denoting
simply "seeing," or a "mirror" (ראי re'ı̂y). Mirrors were commonly made
of plates of metal highly polished; see the notes at [Isa
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#023); compare Wilkinson's Manners and
Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, vol. iii. p. 365. Ancient mirrors were
so highly polished that in some which have been discovered at Thebes the
luster has been partially restored, though they have been buried for
many centuries. There can be no doubt that the early apprehension in
regard to the sky was, that it was a solid expanse, and that it is often
so spoken of in the Bible. There is, however, no direct declaration that
it is so, and whenever it is so spoken of, it is to be understood as
popular language, as we speak still of the rising or setting of the sun,
though we know that the language is not philosophically correct. The
design of the Bible is not to teach science, but religion, and the
speakers in the Bible were allowed to use the language of common life -
just as scientific men in fact do now.

[Job 37:19](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 37:19</span></span>

Teach us what we shall say unto him - This seems to be addressed to Job.
It is the language of Elihu, implying that he was overawed with a sense
of the majesty and glory of such a God. He knew not in what manner, or
with what words to approach such a Being, and he asks Job to inform him,
if he knew.

We cannot order our speech by reason of darkness - Job had repeatedly
professed a desire to bring his cause directly before God, and to argue
it in his presence. He felt assured that if he could do that, he should
be able so to present it as to obtain a decision in his favor; see [Job
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#003), note; [Job
13:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#018), notes. Elihu now designs,
indirectly, to censure that confidence. He says that he and his friends
were so overawed by the majesty of God, and felt themselves so ignorant
and so ill qualified to judge of him and his works, that they would not
know what to say. They were in darkness. They could not understand even
the works of his hands which were directly before them, and the most
common operations of nature were inscrutable to them. How then could
they presume to arraign God? How could they manage a cause before him
with any hope of success? It is scarcely necessary to say, that the
state of mind referred to here by Elihu is that which should be
cultivated, and that the feelings which he expresses are those with
which we should approach the Creator. We need someone to teach us. We
are surrounded by mysteries which we cannot comprehend, and we should,
therefore, approach our Maker with profound reverence and submission

[Job 37:20](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 37:20</span></span>

Shall it be told him that I speak? - Still the language of profound awe
and reverence, as if he would not have it even intimated to God that he
had presumed to say anything in regard to him, or with a view to explain
the reason of his doings.

If a man speak - That is, if he attempt to speak with God; to argue a
case with him; to contend with him in debate; to oppose him. Elihu had
designed to reprove Job for the bold and presumptuous manner in which he
bad spoken of God, and for his wish to enter into a debate with him in
order to vindicate his cause. He now says, that if anyone should attempt
this, God had power at once to destroy him; and that such an attempt
would be perilous to his life. But other interpretations have been
proposed, which may be seen in Rosenmuller, Umbreit, and Lee.

Surely he shall be swallowed up - Destroyed for his presumption and
rashness in thus contending with the Almighty. Elihu says that on this
account he would not dare to speak with God. He would fear that he would
come forth in his anger, and destroy him. How much man by nature
instinctively feels, when he has any just views of the majesty of God,
that he needs a Mediator!

[Job 37:21](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 37:21</span></span>

And now men see not the bright light which is in the clouds - Either the
lightning that plays on the clouds in an approaching tempest, or a
glorious light spread over the sky on the approach of God. There is
reason to believe that as Elihu delivered the sentiments recorded in the
close of this chapter, he meant to describe God as if he were seen to be
approaching, and that the symbols of his presence were discovered in the
gathering tempest and storm. He is introduced in the following chapter
with amazing sublimity and grandeur to speak to Job and his friends, and
to close the argument. He comes in a whirlwind, and speaks in tones of
vast sublimity. The tokens of his coming were now seen, and as Elihu
discerned them he was agitated, and his language became abrupt and
confused. His language is just such as one would use when the mind was
overawed with the approach of God - solemn, and full of reverence, but
not connected, and much less calm than in his ordinary discourse. The
close of this chapter, it seems to me, therefore, is to be regarded as
spoken when the tempest was seen to be gathering, and when in awful
majesty God was approaching, the lightnings playing around him, the
clouds piled on clouds attending him, the thunder reverberating along
the sky, and an unusual brightness evincing his approach; Notes, [Job
37:22](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#022). The idea here is, that people
could not steadfastly behold that bright light. It was so dazzling and
so overpowering that they could not gaze on it intently. The coming of
such a Being strayed in so much grandeur, and clothed in such a light,
was fitted to overcome the human powers.

But the wind passeth, and cleanseth them - The wind passes along and
makes them clear. The idea seems to be, that the wind appeared to sweep
along over the clouds as the tempest was rising, and they seemed to open
or disperse in one part of the heavens, and to reveal in the opening a
glory so bright and dazzling that the eye could not rest upon it. That
light or splendor made in the opening cloud was the symbol of God,
approaching to wind up this great controversy, and to address Job and
his friends in the sublime language which is found in the closing
chapters of the book, The word rendered "cleanseth" (טהר ṭâhêr) means
properly to shine, to be bright; and then to be pure or clean. Here the
notion of shining or brightness is to be retained; and the idea is, that
a wind appeared to pass along, removing the cloud which seemed to be a
veil on the throne of God, and suffering the visible symbol of his
majesty to be seen through the opening; see the notes at [Job
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#009), "He holdeth back the face of his
throne, and spreadeth his cloud upon it."

[Job 37:22](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 37:22</span></span>

Fair weather - Margin, "gold," The Hebrew word (זהב zâhâb) properly
means "gold," and is so rendered by the Vulgate, the Syriac, and by most
versions. The Septuagint renders it, νέψη χρυσαυγουντα nepsē
chrusaugounta, "clouds shining like gold." The Chaldee, אסתניא, the
north wind, Boreas. Many expositors have endeavored to show that gold
was found in the northern regions (see Schultens, in loc.); and it is
not difficult so to establish that fact as to be a confirmation of what
is here said, on the supposition that it refers literally to gold. But
it is difficult to see why Elihu should here make a reference to the
source where gold was found, or how such a reference should be connected
with the description of the approaching tempest, and the light which was
already seen on the opening clouds. It seems probable to me that the
idea is wholly different and that Elihu means to say that a bright,
dazzling light was seen in the northern sky like burnished gold, which
was a fit symbol of the approaching Deity. This idea is hinted at in the
Septuagint, but it has not seemed to occur to expositors. The image is
that of the heavens darkened with the tempest, the lightnings playing,
the thunder rolling, and then the wind seeming to brush away the clouds
in the north, and disclosing in the opening a bright, dazzling
appearance like burnished gold, that bespoke the approach of God. The
word is never used in the sense of "fair weather." An ancient Greek
tragedian, mentioned by Grotius, speaks of golden air - χρυσωπός αἰθήρ
chrusōpos aithēr. Varro also uses a similar expression - aurescit aer,
"the air becomes like gold." So Thomson, in his Seasons:

But yonder comes the powerful king of day

Rejoicing in the east. The lessening cloud.

The kindling azure, and the mountain's brow,

Illumed with fluid gold, his near approach

Betoken glad.

Summer

Out of the north - That is, the symbol of the approaching Deity appears
in that quarter, or God was seen to approach from the north. It may
serve to explain this, to remark that among the ancients the northern
regions were regarded as the residence of the gods, and that on the
mountains in the north it was supposed they were accustomed to assemble.
In proof of this, and for the reasons of it, see the notes at [Isa
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013). From that region Elihu sees God
now approaching, and directs the attention of his companions to the
symbols of his advent. It is this which fills his mind with so much
consternation, and which renders his discourse so broken and
disconnected. Having, in a manner evincing great alarm, directed their
attention to these symbols, he concludes what he has to say in a hurried
manner, and God appears, to close the controversy.

With God is terrible majesty - This is not a declaration asserting this
of God in general, but as he then appeared. It is the language of one
who was overwhelmed with his awful majesty, as the brightness of his
presence was seen on the tempest.

[Job 37:23](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 37:23</span></span>

Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out - See the notes at [Job
11:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#007). This sentiment accords with
all that Elihu had said, and indeed is what he designed particularly to
enforce. But it has a special emphasis here, where God is seen
approaching in visible splendor, encompassed with clouds and tempests,
and seated on a throne of burnished gold. Such a God, Elihu says, it was
impossible to comprehend. His majesty was overwhelming, The passage is
much more impressive and solemn, and accords much better with the
original, by omitting the words which our translators have introduced
and printed in italics. It would then be,

The Almighty! - We cannot find him out!

Great in power, and in justice, and in righteouness!

Thus, it expresses the overwhelming emotion, the awe, the alarm produced
on the mind of one who saw God approaching in the sublimity of the
storm.

He is excellent in power - He excels, or is vast and incomprehensible in
power.

And in judgment - That is, in justice.

And in plenty of justice - Hebrew, "in multitude of righteousness." The
meaning is, that there was an overflowing fulness of righteousness; his
character was entirely righteous, or that trait abounded in him.

He will not afflict - Or, he will not oppress, he will not crush. It was
true that he "did afflict" people, but the idea is, that there was not
harshness or oppression in it. He would not do it for the mere sake of
producing affliction, or when it was not deserved. Some manuscipts vary
the reading here so as to mean "he will not answer;" that is, he will
not give any account of what he does. The change has relation only to
the points, but the above is the usual interpretation, and accords well
with the connection.

[Job 37:24](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 37:24</span></span>

Men do therefore fear him - There is reason why they should fear him, or
why they should treat him with reverence.

He respecteth not any that are wise of heart - He pursues his own plans,
and forms and executes his own counsels. He is not dependent upon the
suggestions of people, and does not listen to their advice. In his
schemes he is original and independent, and people should therefore
regard him with profound veneration. This is the sum of all that Elihu
had to say - that God was original and independent; that he did not ask
counsel of people in his dealings; that he was great, and glorious, and
inscrutable in his plans; and that people therefore should bow before
him with profound submission and adoration. It was to be presumed that
he was wise and good in all that he did, and to this independent and
almighty Sovereign man ought to submit his understanding and his heart.
Having illustrated and enforced this sentiment, Elihu, overwhelmed with
the awful symbols of the approaching Deity, is silent, and God is
introduced to close the controversy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 38](job038)

</div>
