<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job014)  [Next](job016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#001)

[Job 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 15:12</span></span>

Why doth thine heart carry thee away? - Why do you allow your feelings
to control you in spite of the decisions of the understanding? Eliphaz
means to represent him as wholly under the influence of passion, instead
of looking calmly and cooly at things as they were, and listening to the
results of past experience and observation.

And what do thy eyes wink at - This expression has given considerable
perplexity to commentators. Rosenmuller (and after him Noyes) remarks
that the expression indicates pride, haughtiness, and arrogance. In [Psa
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#019), it is an indication of
joyfulness or triumph over a prostrate foe:

Let not them that are mine enemies wrongfully rejoice over me;

Neither let them wink with the eye that hate me without a cause.

In [Pro 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#013), it is an indication of a
haughty, froward, self-confident person:

A haughty person, a wicked man,

Walketh with a froward mouth;

He winketh with his eyes,

He speaketh with his feet,

He teacheth with his fingers.

The Hebrew word (רזם râzam) occurs nowhere else, and it is therefore
difficult to determine its true signification. The most probable meaning
is, to wink with the eyes as a gesture of pride and insolence; compare
the notes at [Isa 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#016). The Vulgate
renders it, attonitos habes oculos? - "Why, as though meditating great
things, hast thou eyes of astonishment?" Septuagint, "Why are thine eyes
elevated?" Schultens renders it, "Why do thine eyes roll fury?" - Quid
fremitum volvunt oculi tui? Luther, "Why art thou so proud? There can be
no reasonable doubt that the word conveys the idea of pride and
haughtiness manifested in some way by the eyes.

[Job 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 15:13</span></span>

That thou turnest thy spirit - That your mind is turned against God
instead of acquiescing in his dealings. The views of Job he traces to
pride and to overweening self-confidence, and perhaps not improperly.

[Job 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 15:14</span></span>

What is man that he should be clean? - The object of Eliphaz in this is
to overturn the positions of Job that he was righteous, and had been
punished beyond his deserts. He had before maintained [Job
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#007), that no one ever perished being
innocent, and that the righteous were not cut off. This was with him a
favorite position; and indeed the whole drift of the argument maintained
by him and his friends was, to prove that uncommon calamities were proof
of uncommon guilt. Job had insisted on it that he was a righteous man,
and had not deserved the calamities which had come upon him - a position
which Eliphaz seems to have regarded as an assertion of innocence. To
meet this he now maintains that no one is righteous; that all that are
born of women are guilty; and in proof of this he goes back to the
oracle which had made so deep an impression on his mind, and to the
declaration then made to him that no one was pure before God; Job 4: He
does not repeat it exactly as the oracle was then delivered to him, but
adverts to the substance of it, and regards it as final and
indisputable. The meaning is, "What are all the pretensions of man to
purity, when even the angels are regarded as impure and the heavens
unclean?"

He which is born of a woman - Another mode of denoting man. No
particular argument to maintain the doctrine of man's depravity is
couched in the fact that he is born of a woman. The sense is, simply,
how can anyone of the human family be pure?

[Job 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 15:15</span></span>

Behold, he putteth no trust in his saints - In [Job
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018), it is, "in his servants," but no
doubt the same thing is intended. The reference is to the angels, called
there servants, and here saints קדשׁים qôdeshı̂ym, holy ones; see the
notes at [Job 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018).

Yea, the heavens are not clean in his sight - In [Job
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018), "and his angels he charged with
folly." The general idea is the same. God is so holy that all things
else seem to be impure. The very heavens seem to be unclean when
compared with him. We are not to understand this as meaning that the
heavens are defiled; that there is sin and corruption there, and that
they are loathsome in the sight of God. The object is to set forth the
exceeding purity of God, and the greatness of his holiness. This
sentiment seemed to be a kind of proverb, or a commonplace in theology
among the sages of Arabia. Thus, it occurs in [Job
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#005), in the speech of Bildad, when he
had nothing to say but to repeat the most common-place moral and
theological adages -

Behold even to the moon, and it shineth not;

Yea, the stars are not pure in his sight:

How much less man, that is a worm,

And the son of man, which is a worm!

[Job 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 15:16</span></span>

How much more abominable and filthy is man - How much more than the
angels, and than the heavens. In [Job
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#019), the image is somewhat different.
There it is, how can man be the object of the divine confidence since he
lives in a house of clay, and is so frail? Here the image is more
striking and forcible. The word rendered filthy (אלח 'âlach) means, in
Arabic, to be sour, as milk, and then to be corrupt, in a moral sense;
[Psa 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003); [Psa
53:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#004). Here it means that man is
defiled and polluted, and this declaration is a remarkable illustration
of the ancient belief of the depravity of man.

Which drinketh iniquity like water - This is still a true, though a
melancholy account of man. He loves sin, and is as greedy of it as a
thirsty man is of water. He practices it as if it were his very nature -
as much so as it is to drink. Perhaps too there may be an allusion, as
Dr. Good supposes, to the large draught of water which the camel makes,
implying that man is exceedingly greedy of iniquity; compare [Job
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#012); [Job
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#007); [Pro
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#028).

[Job 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 15:17</span></span>

I will show thee ... - The remainder of this chapter is a violent
declamation, designed to overwhelm Job with the proofs of personal
guilt. Eliphaz professes to urge nothing which had not been handed down
from his ancestors, and was the result of careful observation. What he
says is made up of apothegms and maxims that were regarded as containing
the results of ancient wisdom, all meaning that God would punish the
wicked, or that the wicked would be treated according to their deserts.
The implied inference all along was, that Job, who had had so many
proofs of the divine displeasure, must be a wicked man.

[Job 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 15:18</span></span>

Which wise men have told from their fathers - Which they have received
from their ancestors and communicated to others. Knowledge among the
ancients was communicated chiefly by tradition from father to son. They
had few or no written records, and hence, they embodied the results of
their observation in brief, sententious maxims, and transmitted them
from one generation to another.

And have not hid it - They have freely communicated the result of their
observations to others.

[Job 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 15:19</span></span>

Unto whom alone the earth was given - The land; the land or country
where they dwelt. He refers to the period before they became
intermingled with other nations, and before they imbibed any sentiments
or opinions from strangers. The meaning is, "I will give you the result
of the observations of the golden age of the world when our fathers
dwelt alone, and it could not be pretended that they had been corrupted
by foreign philosophy; and when in morals and in sentiment they were
pure." Probably all nations look back to such times of primeval
simplicity, and freedom from corruption, when the sentiments on morals
and religion were comparatively pure, and before the people became
corrupt by the importation of foreign opinions. It is a pleasing
delusion to look back to such times - to some innocent Arcadia, or to a
golden age - but usually all such retrospections are the mere work of
fancy. The world really grows wiser as it grows older; and in the
progress of society it is a rare thing when the present is not more pure
and happy than its early stages. The comforts, privileges, and
intelligence of the patriarchal age were not to be compared with those
which we enjoy - any more than the condition of the wandering Arab is to
be preferred to the quiet, peace, intelligence, and order of a calm,
Christian home.

No stranger passed among them - No foreigner came to corrupt their
sentiments by an admixture of strange doctrines. "Eliphaz here speaks
like a genuine Arab, whose pride is in his tongue, his sword, and his
pure blood." Umbreit. It is possible, as Rosenmuller suggests, that
Eliphaz means to insinuate that Job had been corrupted by the sentiments
of the Chaldeans and Sabeans, and had departed from the pure doctrines
of earlier times.

[Job 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 15:20</span></span>

Travaileth with pain - That is, his sorrows are like the pains of
parturition. Eliphaz means to say that he is a constant sufferer.

All his days - It seems difficult to see how they could have ever formed
this universal maxim. It is certainly not literally true now; nor was it
ever. But in order to convey the doctrine that the wicked would be
punished in as pointed and striking a manner as possible, it was made to
assume this universal form - meaning that the life of the wicked would
be miserable. There is some reason to think that this and what follows
to the close of the chapter, is an ancient fragment which Eliphaz
rehearses as containing the sentiments of a purer age of the world.

And the number of years is hidden to the oppressor - Wemyss renders
this, "and a reckoning of years is laid up for the violent." So, also,
Dr. Good. The Vulgate renders it, "and the number of the years of his
tyranny is uncertain." Rosenmuller, Cocceius, Drusius, and some others
suppose that there should be understood here and repeated the clause
occurring in the first hemistich, and that it means, "and in the number
of years which are laid up for the violent man, he is tortured with
pain." Luther renders it, "and to a tyrant is the number of his years
concealed." It is difficult to tell what the passage means. To me, the
most probable interpretation is one which I have not met with in any of
the books which I have consulted, and which may be thus expressed," the
wicked man will be tormented all his days." To one who is an oppressor
or tyrant, the number of his years is hidden. He has no security of
life. He cannot calculate with any certainty on its continuance. The end
is hid. A righteous man may make some calculation, and can see the
probable end of his days. He may expect to see an honored old age. But
tyrants are so often cut down suddenly; they so frequently perish by
assassination, and robbers are so often unexpectedly overcome, that
there is no calculation which can be formed in respect to the
termination of their course. Their end is hid. They die suddenly and
disappear. This suits the connection; and the sentiment is, in the main,
in accordance with facts as they occur.

[Job 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 15:21</span></span>

A dreadful sound is in his ears - Margin, "A sound of fears." He hears
sudden, frightful sounds, and is alarmed. Or when he thinks himself
safe, he is suddenly surprised. The enemy steals upon him, and in his
fancied security he dies. This sentiment might be illustrated at almost
any length by the mode of savage warfare in America, and by the sudden
attacks which the American savage makes, in the silence of the night, on
his unsuspecting foes. The Chaldee renders this, "the fear of the
terrors in Gehenna are in his ears; when the righteous dwell in peace
and eternal life, destruction comes upon him."

In prosperity the destroyer shall come upon him - When he supposes he is
safe, and his affairs seem to be prosperous, then sudden destruction
comes; see [Th1 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003). The history of
wicked people, who have encompassed themselves with wealth, and as they
supposed with every thing necessary to happiness, and who have been
suddenly cut off, would furnish all the instances which would be
necessary to illustrate this sentiment of Eliphaz. See an exquisitely
beautiful illustration of it in [Psa
37:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#035) :

I have seen the wicked in great power,

And spreading himself like a green bay-tree.

Yet he passed away, and lo he was not;

Yea, I sought him, but he could not be found.

So, also, in [Psa 73:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#018) :

Surely thou didst set them in slippery places;

Thou castedst them down into destruction.

How are they brought into desolation as in a moment!

They are utterly consumed with terrors.

As a dream when one awaketh,

O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shalt despise their image.

[Job 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 15:22</span></span>

He believeth not that he shall return out of darkness - Darkness is used
in the Bible, as elsewhere, to denote calamity; and the meaning here is,
that the wicked man has not confidence (יאמין לא lo' ya'amı̂yn), that he
shall return safely from impending danger. He is in constant dread of
assassination, or of some fearful evil. He is never secure; his mind is
never calm; he lives in constant dread. This is still an accurate
description of a man with a guilty conscience; for such a man lives in
constant fear, and never feels any security that he is safe.

And he is waited for of the sword - That is, he is destined for the
sword. Gesenius.

[Job 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 15:23</span></span>

He wandereth abroad for bread - The Septuagint renders this, "he is
destined to be food for vultures" - κατατέτακται δὲ εἰς σῖτα γυψίν
katatetaktai de eis sitos gupsin. The meaning of the Hebrew is, simply,
that he will be reduced to poverty, and will not know where to obtain a
supply for his returning needs.

He knoweth that the day of darkness is ready at his hand - He is assured
that the period of calamity is not far remote. It must come. He has no
security that it will not come immediately. The whole design of this is
to show that there is no calmness and security for a wicked man; that in
the midst of apparent prosperity his soul is in constant dread.

[Job 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 15:24</span></span>

As a king ready to the battle - Fully prepared for a battle; whom it
would be vain to attempt to resist. So mighty would be the combined
forces of trouble and anguish against him, that it would be vain to
attempt to oppose them.

[Job 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 15:25</span></span>

For he stretcheth out his hand against God - The hand is stretched out
for battle. It wields the spear or the sword against an enemy. The idea
here is, that the wicked man makes God an adversary. He does not contend
with his fellow-man, with fate, with the elements, with evil angels, but
with God. His opponent is an Almighty Being, and he cannot prevail
against him; compare the notes at [Isa
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#004).

And strengtheneth himself - As an army does that throws up a rampart, or
constructs a fortification. The whole image here is taken from the
practice of war; and the sense is, that a wicked man is really making
war on the Almighty, and that in that war he must be vanquished; compare
[Job 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#004).

[Job 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 15:26</span></span>

He runneth upon him - That is, upon God. The image here is taken from
the mode in which people rushed into battle. It was with a violent
concussion, and usually with a shout, that they might intimidate their
foes, and overcome them at first, with the violence of the shock. The
mode of warfare is now changed, and it is the vaunted excellency of
modern warfare that armies now go deliberately and calmly to put each
other to death.

Even "on his neck - literally, "with the neck" - בצואר betsavā'r.
Vulgate, "With erect neck - erecto collo." Septuagint, contemptuously,
or with pride - ὕβρει hubrei. The idea seems to be, not that he ran
"upon the neck" of his adversary - as would seem to be implied in our
translation - but that he ran in a firm, haughty, confident manner; with
a head erect and firm, as the indication of self confidence, and a
determined purpose to overcome his foe. See Schultens in loc.

Upon the thick bosses - The word boss with us means a knob - a
protuberant ornament of silver, brass, or ivory on a harness or a
bridle; then a protuberant part, a prominence, or a round or swelling
body of any kind. The Hebrew word used here (גב gab) means properly
anything gibbous, convex, arched; and hence, "the back" - as of animals.
Applied to a shield, it means the convex part or the back of it - the
part which was presented to an enemy, and which was made swelling and
strong, called by the Greeks ὀμφαλὸς omfalos, or μεσομφάλιον
mesomfalion. Gesenius supposes that the metaphor here is taken from
soldiers, who joined their shields together, and thus rushed upon an
enemy. This was one mode of ancient warfare, when an army or a phalanx
united their shields in front, so that nothing could penetrate them, or
so united them over their heads when approaching a fortress, that they
could safely march under them as a covering.

This, among the Romans and Greeks, was commonly practiced when
approaching a besieged town. One form of the testudo - the χελώη
στρατιωτῶν chelōnē stratiōtōn of the Greeks, was formed by the soldiers,
pressed close together and holding their shields over their heads in
such a manner as to form a compact covering. John H. Eschenburg, Manual
of Classical Literature. by N. W. Fiske, pt. III, section 147. The
Vulgate renders this, "and he is armed with a fat neck" - pingui cervice
armatus est. Schultens expresses the idea that is adopted by Gesenius,
and refers to Arabic customs to show that shields were thus united in
defending an army from a foe, or in making an attack on them. He says,
also, that it is a common expression - a proverb - among the Arabs, "he
turns the back of his shield" to denote that one is an adversary; and
quotes a passage from Hamasa, "When a friend meets me with base
suspicions, I turn to him the back of my shield - a proverb, whose
origin is derived from the fact, that a warrior turns the back of his
shield to his foes."

Paxton supposes that the expression here is taken from single combat,
which early prevailed. But the idea here is not that which our
translation would seem to convey. It is not that he rushes upon or
against the hard or thick shield "of the Almighty" - and that,
therefore, he must meet resistance and be overcome: it is that he rushes
upon God with his own shield. He puts himself in the attitude of a
warrior. He turns the boss of his own shield against God, and becomes
his antagonist. He is his enemy. The omission of the word "with" in the
passage - or the preposition which is in the Hebrew (ב b) has led to
this erroneous translation. The passage is often quoted in a popular
manner to denote that the sinner rushes upon God, "and must meet
resistance" from his shield, or be overcome. It should be quoted only to
denote that the sinner places himself in an attitude of opposition to
God, and is his enemy.

Of his bucklers - Of his shields (מגניו megı̂nāy), that is, of the
shields which the sinner has; not the shields of God. The shield was a
well-known instrument of war, usually made with a rim of wood or metal,
and covered with skins, and carried on the left arm; see the notes at
[Isa 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#005). The outer surface was made
rounding from the center to the edge, and was smoothly polished, so that
darts or arrows would glide off and not penetrate.

[Job 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 15:27</span></span>

Because he covereth his face with his fatness - That is, he not only
stretches out his hand against God [Job
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#025) and rushes upon him as an armed
foe [Job 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#026), but he gives himself
up to a life of luxury, gluttony, and licentiousness; and therefore,
these calamities must come upon him. This is designed to be a
description of a luxurious and licentious person - a man who is an enemy
of God, and who, therefore, must incur his displeasure.

And maketh collops of fat - Like an ox that is fattened. The word collop
properly means "a small slice of meat, a piece of flesh" (Webster), but
here it means a thick piece, or a mass. The word is used in this sense
in New England. The sense is, that he becomes excessively fat and gross
- as they usually do who live in sensual indulgence and who forget God.

[Job 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 15:28</span></span>

And he dwelleth - Or rather, "therefore he shall dwell." As a
consequence of his opposing God, and devoting himself to a life of
sensuality and ease, he shall dwell in a desolate place. Instead of
living in affluence and in a splendid city, he shall be compelled to
take up his abode in places that have been deserted and abandoned. Such
places - like Petra or Babylon now - became the temporary lodgings of
caravans and travelers, or the abodes of outcasts and robbers. The
meaning here is, that the proud and wicked man shall be ejected from his
palace, and compelled to seek a refuge far away from the usual haunts of
men.

Which are ready to become heaps - Which are just ready to tumble into
ruin.

[Job 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 15:29</span></span>

He shall not be rich - That is, he shall not continue rich; or he shall
not again become rich. He shall be permanently poor.

Neither shall his substance continue - His property.

Neither shall he prolong the perfection thereof - Noyes renders this,
"And his possessions shall not be extended upon the earth." Wemyss, "Nor
shall he be master of his own desires." Good, "Nor their success spread
abroad in the land." Luther, Und sein Gluck wird sich nicht ausbreiten
im Lande - " And his fortune shall not spread itself abroad in the
land." Vulgate, "Neither shall he send his root in the earth " - nec
mittet in terra radicem suam. The Septuagint, οὐ μὴ βάλῃ ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν
σκιὰν ou mē balē epi tēn gōn skian - "and shall not cast a shadow upon
the earth." The word rendered "perfection" (מנלם mı̂nlām) is commonly
supposed to be from מנלה mı̂nleh, from נלה nâlâh to finish, to procure,
and hence, the noun may be applied to that which is procured - and thus
may denote possessions. According to this the correct rendering is, "and
he does not extend their possessions abroad in the land;" that is, his
possessions do not extend abroad. Gesenius supposes, however, that the
word is a corruption for מבלם - "their flocks." I see no objection,
however, to its being regarded as meaning possessions - and then the
sense is, that he would fail in that which is so much the object of
ambition with every avaricious man - that his possessions should extend
through the land; compare the notes at [Isa
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#008).

[Job 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">job 15:30</span></span>

He shall not depart out of darkness - He shall not escape from calamity;
see [Job 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#022). He shall not be able
to rise again, but shall be continually poor.

The flame shall dry up his branches - As the fire consumes the green
branches of a tree, so shall punishment do to him. This comparison is
very forcible, and the idea is, that the man who has been prospered as a
tree shall be consumed - as the fire consumes a tree when it passes
through the branches. The comparison of a prosperous man with a tree is
very common, and very beautiful. Thus, the Psalmist says,

I have seen the wicked in great power,

And spreading himself like a green bay tree. [Psa
37:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#035).

Compare [Psa 92:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#012). The aged
Skenandoah - a chief of the Oneida tribe of Indians, said," I am an aged
hemlock. The winds of an hundred winters have whistled through my
branches. I am dead at the top. My branches are falling," etc.

And by the breath of his mouth shall he go away - That is, by the breath
of the mouth of God. God is not indeed specified, but it is not unusual
to speak of him in this manner. The image here seems to be that of the
destruction of a man by a burning wind or by lightning. As a tree is
dried up, or is rent by lightning, or is torn up from the roots by a
tempest sent by the Deity, so the wicked will be destroyed.

[Job 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">job 15:31</span></span>

Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity - The sense is, "Let him
not trust in vanity. He will be deceived. Vanity will be his
recompense." The idea is, that a man should not confide in that which
will furnish no support. He should not rely on his wealth and rank; his
houses and lands; his servants, his armies, or his power, if he is
wicked, for all this is vain. He needs some better reliance, and that
can be found only in a righteous life. The word vanity here means that
which is unsubstantial; which cannot uphold or sustain; which will
certainly give way.

For vanity will be his recompense - He will find only vanity. He will be
stripped of all his honors and possessions.

[Job 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">job 15:32</span></span>

It shall be accomplished before his time - Margin, "cut off." The image
here is that of a tree, which had been suggested in [Job
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#030). Here it is followed up by
various illustrations drawn from the flower, the fruit, etc., all of
which are designed to denote the same thing - that a wicked man will not
be permanently prosperous; he will not live and flourish as he would if
he were righteous. He will be like a tree that is cut down before its
proper time, or that casts its flowers and fruits and brings nothing to
perfection. The phrase here literally is, "It shall not be filled up in
its time;" that is, a wicked man will be cut off before he has filled up
the measure of his days, like a tree that decays and falls before its
proper time. A similar idea occurs in [Psa
55:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023). "Bloody and deceitful men shall
not live out half their days." As a general fact this is all true, and
the observation of the ancient Idumeans was correct. The temperate live
longer than the intemperate; the chaste longer than the licentious; he
that controls and governs his passions longer than he who gives the
reins to them; and he who leads a life of honesty and virtue longer than
he who lives for crime. Pure religion makes a man temperate, sober,
chaste, calm, dispassionate, and equable in his temper; saves from
broils, contentions, and strifes; subdues the angry passions, and thus
tends to lengthen out life.

His branch shall not be green - It shall be dried up and withered away -
retaining the image of a tree.

[Job 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">job 15:33</span></span>

He shall shake off his unripe grape as the vine - The idea here is, that
the wicked man shall be like a vine that casts off its grapes while they
are yet sour and green, and brings none to perfection; compare the notes
at [Isa 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#005). Scott renders this,

"As when the vine her half-grown berries showers,

Or poisoned olive her unfolding flowers."

It would seem from this passage that the vine might be so blasted by a
hot wind or other cause, as to cast its unripe grapes to the earth. The
employment of a figure of this kind to illustrate an idea supposes that
such a case was familiar to those who were addressed. It is well known
that in the East the grape and the olive might be blasted while in
blossom, or when the fruit was setting, as all fruit may be. The injury
is usually done in the flower, or when the fruit is just forming. Yet
our observations of the effects of the burning winds that pass over the
deserts on fruit that is half formed, in blasting it and causing it to
fall, are too limited to allow us to come to any definite conclusion in
regard to such effects in general. Anyone, however, can see the beauty
of this image. The plans and purposes of wicked people are immature.
Nothing is carried to perfection. They are cut off, their plans are
blasted, and all the results of their living are like the sour, hard,
crabbed, and useless fruit that falls from the tree before it is ripe.
The results of the life of the righteous, on the other hand, are like a
tree loaded with ripe and mellow fruit - their plans are brought to
maturity, and resemble the rich and heavy clusters of grapes, or the
abundant fruits of the olive when ripe.

And shall cast off his flower as the olive - The olive is a well-known
tree that abounds in the East. The fruit is chiefly valuable for the oil
which it produces; compare the notes at [Rom
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#017). The olive is liable to be
blasted while the fruit is setting, or while the tree is in blossom. In
Greece, a northeast wind often proves destructive to the olive, and the
same may be true of other places. Dr. Chandler speaking of Greece, says,
"The olive groves are now, as anciently, a principal source of the
riches of Athens. The crops had failed five years successively when we
arrived; the cause assigned was a northerly wind, called
Greco-tramontane, which destroyed the flower. The fruit is set in about
a fortnight, when the apprehension from this unpropitious quarter
ceases. The bloom in the following year was unhurt, and we had the
pleasure of leaving the Athenians happy in the prospect of a plentiful
harvest." A wicked man is here elegantly compared with such a tree that
casts its flowers and produces no fruit.

[Job 15:34](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">job 15:34</span></span>

For the congregation of hypocrites - The word rendered "congregation"
here (עדה ‛êdâh) means properly an appointed meeting; a meeting convened
by appointment or at stated times (from ידה yâdâh), and hence, an
assembly of any kind. It is commonly applied to an assembly for public
worship; but it may refer to a more private company - a family, or
circle of friends, dependents, etc. It refers here, I suppose, to such a
community that a man can get around him in his own dwelling - his
family, servants, dependents, etc. The word rendered "hypocrites" (חנף
chânêph) is in the singular number, and should be so rendered here. It
does not mean that a worshipping assembly composed of hypocrites would
be desolate - which may be true - but that the community which a man who
is a hypocrite can gather around him shall be swept away. His children,
his dependents, and his retinue of servants, shall be taken away from
him, and he shall be left to solitude. Probably there was an allusion
here to Job, who had been stripped in this manner; or at any rate the
remark was one, if it were a quotation from the ancient sayings of the
Arabians, which Job could not but regard as applied to himself.

And fire shall consume - This has all the appearance of being a proverb.
The meaning is, that they who received a bribe would be certainly
punished.

The tabernacles of bribery - The tents or dwellings of those who receive
bribes, and who therefore are easily corrupted, and have no solid
principles. There is probably an allusion here to Job; and no doubt
Eliphaz meant to apply this severe remark to him. Job was a Sheik, an
Emir, a head of a tribe, and, therefore, a magistrate; see [Job
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#007), seq. Yet a part of his
possessions and servants had been cut off by fire from heaven [Job
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#016); and Eliphaz means probably to
imply that it had been because he had been guilty of receiving a bribe.
This ancient proverb declared that the dwellings of the man who could be
bribed would be consumed by fire; and now he presumes that the fact that
Job had been visited by the fire of heaven was full proof that he had
been guilty in this manner. It was about on principles such as these
that the reasoning of the friends of Job was conducted.

[Job 15:35](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">job 15:35</span></span>

They conceive mischief - The meaning of this verse is, that they form
and execute plans of evil. It is the characteristic of such men that
they form such plans and live to execute them, and they must abide the
consequences. All this was evidently meant for Job; and few things could
be more trying to a man's patience than to sit and hear those ancient
apothegms, designed to describe the wicked, applied so unfeelingly to
himself.

[Job 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 15:2</span></span>

Should a wise man - Referring to Job, and to his claims to be esteemed
wise; see [Job 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#003); [Job
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#002), [Job
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#006). The argument of Eliphaz here is,
that the sentiments which Job had advanced were a sufficient refutation
of his pretensions to wisdom. A wise man would not be guilty of "mere
talk," or of using language that conveyed no ideas.

Utter - literally, answer. It refers to the replies which Job had made
to the arguments of his friends.

Vain knowledge - Margin, "Knowledge of wind." So the Hebrew; see [Job
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#026); [Job
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#007). The "wind" is used to denote what
is unsubstantial, vain, changing. Here it is used as an emblem of
remarks which were vain, empty, and irrelevant.

And fill his belly - Fill his mind with unsubstantial arguments or
sentiments - as little fitted for utility as the east wind is for food.
The image is, "he fills himself with mere wind, and then blows it out
under pretence of delivering the maxims of wisdom."

With the east wind - The east wind was not only tempestuous and
vehement, but sultry, and destructive to vegetation. It passed over vast
deserts, and was characterized by great dryness and heat. It is used
here to denote a manner of discourse that had in it nothing profitable.

[Job 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 15:3</span></span>

Should he reason with unprofitable talk? - It does not become a man
professing to be wise to make use of words that are nothing to the
purpose. The sense is, that what Job said amounted to just nothing.

[Job 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 15:4</span></span>

Yea, thou castest off fear - Margin, Makest void. Fear here means the
fear or reverence of God; and the idea is, that Job had not maintained a
proper veneration or respect for his Maker in his argument. He had
defended principles and made assertions which implied great disrespect
for the Deity. If those doctrines were true; if he was right in his
views about God, then he was not a being who could be reverenced. No
confidence could be placed in his government; no worship of such a being
could be maintained. Eliphaz does not refer here so much to what was
personal with Job, as to his principles. He does not mean so much to
affirm that he himself had lost all reverence for God, as that his
arguments led to that. Job had maintained that God did not in this life
reward and punish people strictly according to their deserts. If this
was so, Eliphaz says, then it would be impossible to honor him, and
religion and worship would be at an end.

The Hebrew word rendered "castest off" - more accurately rendered in the
margin "makest void" (תפר tāpēr) - implies this. "And restrainest prayer
before God." Margin, "speech." The Hebrew word שׂיחה śı̂ychâh means
properly "meditation" - and particularly meditation about divine things:
[Psa 119:97](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#097). Then it means "devotion"
- as to meditate on divine things is a part of devotion. It may be
applied to any part of devotion, and seems to be not improperly rendered
"prayer." It is that devotion which finds utterance in the language of
prayer. The word rendered "restrainest" - תגרע tı̂gâra‛ - means to shave
off - like the beard; then to cut off, to take away, detract, withhold;
and the idea here is, that the views which Job maintained were such as
"to sap the very foundations of religion." If God treated the righteous
and the wicked alike, the one would have nothing to hope and the other
nothing to fear.

There could be no ground of encouragement, to pray to him. How could the
righteous pray to him, unless there was evidence that he was the friend
of virtue? How could they hope for his special blessing, if he were
disposed to treat the good and the bad alike? Why was it not just as
well to live in sin as to be holy? And how could such a being be the
object of confidence or prayer? Eliphaz mistook the meaning of Job, and
pressed his positions further than he intended; and Job was not entirely
able to vindicate his position, or to show how the consequences stated
by Eliphaz could be avoided. "They both wanted the complete and full
view of the future state of retribution revealed in the gospel, and that
would have removed the whole difficulty." But I see not how the
considerations here urged by this ancient sage of the tendency of Job's
doctrine can be avoided, if it be applied to the views of those who hold
that all people will be saved at death. If that be the truth, then who
can fail to see that the tendency must be to make people cast off the
fear of God and to undermine all devotion and prayer? Why should people
pray, if all are to be treated alike at death? How can people worship
and honor a Being who will treat the good and the bad alike? How can we
have confidence in a being who makes no distinction in regard to
character? And what inducement can there be to be pious, when all people
shall be made as happy as they can be forever whether they are pious or
not? We are not to wonder, therefore, that the system tends every where
to sap the foundations of virtue and religion; that it makes no man
better; and that where it prevails, it banishes religion and prayer from
the world.

[Job 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 15:5</span></span>

For thy mouth uttereth thine iniquity - Margin, "teacheth." That is,
"your whole argument shows that you are a guilty man. A man who can
defend such positions about God cannot be a pious man, or have any
proper veneration for the Most High." A man may pursue an argument, and
defend positions, that shall as certainly show that he is destitute of
religion as though he lived an abandoned life; and he who holds opinions
that are dishonorable to God, can no more be a pious man than if he
dishonored God by violating his law.

Thou choosest the tongue of the crafty - Instead of pursuing an argument
with candor and sincerity, you have resorted to miserable sophisms, such
as running disputants use. You have not showed a disposition to
ascertain and defend the truth, but have relied on the arts and evasions
of the subtle disputant and the rhetorician. His whole discourse,
according to Eliphaz, was a work of mere art, designed to blind his
hearers; to deceive them with a favorable opinion of his piety; and to
give some plausible, but delusive view of the government of God.

[Job 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 15:6</span></span>

Thine own mouth condemneth thee - That is, the sentiments which you have
uttered show that you cannot be a pious man.

[Job 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 15:7</span></span>

Art thou the first man that was born? - Hast thou lived ever since the
creation, and treasured up all the wisdom of past times, that thou dost
now speak so arrogantly and confidently? This question was asked,
because, in the estimation of Eliphaz and his friends, wisdom was
supposed to be connected with long life, and with an opportunity for
extended and varied observation; see [Job
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#010). Job they regarded as
comparatively a young man.

Wast thou made before the hills - The mountains and the hills are often
represented as being the oldest of created objects, probably because
they are the most ancient things that appear on earth. Springs dry up,
and waters change their beds; cities are built and decay; kingdoms rise
and fall, and all the monuments of human skill and art perish; but the
hills and mountains remain the same from age to age. Thus, in [Psa
90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002) :

Before the mountains were brought forth,

Or ever thou hadst formed the earth and the world,

Even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God.

So in [Pro 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#025), in the description of
wisdom:

Before the mountains were settled,

Before the hills was I brought forth.

So the hills are called "everlasting" [Gen
49:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#026), in allusion to their great
antiquity and permanence. And so we, in common parlance, have a similar
expression when we say of anything that "it is as old as the hills." The
question which Eliphaz intends to ask here of Job is, whether he had
lived from the creation, and had observed everything?

[Job 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 15:8</span></span>

Hast thou heard the secret of God? - literally, "in the secret of God
hast thou heard" - הסוד hasôd. The word rendered "secret" (סוד sôd)
means properly a "couch" or "cushion," on which one reclines - whether
for sleep or at a table, or as a divan. Hence, it means a divan, or
circle of persons sitting together for familiar conversation, [Jer
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#011); [Jer
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#017); or of judges, counsellors, or
advisers for consultation, as the word "divan" is now used in Oriental
countries; [Psa 89:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#007); [Jer
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#018). Then it means any consultation,
counsel, familiar conversation, or intimacy; [Psa
55:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#014); [Pro
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#022). Here God is represented in
Oriental language as seated in a "divan," or council of state: there is
deliberation about the concerns of his government; important questions
are agitated and decided; and Eliphaz asks of Job whether he had been
admitted to that council, and had heard those deliberations; and
whether, if he had not, he was qualified to pronounce as he had done, on
the plans and purposes of the Almighty.

And dost thou restrain wisdom to thyself? - Having obtained the secret
of that council, art thou now keeping it wholly to thyself - as a prime
minister might be supposed to keep the purposes resolved on in the
divan? "Hast thou listened in the council of yahweh, and dost thou now
reserve all wisdom to thyself?"

[Job 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 15:9</span></span>

What knowest thou that we know not? - What pretensions or claims to
wisdom have you which we have not? We have had, at least, equal
advantages, and may be presumed to know as much as you.

[Job 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 15:10</span></span>

With us are both the gray headed - That is, some of us who are here are
much older than thy father; or we express the sentiments of such aged
men. Job had admitted [Job 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#012), that
with the aged was wisdom, and in length of days understanding; and
Eliphaz here urges that on that principle he and his friends had a claim
to be heard. It would seem from this, that Job was very far from being
regarded as an old man, and would probably be esteemed as in middle
life. The Targum (Chaldee) refers this to Eliphaz himself and his two
friends. "Truly Eliphaz, who is hoary-headed (דסיב) and Bildad, the
long-lived (דקשיש) are with us, and Zophar, who is older than thy
father." But it is not certain that he meant to confine the remark to
them. It seems to me probable that this whole discussion occurred in the
presence of others, and perhaps was a public contest. It is clear, I
think, that Elihu was present, and heard it all (see [Job
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#004)), and it would accord well with
Oriental habits to suppose that this was a trim of skill, which many
were permitted to witness, and which was continued for a considerable
time. Eliphaz may, therefore, have meant to say that among his friends
who had assembled to hear this debate, there were not a few who
coincided with him in sentiment, who were much more aged than Job, and
who had had much longer experience in the world.

[Job 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 15:11</span></span>

Are the consolations of God small with thee? - The "consolations of God"
here refer probably to those considerations which had been suggested by
Eliphaz and his friends, and which he takes to be the "consolations"
which God had furnished for the afflicted. He asks whether they were
regarded by Job as of little value? Whether he was not willing to take
such consolations as God had provided, and to allow them to sustain him
instead of permitting himself to inveigh against God? The Septuagint
renders this, "thou hast been chastised less than thy sins deserve. Thou
hast spoken with excessive haughtiness!" But the true idea seems to be,
that Eliphaz regarded the considerations adduced by him and his friends,
as the gracious consolations which God had provided for people in
affliction, and as the results of all former reflections on the design
of God in sending trial. He now represents Job as regarding them as of
no value, and maintaining sentiments directly at variance with them. "Is
there any secret thing with thee?"

Noyes renders this," and words so full of kindness to thee," that is,
are they of no account to you? So Dr. Good and Wemyss, "or the addresses
of kindness to thyself?" Luther translates it, "but thou hast, perhaps,
yet a secret portion with thee." Rosenmuller, "and words most guilty
spoken toward thee." The Septuagint renders it, "and thou hast spoken
proudly beyond measure" - μεγάλως ὑπερβαλλόντας λελάηκας megalōs
huperballontas lelalēkas. The word which occurs in the Hebrew - לאט
lâ'aṭ, when it is a single word, and used as a verb, means to wrap
around, to muffle, to cover, to conceal, and then to be "secret" -
whence the Greek: λάφω lathō, and λανθάνω lanthanō, and the Latin:
lateo. In this sense it is understood here by our translators. But it
may be also a compound word - from אט 'aṭ - a gentle sound, murmur,
whisper; from where it is used adverbially - לאט le'at and לאט lâ'aṭ -
gently, softly, slowly - as of the slow gait of a mourner, [Kg1
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#027); and of water gently flowing, as
the water of Siloam, [Isa 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#006). And
hence, also, it may refer to words flowing kindly or gently toward
anyone; and this seems to be the meaning here. Eliphaz asks whether Job
could despise or undervalue the words spoken so gently and kindly toward
him? A singular illustration, to be sure, of kindness, but still showing
how the friends of Job estimated their own remarks.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 16](job016)

</div>
