<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job034)  [Next](job036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#001)

[Job 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 35:1</span></span>

Elihu spake - Hebrew, ויען vaya‛an "And he answered"; the word "answer"
being used, as it is often in the Scriptures, to denote the commencement
of a discourse. We may suppose that Elihu had paused at the close of his
second discourse, possibly with a view to see whether there was any
disposition to reply.

[Job 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 35:2</span></span>

Thinkest thou this to be right? - This is the point which Elihu now
proposes to examine. He, therefore, solemnly appeals to Job himself to
determine whether he could himself say that he thought such a sentiment
correct.

That thou saidst, My righteousness is more than God's - Job had nowhere
said this in so many words, but Elihu regarded it as the substance of
what he had said, or thought that what he had said amounted to the same
thing. He had dwelt much on his own sincerity and uprightness of life;
he had maintained that he had not been guilty of such crimes as to make
these calamities deserved, and he had indulged in severe reflections on
the dealings of God with him; compare [Job
9:30-35](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#030); [Job
10:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#013). All this Elihu interprets as
equivalent to saying, that he was more righteous than his Maker. It
cannot be denied that Job had given occasion for this interpretation to
be put on his sentiments, though it cannot be supposed that he would
have affirmed this in so many words.

[Job 35:3](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 35:3</span></span>

For thou saidst - Another sentiment of a similar kind which Elihu
proposes to examine. He had already adverted to this sentiment of Job in
[Job 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#009), and examined it at some
length, and had shown in reply to it that God could not be unjust, and
that there was great impropriety when man presumed to arraign the
justice of the Most High. He now adverts to it again in order to show
that God could not be benefited or injured by the conduct of man, and
that he was, therefore, under no inducement to treat him otherwise than
impartially.

What advantage will it be unto thee? - see the notes at [Job
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#009). The phrase "unto thee," refers
to Job himself. He had said this to himself; or to his own soul. Such a
mode of expression is not uncommon in the Scriptures.

And, What profit shall I have if I be cleansed from my sin - Margin,
"or, by it" more than by my sin."" The Hebrew will admit of either of
these interpretations, and the sense is not materially varied. The idea
is, that as to good treatment or securing the favor of God under the
arrangements of his government, a man might just as well be wicked as
righteous. He would be as likely to be prosperous in the world, and to
experience the tokens of the divine favor. Job had by no means advanced
such a sentiment; but he had maintained that he was treated "as if" he
were a sinner; that the dealings of Providence were "not" in this world
in accordance with the character of people; and this was interpreted by
Elihu as maintaining that there was no advantage in being righteous, or
that a man might as well be a sinner. It was for such supposed
sentiments as these, that Elihu and the three friends of Job charged him
with giving "answers" for wicked people, or maintaining opinions which
went to sustain and encourage the wicked; see [Job
34:36](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#036).

[Job 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 35:4</span></span>

I will answer thee - Margin, "return to thee words." Elihu meant to
explain this more fully than it had been done by the friends of Job, and
to show where Job was in error.

And thy companions with thee - Eliphaz, in [Job
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#002), had taken up the same inquiry,
and proposed to discuss the subject, but he had gone at once into severe
charges against Job, and been drawn into language of harsh crimination,
instead of making the matter clear, and Elihu now proposes to state just
how it is, and to remove the objections of Job. It may be doubted,
however, whether he was much more successful than Eliphaz had been. The
doctrine of the future state, as it is revealed by Christianity, was
needful to enable these speakers to comprehend and explain this subject.

[Job 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 35:5</span></span>

Look unto the heavens, and see - This is the commencement of the reply
which Elihu makes to the sentiment which he had understood Job to
advance, and which Eliphaz had proposed formerly to examine. The general
object of the reply is, to show that God is so great that he cannot be
affected with human conduct, and that he has no interest in treating
people otherwise than according to character. He is so exalted that
their conduct cannot reach and affect his happiness. It ought to be
"presumed," therefore, since there is no motive to the contrary, that
the dealings of God with people would be impartial, and that there
"would" be an advantage in serving him - not because people could lay
him under "obligation," but because it was right and proper that such
advantage should accrue to them. To impress this view on the mind, Elihu
directs Job and his friends to look to the heavens - so lofty, grand,
and sublime; to reflect how much higher they are than man; and to
remember that the great Creator is "above" all those heavens, and "thus"
to see that he is so far cxalted that he is not dependent on man; that
he cannot be affected by the righteousness or wickedness of his
creatures; that his happiness is not dependent on them, and consequently
that it is to bc presumed that he would act impartially, and treat all
people as they deserved. There "would" be, therefore, an advantage in
serving God.

And behold the clouds - Also far above us, and seeming to float in the
heavens. The sentiment here is, that one view of the astonishing display
of wisdom and power above us must extinguish every feeling that he will
be influenced in his dealings as people are in theirs, or that he can
gain or suffer anything by the good or bad behavior of his creatures.

[Job 35:6](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 35:6</span></span>

If thou sinnest, what doest thou against him? - This should not be
interpreted as designed to justify sin, or as saying that there is no
evil in it, or that God does not regard it. That is not the point or
scope of the remark of Elihu. His object is to show that God is not
influenced in his treatment of his creatures as people are in their
treatment of each other. He has no "interest" in being partial, or in
treating them otherwise than they deserve. If they sin against him his
happiness is not so marred that he is under any inducement to interpose
"by passion," or in any other way than that which is "right."

[Job 35:7](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 35:7</span></span>

If thou be righteous, what givest thou him? - The same sentiment
substantially as in the previous verses. It is, that God is supreme and
independent. He does not desire such benefits from the services of his
friends and is not so dependent on them; as to be induced to interpose
in their favor, in any way beyond what is strictly proper. It is to be
presumed, therefore, that he will deal with them according to what is
right, and as it is right that they should experience proofs of his
favor, it followed that there "would be" advantage in serving him, and
in being delivered from sin; that it "would be" better to be holy than
to lead a life of transgression. This reasoning seems to be somewhat
abstract, but it is correct, and is as sound now as it was in the time
of Elihu. There is no reason why God should not treat people according
to their character. He is not so under obligations to his friends, and
has not such cause to dread his foes; he does not derive so much benefit
from the one, or receive such injury from the other, that he is under
any inducement to swerve from strict justice; and it follows, therefore,
that where there ought to be reward there will be, where there ought to
be punishment there will be, and consequently that there is an advantage
in being righteous.

[Job 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 35:8</span></span>

Thy wickedness may hurt a Man as thou art - That is, it may injure him,
but not God. He is too far exalted above man, and too independent of man
in his sources of happiness, to be affected by what he can do. The
object of the whole passage [Job
35:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#006) is, to show that God is
independent of people, and is not governed in his dealings with them on
the principles which regulate their conduct with each other. One man may
be greatly benefited by the conduct of another, and may feel under
obligation to reward him for it; or he maybe greatly injured in his
person, property, or reputation, by another, and will endeavor to avenge
himself. But nothing of this kind can happen to God. If he rewards,
therefore, it must be of his grace and mercy, not because he is laid
under obligation; if he inflicts chastisement, it must be because people
deserve it, and not because God has been injured. In this reasoning
Elihu undoubtedly refers to Job, whom he regards as having urged a
"claim" to a different kind of treatment, because he supposed that he
"deserved" it. The general principle of Elihu is clearly correct, that
God is entirely independent of human beings; that neither our good nor
evil conduct can effect his happiness, and that consequently his
dealings with us are those of impartial justice.

[Job 35:9](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 35:9</span></span>

By reason of the multitude of oppressions they make the oppressed to cry
- It is not quite easy to see the connection which this verse has with
what goes before, or its bearing on the argument of Elihu. It seems
however, to refer to the "oppressed in general," and to the fact, to
which Job had himself adverted [Job
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#012), that people are borne down by
oppression and that God does not interpose to save them. They are
suffered to remain in that state of oppression - trodden down by people,
crushed by the armor of a despot, and overwhelmed with poverty, sorrow,
and want, and God does not interpose to rescue them. He looks on and
sees all this evil, and does not come forth to deliver those who thus
suffer. This is a common case, according to the view of Job; this was
his own case, and he could not explain it, and in view of it he had
indulged in language which Elihu regarded as a severe reflection on the
government of the Almighty. He undertakes, therefore, to "explain the
reason" why people are permitted thus to suffer, and why they are not
relieved.

In the verse before us, he states "the fact," that multitudes "do" thus
suffer under the arm of oppression - for that fact could not be denied;
in the following verses, he states "the reason" why it is so, and that
reason is, that they do not apply in any proper manner to God, who could
"give songs in the night," or joy in the midst of calamities, and who
could make them acquainted with the nature of his government as
intelligent beings, so that they would be able to understand it and
acquiesce in it. The phrase "the multitude of oppressions" refers to the
numerous and repeated calamities which tyrants bring upon the poor, the
down-trodden, and the slave. The phrases "to cry" and "they cry out,"
refer to the lamentations and sighs of those under the arm of the
oppressor. Elihu did not dispute the truth of "the fact" as it was
alleged by Job. That fact could not then be doubted any more than it can
now, that there were many who were bowed down under burdens imposed by
hard-hearted masters, and groaning under the government of tyrants, and
that all this was seen and permitted by a holy God. This fact troubled
Job - for he was one of this general class of sufferers; and this fact
Elihu proposes to account for. Whether his solution is satisfactory,
however, may still admit of a doubt.

[Job 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 35:10</span></span>

But none saith - That is, none of the oppressed and down-trodden say.
This is the solution which Elihu gives of what appeared so mysterious to
Job, and of what Elihu regarded as the source of the bitter complaints
of Job. The solution is, that when people are oppressed they do not
apply to God with a proper spirit, and look to him that they may find
relief. It was a principle with Elihu, that if when a man was afflicted
he would apply to God with a humble and penitent heart, he would hear
him, and would withdraw his hand; see this principle fully stated in
[Job 33:19-26](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#019). This Elihu now says,
was not done by the oppressed, and this, according to him, is the reason
why the hand of God is still upon them.

Where is God my Maker - That is, they do not appeal to God for relief.
They do not inquire for him who alone can help them. This is the reason
why they are not relieved.

Who giveth songs in the night - Night, in the Scriptures, is an emblem
of sin, ignorance, and calamity. Here "calamity" is particularly
referred to; and the idea is, that God can give joy, or impart
consolation, in the darkest season of trial. He can impart such views of
himself and his government as to cause the afflicted even to rejoice in
his dealings; he can raise the song of praise even when all external
things are gloomy and sad; compare [Act
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#025). There is great beauty in this
expression. It has been verified in thousands of instances where the
afflicted have looked up through tears to God, and their mourning has
been turned into joy. Especially is it true under the gospel, that in
the day of darkness and calamity, God puts into the mouth the language
of praise, and fills the heart with thanksgiving. No one who has sought
comfort in affliction with a right spirit has found it withheld, and all
the sad and sorrowful may come to God with the assurance that he can put
songs of praise into their lips in the night of calamity; compare [Psa
126:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#001).

[Job 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 35:11</span></span>

Who teacheth us more than the beasts of the earth - Who is able to teach
us mere than the irrational creation; that is, in regard to the nature
and design of affliction. They suffer without knowing why. They are
subjected to toil and hardships; endure pain, and die, without any
knowledge why all this occurs, and without any rational view of the
government and plans of God. It is not, or need not be so, says Elihu,
when man suffers. He is intelligent. He can understand why he is
afflicted. He has only to make use of his superior endowments, and apply
to his Maker, and he will see so much of the reason of his doings that
he will acquiesce in the wise arrangement. Perhaps there is an implied
reflection here on those who suffered generally, as if they manifested
no more intelligence than the brute creation. They make no use of
intellectual endowments. They do not examine the nature of the divine
administration, and they do not apply to God for instruction and help.
If they should do so, he would teach them so that they would acquiesce
and rejoice in his government and dealings. According to this view, the
meaning is, that if people suffer without relief and consolation, it is
to be attributed to their stupidity and unwillingness to look to God for
light and aid, and not at all to his injustice.

[Job 35:12](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 35:12</span></span>

There they cry - They cry out in the language of complaint, but not for
mercy.

Because of the pride of evil men - That is, of their own pride. The
pride of men so rebellious, and so disposed to complain of God, is the
reason why they do not appeal to him to sustain them and give them
relief. This is still as true as it was in the time of Elihu. The pride
of the heart, even in affliction, is the true reason with multitudes why
they do not appeal to God, and why they do not pray. They have valued
themselves on their independence of spirit. They have been accustomed to
rely on their own resources. They have been unwilling to recognize their
dependence on any being whatever. Even in their trials, the heart is too
wicked to acknowledge God, and they would be ashamed to be known to do
what they regard as so weak a thing as "to pray." Hence, they complain
in their afflictions; they linger on in their sufferings without
consolation, and then die without hope. However inapplicable, therefore,
this solution of the difficulty may have been to the case of Job, it is
"not" inapplicable to the case of multitudes of sufferers. "Many of the
afflicted have no peace or consolation in their trials - no 'songs in
the night' - because they are too proud to pray!"

[Job 35:13](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 35:13</span></span>

Surely God will not hear vanity - A vain, hollow, heartless petition.
The object of Elihu here is to account for the reason why sufferers are
not relieved - having his eye, doubtless, on the case of Job as one of
the most remarkable of the kind. The solution which he here gives of the
difficulty is, that it is not consistent for God to hear a prayer where
there is no sincerity. Of the "truth" of the remark there can be no
doubt, but he seems to have taken it for granted that all prayers
offered by unrelieved sufferers are thus insincere and hollow. This was
needfull in his view to account for the fact under consideration, and
this he "assumes" as being unquestionable. Yet the very point
indispensable to make out his case was, that "in fact" the prayers
offered by such persons were insincere.

[Job 35:14](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 35:14</span></span>

Although thou sayest thou shalt not see him - This is addressed to Job,
and is designed to entreat him to trust in God. Elihu seems to refer to
some remark that Job had made, like that in [Job
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#008), where he said that he could not
come near him, nor bring his cause before him. If he went to the east,
the west, thc north, or the south, he could not see him, and could get
no opportunity of bringing his cause before him: see the notes at that
place. Elihu here says that though it is true in fact that God is
invisible, yet this ought not to be regarded as a reason why he should
not confide in him. The argument of Elihu here - which is undoubtedly
sound - is, that the fact that God is invisible should not be regarded
as any evidence that he does not attend to the affairs of people, or
that he is not worthy of our love.

Judgment is before him - He is a God of justice, and will do that which
is right.

Therefore trust him - Though he is invisible, and though you cannot
bring, your cause directly before him. The word which is used here
(תחולל tchûlēl, from חול chûl) means "to turn around"; to twist; to be
firm - as a rope is that is twisted; and then to wait or delay - that
is, to be firm in patience. Here it may have this meaning, that Job was
to be firm and unmoved, patiently waiting for the time when the now
invisible God would interpose in his behalf, though he could not now see
him. The idea is, that we may trust the "invisible God," or that we
should patiently "wait" for him to manifest himself in our behalf, and
may leave all our interests in his hands, with the feeling that they are
entirely safe. It must be admitted that Job had not learned this lesson
as fully as it might have been learned, and that he had evinced an undue
anxiety for some public "manifestation" of the favor and friendship of
God, and that he had not shown quite the willingness which he should
have done to commit his interests into his hands, though he was unseen.

[Job 35:15](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 35:15</span></span>

But now, because it is not so - This verse, as it stands in our
authorized translation, conveys no intelligible idea. It is evident that
the translators meant to give a literal version of the Hebrew, but
without understanding its sense. An examination of the principal words
and phrases may enable us to ascertain the idea which was in the mind of
Elihu when it was uttered. The phrase in the Hebrew here (ועתה כי־אין
kı̂y-'ayin ve‛attâh) may mean, "but now it is as nothing," and is to be
connected with the following clause, denoting, "now it is comparatively
nothing that he has visited you in his anger;" that is, the punishment
which he has inflicted on you is almost as nothing compared with what it
might have been, or what you have deserved. Job had complained much, and
Elihu says to him, that so far from having cause of complaint, his
sufferings were as nothing - scarcely worth noticing, compared with what
they might have been.

He hath visited in his anger - Margin, that is, "God." The word rendered
"hath visited" (פקד pâqad) means to visit for any purpose - for mercy or
justice; to review, take an account of, or investigate conduct. Here it
is used with reference to punishment - meaning that the punishment which
he had inflicted was trifling compared with the desert of the offences.

Yet he knoweth it not - Margin, that is, "Job." The marginal reading
here is undoubtedly erroneous. The reference is not to Job, but to God,
and the idea is, that he did not "know," that is, did not "take full
account" of the sins of Job. He passed them over, and did not bring them
all into the account in his dealings with him. Had he done this, and
marked every offence with the utmost strictness and severity, his
punishment would have been much more severe.

In great extremity - The Hebrew here is מאד בפשׁ bapash me'ôd. The word
פשׁ pash occurs nowhere else in the Hebrew. The Septuagint renders it
παράπτωμα paraptōma, "offence." and the Vulgate "scelus," that is,
"transgression." The authors of those versions evidently read it as if
it were פשׁע pesha‛, iniquity; and it may be that the final ע (‛) has
been dropped, like שו for שׁוא shâv', in [Job
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#031). Gesenius, Theodotion and
Symmachus in like manner render it "transgression." Others have regarded
it as if from פוש "to be proud," and as meaning "in pride" or
"arrogance;" and others, as the rabbis generally, as if from פוש, to
"disperse," meaning "on account of the multitude," scil. of
transgressions. So Rosenmuller, Umbreit, Luther, and the Chaldee. It
seems probable to me that the interpretation of the Septuagint and the
Vulgate is the correct one, and that the sense is, that he "does not
take cognizance severely (מאד me'ôd) of transgressions;" that is, that
he had not done it in the case of Job. This interpretation agrees with
the scope of the passage, and with the view which Elihu meant to express
- that God, so far from having given any just cause of complaint, had
not even dealt with him as his sins deserved. Without any impeachment of
his wisdom or goodness, his inflictions "might" have been far more
severe.

[Job 35:16](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 35:16</span></span>

Therefore - In view of all that Elihu had now said, be came to the
conclusion that the views of Job were erroneous, and that he had no just
cause of complaint. He had suffered no more than he had deserved; he
might have obtained a release or mitigation if he had applied to God;
and the government of God was just, and was every way worthy of
confidence. The remarks of Job, therefore, complaining of the severity
of his sufferings and of the government of God, were not based on
knowledge, and had in fact no solid foundation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 36](job036)

</div>
