<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job018)  [Next](job020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#001.md)

[Job 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 19:2</span></span>

How long will ye vex my soul? - Perhaps designing to reply to the
taunting speech of Bildad; [Job 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#002.md).
"He" had asked "how long it would be ere Job would make an end of empty
talk?" "Job" asks, in reply, "how long" they would torture and afflict
his soul? Or whether there was on hope that this would ever come to an
end!

And break me in pieces - Crush me, or bruise me - like breaking any
thing in a mortar, or breaking rocks by repeated blows of the hammer.
"Noyes." He says they had crushed him, as if by repeated blows.

[Job 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 19:3</span></span>

These ten times - Many times; the word "ten" being used as we often say,
"ten a dozen" or "twenty," to denote many; see [Gen
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#007.md), "And your father hath changed my
wages "ten times." [Lev 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#026.md), "and
when I have broken your staff of bread, "ten women" shall bake your
bread, in one oven;" compare [Num
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#022.md); [Neh
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#006.md).

You are not ashamed that you make yourselves strange to me - Margin,
"harden yourselves strange to me." Margin, "harden yourselves against
me." Gesenius, and after him Noyes, renders this, "Shameless ye stun
me." Wemyss, "Are ye not ashamed to treat me thus cruelly? The word used
here (הכר hâkar) occurs no no where else, and hence, it is difficult to
determine its meaning. The Vulgate renders it, "oppressing me." The
Septuagint, "and you are not ashamed to press upon me." - ἐπίκεισθέ υοι
epikeisthe moi. Schultens has gone into an extended examination of its
meaning, and supposes that the primary idea is that of being "stiff," or
"rigid." The word in Arabic, he says, means to be "stupid with wonder."
It is applied, he supposes, to those who are "stiff or rigid" with
stupor; and then to those who have a stony heart and an iron an iron
fore-head - and who can look on the suffering without feeling or
compassion. This sense accords well with the connection here. Gesenius,
however, supposes that the primary idea is that of beating or pounding;
and hence, of stunning by repeated blows. In either case the sense would
be substantially the same - that of "stunning." The idea given by our
translators of making themselves "strange" was derived from the
supposition that the word might be formed from נכר nâkar - to be
strange, foreign; to estrange, alienate, etc. For a more full
examination of the word, the reader may consult Schultens, or
Rosenmuller "in loco."

[Job 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 19:4</span></span>

And be it indeed that I have erred - Admitting that I have erred, it is
my own concern. You have a right to reproach and revile me in this
manner.

Mine error abideth with myself - I must abide the consequences of the
error." The design of this seems to be to reprove what he regarded as an
improper and meddlesome interference with his concerns. Or it may be an
expression of a willingness to bear all the consequences himself. He was
willing to meet all the fair results of his own conduct.

[Job 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 19:5</span></span>

If, indeed, ye will magnify yourselves against me - This is connected
with the next verse. The sense is, "all these calamities came from God.
He has brought them upon me in a sudden and mysterious manner. In these
circumstances you ought to have pity upon me; [Job
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#021.md). Instead of magnifying
yourselves against me, setting yourselves up as censors and judges,
overwhelming me with reproaches and filling my mind with pain and
anguish, you ought to show to me the sympathy of a friend." The phrase,
"magnify yourselves," refers to the fact that they had assumed a tone of
superiority and an authoritative manner, instead of showing the
compassion due to a friend in affliction.

And plead against me my reproach - My calamities as a cause of reproach.
You urge them as a proof of the displeasure of God, and you join in
reproaching me as a hypocrite. Instead of this, you should have shown
compassion to me as a man whom God had greatly afflicted.

[Job 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 19:6</span></span>

Know now that God - Understand the case; and in order that they might,
he goes into an extended description of the calamities which God had
brought upon him. He wished them to be "fully" apprised of all that he
had suffered at the hand of God.

Hath overthrown me - The word used here (עות ‛âvath) means to bend, to
make crooked or curved; then to distort, prevert: them to overturn, to
destroy; [Isa 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#001.md); [Lam
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#009.md). The meaning here is, that he had
been in a state of prosperity, but that God had completely "reversed"
everything.

And hath compassed me with his net - Has sprung his net upon me as a
hunter does, and I am caught. Perhaps there may be an allusion here to
what Bildad said in [Job 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#008.md) ff, that
the wicked would be taken in his own snares. Instead of that, Job says
that "God" had sprung the snare upon him - for reasons which he could
not understand, but in such a manner as should move the compassion of
his friends.

[Job 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 19:7</span></span>

Behold, I cry out of wrong - Margin, or "violence." The Hebrew word (חמס
châmâs) means properly violence. The violence referred to is that which
was brought upon him by God. It is, indeed, harsh language; but it is
not quite sure that he means to complain of God for doing him injustice.
God had dealt with him in a severe or violent manner, is the meaning,
and he had cried unto him for relief, but had cried in vain.

No judgment - No justice. The meaning is, that he could obtain justice
from no one God would not interpose to remove the calamities which he
had brought upon him, and his friends would do no justice to his motives
and character.

[Job 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 19:8</span></span>

He hath fenced up my way - This figure is taken from a traveler, whose
way is obstructed by trees, rocks, or fences, so that he cannot get
along, and Job says it was so with him. He was traveling along in a
peaceful manner on the journey of life, and all at once obstructions
were put in his path, so that he could not go farther. This does not
refer, particularly, to his spiritual condition, if it does at all. It
is descriptive of the obstruction of his plans, rather than of spiritual
darkness or distress.

And he hath set darkness in my paths - So that I cannot see - as if all
around the traveler should become suddenly dark, so that he could not
discern his way. The "language" here would well express the spiritual
darkness which the friends of God sometimes experience, though it is by
no means certain that Job referred to that. All the dealings of God are
to them mysterious, and there is no light in the soul - and they are
ready to sink down in despair.

[Job 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 19:9</span></span>

He hath stripped me of my glory - Everything which I had that
contributed to my respectability and honor, he has taken away. My
property, my health, my family, the esteem of my friend - all is gone.

And taken the crown from my head - The crown is an emblem of honor and
dignity - and Job says that God had removed all that contributed to his
- and Job says that God had removed all that contributed to his former
dignity; compare [Pro 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#009.md); [Pro
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#006.md); [Eze
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#012.md); [Lam
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#016.md).

[Job 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 19:10</span></span>

He hath destroyed me on every side - He has left me nothing. The word
which is used here is that which is commonly applied to which is used
here is that which is commonly applied to destroying cities, towns, and
houses. "Rosenmuller."

And I am gone - That is, I am near death. I cannot recover myself.

And mine hope hath he removed like a tree - A tree, which is plucked up
by the roots, and which does not grow again. That is, his hopes of life
and happiness, of an honored old age, and of a continuance of his
prosperity, had been wholly destroyed. This does not refer to his
"religious" hope - as the word hope is often used now - but to his
desire of future comfort and prosperity in this life. It does not appear
but that his religious hope, arising from confidence in God, remainned
unaffected.

[Job 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 19:11</span></span>

He hath also kindled his wrath - He is angry. Wrath in the Scriptures is
usually represented as burning or inflamed - because like fire it
destroys everything before it.

And he counteth me unto him as one of his enemies - He treats me as he
would an enemy. The same complaint he elsewhere makes; see [Job
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#024.md); perhaps also in [Job
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#009.md). We are not to understand Job
here as admitting that "he" was an enemy of God. He constantly
maintained that he was not, but he was constrained to admit that God
"treated him" as if he were his enemy, and he could not account for it.
"On this ground," therefore, he now maintains that his friends ought to
show him compassion, instead of trying to prove that he "was" an enemy
of God; they ought to pity a man who was so strangely and mysteriously
afflicted, instead of increasing his sorrows by endeavoring to
demonstrate that he was a man of eminent wickedness.

[Job 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 19:12</span></span>

His troops - The calamities which he had sent, and which are here
represented as "armies" or "soldiers" to accomplish his work. It is not
probable that he refers here to the bands of the Chaldeans and the
Sabeans, that had robbed him of his property, but to the calamities that
had come upon him, "as if" they were bands of robbers.

And raise up their way - As and army that is about to lay siege to a
city, or that is marching to attack it, casts up a way of access to it,
and thus obtains every facility to take it; see [Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003.md), note; [Isa
57:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#014.md), note.

And encamp round about my tabernacle - In the manner of an army
besieging a city. Often an army is encamped in this manner for months or
even years, in order to reduce the city by famine.

My tabernacle - My tent; my dwelling.

[Job 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 19:13</span></span>

He hath put my brethren - This is a new source of afflication that he
had not adverted to before, that God had caused all his children to be
estranged from him - a calamity which he regarded as the crown of all
his woes. The word rendered "my brethren" (אחי 'âchāy) means means
properly "my brothers" - but whether he means literally his brothers, or
whether he designs it to be taken in a figuratie sense as denoting his
intimate friends, or those of the same rank in life or calling, it is
impossible now to determine.

And mine acquaintance - My friends - on whom I relied in time of
calamity.

And verily estranged - They have forgotten me, and treat me as a
stranger. What an accurate description is this of what often occurs! In
prosperity a man will be surrounded by friends; but as soon as his
prosperity is stripped away, and he is overwhelmed with calamity, they
withdraw, and leave him to suffer alone. Proud of his acquaintance
before, they now pass him by as a stranger, or treat him with cold
civility, and when he "needs" their friendship, they are gone.

[Job 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 19:14</span></span>

My kinsfolk have failed - My neighbors (קרובי qârôbāy), those who were
near to me. It may refer to "nearness" of affinity, friendship, or
residence. The essential idea is that of "nearness" - whether by blood,
affection, or vicinity. In [Psa 38:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#011.md),
it denotes near friends.

And my familiar friends - Those who knew me - מידעי myudā‛ay. The
allusion is to those who were "intimately" acquainted with him, or who
were his bosom friends.

[Job 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 19:15</span></span>

They that dwell in mine house - The trials came to his very dwelling,
and produced a sad estrangement there. The word used here גרי gārēy from
גוּר gûr means properly those who "sojourn" in a house for a little
time. It may refer to guests, strangers, servants, clients, or tenants.
The essential idea is, that they were not "permanent" residents, though
for a time they were inmates of the family. Jerome renders the place,
"Inquilini domus meoe - the tenants of my house." The Septuagint,
Γείτονες οἰχιάς Geitones oikias - neighbors. Schultens supposes it means
"clients," or those who were taken under the protection of a great man.
He quotes from the Arabian poets to show that the word is used in that
sense, and particularly a passage from the "Hamasa," which he thus
translates:

Descendite sub alas meas, alasque gentis meae.

Ut sim praesidium vobis quum pugna con seritur.

Namque testamento injunxit mihi pater, ut reciperem vos hospites.

Omnemque oppressorem a vobis propulsarem.

There can be no doubt that Job refers to "dependents," but whether in
the capacity of servants, tenants, or clients, it is not easy to
determine, and is not material. Dr. Good renders it "sojourners," and
this is a correct rendering of the word. This would be clearly the sense
if the corresponding member of the parallelism were not "maids." or
female servants. "That" requires us to understand here persons who were
"somehow" engaged in the service of Job. Perhaps his clients, or those
who came for protection, were under obligation to some sort of service
as the return of his patronage.

And my maids - Female domestics. The Chaldee, however, renders this
לחינתי - "my concubines;" but the correct reference is to female female
servants.

I am an alien - That is, to them. They cease to treat me as the head of
the family.

[Job 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 19:16</span></span>

I called my servant - He lost all respect for me, and paid me no
attention.

I entreated him - I ceased to expect "obedience," and tried to see what
"persuasion" would do. I ceased to be master in my own house.

[Job 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 19:17</span></span>

My breath is strange to my wife - Schultens renders this, "my breath is
loathsome to my wife," and so also Noyes. Wemyss translates it, "my own
wife turns aside from my breath." Dr Good, "my breath is scattered away
by my wife." The literal meaning is, "my breath is "strange" (זרה zârâh)
to my wife;" and the idea is, that there had been such a change in him
from his disease, that his breath was not that which she had been
accustomed to breathe without offence, and that she now turned away from
it as if it were the breath of a stranger. Jerome renders it, "Halitum
meum exhorruit uxor mea - my wife abhors my breath." It may be worthy of
remark here, that but "one" wife of Job is mentioned - a remarkable
fact, as he probably lived in an age when polygamy was common.

I entreated her - I appealed to her by all that was tender in the
domestic relation, but in vain. From this it would seem that even his
wife had regarded him as an object of divine displeasure and had also
left him to suffer alone.

For the children's sake of mine own body - Margin, "my belly." There is
consideralbe variety in the interpretation of this passage. The word
rendered "my own body" (בטני beṭenı̂y) means literally, "my belly or
womb;" and Noyes, Gesenius, and some others, suppose it means the
children of his own mother! But assuredly this was scarcely an appeal
that Job would be likely to make to his wife in such circumstances.
There can be no impropriety in supposing that Job referred to himself,
and that the word is used somewhat in the same sense as the word "loins"
is in [Gen 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#011.md); [Gen
46:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#026.md); [Exo
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#005.md); [Kg1
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#019.md). Thus, understood, it would refer
to his own children, and the appeal to his wife was founded on the
relation which they had sustainded to them. Though they were now dead,
he referred to their former united attachment to them, to the common
affliction which they had experienced in their loss; and in view of all
their former love to them, and all the sorrow which they had experienced
in their death, he made an appeal to his wife to show him kindness, but
in vain. Jerome renders this, "Orabam filios uteri mei." The Septuagint,
not understanding it, and trying to "make" sense of it, introduced a
statement which is undoubtedly false, though Rosenmuller accords with
it. "I called affectionately (κολακεύων kolakeuōn) the sons of my
concubines" - υἵους παλλακίδων μου huious pallakidōn mou. But the whole
meaning is evidently that he made a solemn and tender appeal to his
wife, in view of all the joys and sorrows which they had experience as
the united head of a family of now no more. What would reach the heart
of an estranged wife, if such an appeal would not?

[Job 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 19:18</span></span>

Yea, young children - Margin, or "the wicked." This difference between
the text and the margin arises from the ambiguity of the original word -
עוילים ‛ăvı̂ylı̂ym. The word עויל ‛ăvı̂yl (whence our word "evil") means
sometimes the wicked, or the ungodly, as in [Job
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#011.md). It may also mean a child, or
suckling, (from עוּל ‛ûl - to give milk, to suckle, [Sa1
7:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#007.md); [Gen
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#013.md) : Ps. 77:71; [Isa
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011.md); compare [Isa
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#015.md); [Isa
65:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#020),.md) and is doubtless used in this
sense here. Jerome, however, renders it "stulti - fools." The
Septuagint, strangely enough, "They renounced me forever." Dr. Good
renders it, "Even the dependents." So Schultens, Etiam clientes
egentissimi - "even the most needy clients." But the reference is
probably to children who are represented as withholding from him the
respect which was due to age.

I arose, and they spake against me - "When I rise up, instead of
regarding and treating me with respect, they make me an object of
contempt and sport." Compare the account of the respect which had
formerly been shown him in [Job 29:8](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#008.md).

[Job 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 19:19</span></span>

All my inward friends - Margin, "the men of my secret." The meaning is
those, who were admitted to the intimacy of friendship or who were
permitted to be acquainted with his secret thoughts, purposes, and
plans. The word uses here (סוד sôd) denotes properly "a couch, cushions,
pillow," on which one reclines; then a "divan," a circle of persons
sitting together for consultation or conversation; and hence, it refers
to those who are sitting together in intimate counsel, (see [Job
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#008.md), note; [Job
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#004), note.md) and then familiar
conversation, intimacy. Here the phrase "men of my intimacy" (סודי
sôdı̂y) denotes those who were admitted to intimate friendship. All such
persons had now forsaken him, and turned against him.

[Job 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 19:20</span></span>

My bone cleaveth to my skin and to my flesh - The meaning of this
probably is, "my skin and flesh are dried up so that the bone seems
adhere to the skin, and so tht the form of the bone becomes visible." It
is designed to denote a state of great emaciation, and describes an
effect which we often see.

And I am escaped with the skin of my teeth - A very difficult
expression, and which has greatly perplexed commentators, and on whose
meaning they are by no means agreed. Dr. Good renders it, "and in the
skin of my teeth am I dissolved;" but what that means is as difficult of
explanation as the original. Noyes, "and I have scarcely escaped with
the skin of my teeth." Herde, (as translated by Marsh,) "and scarcely
the skin in my teeth have I brought away as a spoil." He says that "the
figure is taken from the prey which wild beasts carry in their teeth;
his skin is his poor and wretched body, which alone he had escaped with.
His friends are represented as carnivorous animals which gnaw upon his
skin, upon the poor remnant of life;" but the Hebrew will not bear this
construction. Poole observes, quaintly enough, that it means, "I am
scarcely sound and whole and free from sores in any part of my skin,
except that of my jaws, which holdeth and covereth the roots of my
teeth. This being, as divers observe, the devil's policy, to leave his
mouth untouched, that be might more freely express his mind, and vent
his blasphemies against God, which he supposed sharp pain would force
him to do." Schultens has mentioned four different interpretations given
to the phrase, none of which seems to be perfectly satisfactory. They
are the following:

\(1\) That it means that the skin "about" the teeth alone was preserved,
or the gums and the lips, so that he had the power of speaking, though
every other part was wasted away, and this exposition is given,
accompanied with the suggestion that his faculty of speech was preserved
entire by Satan, in order that he might be "able" to utter the language
of complaint and blasphemy against God.

\(2\) That he was emaciated and exhausted completely, "except" the skin
about his teeth, that is, his lips, and that by them he was kept alive;
that if it were not for them he could not breathe, but must soon expire.

\(3\) That the teeth themselves had fallen out by the force of disease,
and that nothing was left but the gums. This opinion Schultens himself
adopts. The image, be says, is taken from pugilists, whose teeth are
knocked out by each other; and the meaning he supposes to be, that Job
had been treated by his disease in the same manner. So violent had it
been that he had lost all his teeth and nothing was left but his gums.

\(4\) A fourth opinion is, that the reference is to the "enamel" of the
teeth, and that the meaning is, that such was the force and extent of
his afflictions that all his teeth became hollow and were decayed,
leaving only the enamel. It is difficult to determine the true sense
amidst a multitude of learned conjectures; but probably the most simple
and easy interpretation is the best. It may mean that he was "almost"
consumed. Disease had preyed upon his frame until he was wasted away.
Nothing was left but his lips, or his gums; he was just able to speak,
and that was all. So Jerome renders it, delicta sunt tantummodo labia
circa dentes meos. Luther renders it, und kann meine Zahne mit der Haut
nicht bedecken - "and I cannot cover my teeth with the skin;" that is,
with the lips.

[Job 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 19:21</span></span>

Have pity on me - A tender, pathetic cry for sympathy. "God has
afflicted me, and stripped me of all my comforts, and I am left a poor,
distressed, forsaken man. I make my appeal to you, my friends, and
entreat you to have pity; to sympathize with me, and to sustain me by
the words of consolation." One would have supposed that these words
would have gone to the heart, and that we should hear no more of their
bitter reproofs. But far otherwise was the fact.

The hand of God hath touched me - Hath smitten me; or is heavy upon me.
The meaning is, that he had been subjected to great calamities by God,
and that it was right to appeal now to his friends, and to expect their
sympathy and compassion. On the usual meaning of the word here rendered,
"hath touched" (נגעה nâga‛âh from נגע nâga‛ ), see the notes at [Isa
53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004.md).

[Job 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 19:22</span></span>

Why do ye persecute me as God? - As God has done. That is, without
giving me any reason for it; accusing me of crimes without proof, and
condeming me without mitigation. That there is here an improper
reflection on God, will be apparent to all. It accords with what Job
frequently expresses where he speaks of him as judging him severly, and
is on of the instances which prove that he was not entirely perfect.

And are not satisfied with my flesh - That is, are not contented that my
"body" is subjected to inexpressible torment, and is wholly wasting
away, but add to this the torment of the soul. Why is it not enough that
my "body" is thus tormented without adding the severer tortures of the
mind?

[Job 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 19:23</span></span>

Oh that my words were now written! - Margin, as in Hebrew, "Who will
give;" a common mode of expressing desire among the Hebrews. This
expression of desire introduces one of the most important passages in
the book of Job. It is the language of a man who felt that injustice was
done by his friends, and that he was not likely to have justice done him
by that generation. He was charged with hypocrisy; his motives were
called in question; his solemn appeals, and his arguments to assert his
innocence, were disregarded; and in this state of mind he expresses the
earnest wish that his expressions might be permanently recorded, and go
down to far distant times. He desired that what he had said might be
preserved, that future ages might be able to judge between him and his
accusers, and to know the justice of his cause. The desire thus
expressed has been granted, and a more permanent record bas been made
than if, in accordance with his request, his sentiments had been
engraved on lead or stone.

Oh that they were printed! - It is clear that this expression may convey
wholly an erroneous idea. The art of "printing" was then unknown; and
the passage has no allusion to that art. The original word (חקק châqaq)
means properly, to cut in, to hew; then to cut - e. g. a sepulchre in a
rock, [Isa 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#016.md); then to cut, or
engrave letters on a tablet of lead or stone, [Isa
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#008.md); [Eze
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#001.md); and generally it implies the
notion of engraving, or inscribing on a plate with an engraving tool.
Anciently books were made of materials which allowed of this mode of
making a record. Stone would probably be the first material; and then
plates of metal, leaves, bark, skins, etc. The notion of engraving,
however, is the proper idea here.

In a book - - בספר besêpher. The word ספר drow sêpher is derived from
ספר sâphar. In Arabic the kindred word shafar means to scratch, to
scrape; and hence, to engrave, write, record - and the idea was
originally that ofinsculping or engraving on a stone. Hence, the word
comes to denote a book, of any materials, or made in any form. Pliny,
speaking of the materials of ancient books, says, Olim in palmarum
foliis scriptitatum, et libris quarundam arborum; postea publira
monumenta plumbeis voluminibus, mox et privata lintels confici coepta
aut ceris. Lib. xiii. 11. "At first men wrote on the leaves of the palm,
or the bark of certain trees; but afterward public documents were
preserved in leaden volumes (or rolls), and those of a private nature on
wax or linen." "Montfaucon purchased at Rome, in 1699, an ancient book
entirely composed of lead. It was about four inches long, and three
inches wide: and not only were the two pieces that formed the cover, and
the leaves, six in number, of lead, but also the stick inserted through
the rings to hold the leaves together, as well as the hinges and nails.
It contained Egyptian Gnostic figures and unintelligible writing. Brass,
as more durable, was used for the inscriptions designed to last the
longest, such as treaties, laws, and alliances. These public documents
were, however, usually written on large tablets. The style for writing
on brass and other hard substances was sometimes tipped with diamond."

The meaning of the word here is evidently a record made on stone or lead
- for so the following verses indicate. The art of writing or engraving
was known in the time of Job; but I do not know that there is evidence
that the art of writing on leaves, bark, or vellum was yet understood.
As books in the form in which they are now were then unknown; as there
is no evidence that at that time anything like volumes or rolls were
possessed; as the records were probably preserved on tablets of stone or
lead; and as the entire description here pertains to something that was
engraved; and as this sense is conveyed by the Arabic verb from which
the word ספר sêpher, book, is derived, the word tablet, or some kindred
word, will better express the sense of the original than book - and I
have, therefore, used it in the translation.

Assyrian records are found generally in stone or clay; and the latter
being more easily and speedily engraven with a triangular instrument,
was more frequently employed.

\(1\) An Assyrian terra-cotta cylinder from Khorsabad contains the
annals of the reign of Sargon. It is dated about 721 B.C.

\(2\) A hexagonal terra cotta cylinder from Koyunjik contains the annals
of the first eight years of the reign of Sennacherib (702 to 694 B.C.),
with an account of the expedition against Hezekiah.

\(3\) The inscription shows Assyrian scribes making notes of prisoners,
heads of slain, spoils, etc. It comes from Koyunjik.

[Job 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 19:24</span></span>

That they were graven - Cut in, or sculptured - as is done on stones.
That they might become thus a permanent record.

With an iron pen - A stylus, or an engraving tool - for so the word (עט
‛êṭ) means. The instrument formerly used for writing or engraying was a
small, sharp-pointed piece of iron or steel, that was employed to mark
on lead or stone - somewhat in the form of small graying tools now. When
the writing was on wax, the instrument was made with a flat head, that
it could be obliterated by pressing it on or passing it over the wax.

The reason why Job mentions the iron pen here is, that he wished a
perment record. He did not desire one made with paint or chalk, but one
which would convey his sentiments down to future times.

And lead - That is, either engraved on lead, or more probably with lead.
It was customary to cut the letters deep in stone, and then to fill fill
them up with lead, so that the record became more permanent. This I take
to be the meaning here. The Hebrew will scarcely allow of the
supposition that Job meant that the records should be made on plates of
lead - though such plates were used early, but perhaps not until after
the time of Job.

In the rock - It was common, at an early period, to make inscriptions on
the smooth surface of a rock. Perhaps the first thai were made were on
stones, which were placed as way marks, or monuments over the dead - as
we now make such inscriptions on grave-stones. Then it became common to
record any memorable transaction - as a battle - on stones or rocks; and
perhaps, also, sententious and apothegmatical remarks were recorded in
this manner, to admonish travelers, or to transmit them to posterity.
Numerous inscriptions of this kind are found by travelers in the East,
on tombs, and on rocks in the desert. All that can be appropriate here
is a notice of such early inscriptions of that kind in Arabia, as would
render it probable that they existed in the time of Job, or such as
indicate great antiquity. Happily we are at no loss for such
inscriptions on rocks in the country where Job lived.

The Wady Mokatta, the cliffs of which bear these inscriptions, is a
valley entering Wady Sheikh, and bordering the upper regions of the
Sinai mountains. It extends for about three hours' march, and in most
places its rocks present abrupt cliffs, twenty or thirty feet high. From
these cliffs large masses have separated, and lie at the bottom of the
valley. The cliffs and rocks are thickly covered with inscriptions,
which are continued at intervals of a few hundred paces only, for at
least the distance of two hours and a half. Burckhardt, in his travels
from Akaba to Cairo, by Mount Sinai, observed many inscriptions on the
rocks, part of which he has copied. See his Travels in Syria, Lond. Ed.
pp. 506, 581, 582, 606, 613, 614. Pococke, who also visited the regions
of Mount Sinai in 1777, has given a description of the inscriptions
which he saw on the rocks at Mount Sinai. Vol. i. 148, be says," There
are on many of the rocks, both near these mountains and in the road, a
great many inscriptions in an ancient character; many of them I copied,
and observed that most of them were not cut, but stained, making the
granite of a lighter color, and where the stone had scaled, I could see
the stain had sunk into the stone."

Numerous specimens of these inscriptions may be seen in Pococke, vol. i.
p. 148. These inscriptions were also observed by Robinson and Smith, and
are described by them in Biblical Researches, vol. i. 108, 118, 119,
123, 161, 167. They are first mentioned by Cosmas, about 535 a.d. He
supposed them to be the work of the ancient Hebrews, and says that
certain Jews, who had read them, explained them to him as noting "the
journey of such an one, out of such a tribe, in such a year and month."
They have also been noticed by many early travelers, as Neitzschitz, p.
149; Moncongs, i. p. 245; and also by Niebuhr in his Reisebeschr. i. p.
250. The copies of them given by Pococke and Niebuhr are said to be very
imperfect; those by Seetzen are better, and those made by Burckhardt are
tolerably accurate. Rob. Bib. Research. i. 553. A large number of them
have been copied and published by Mr. Grey, in the Transactions of the
Royal Society of Literature, vol. iii. pt. 1, Lond. 1832; consisting of
one hundred and seventy-seven in the unknown character, nine in Greek,
and one in Latin. These inscriptions, which so long excited the
curiosity of travelers, have been recently deciphered (in the year 1839)
by Professor Beer, of the University of Leipzig. He had turned his
attention to them in the year 1833, but without success.

In the year 1839 his attention was again turned to them, and after
several months of the most persevering application, he succeeded in
making out the alphabet, and was enabled to read all the inscriptions
which have been copied, with a good degree of accuracy. According to the
results of this examination, the characters of the Sinaitic inscriptions
belong to a distinct and independent alphabet. Some of the letters are
wholly unique; the others have more or less affinity with the Palmyrene,
and particularly with the Estrangelo and the Cufic. They are written
from right to left. The contempts of the inscriptions, so far as
examined, consist only of proper names, preceded by a word which is
usually שׁלם shâlôm, peace, though occasionally some other word is used.
In one or two instances the name is followed by a sentence which has not
yet been deciphered. The names are those common in Arabic. It is a
remarkable fact that not one Jewish or Christian name has been found.

The question, as to the writers of these inscriptions, receives very
little light from their contents. A word at the end of some of them may
be so read as to affirm that they were pilgrims, and this opinion
Professor Beer adopts; but this is not certain. That the writers were
Christians, seems apparent from many of the crosses connected with the
inscriptions. The age, also, of the inscriptions, receives no light from
their conents, as no date has yet been read. Beer supposes that the
greater part of them could not have been written earlier than the fourth
century. Little light, therefore, is cast upon the question who wrote
them; what was their design; in what age they were written, or who were
the pilgrims who wrote them. See Rob. Bib. Research. i. 552-556. That
there were such records in the time of Job, is probable.

[Job 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 19:25</span></span>

For I know that my Redeemer liveth - There are few passages in the Bible
which have excited more attention than this, or in respect to which the
opinions of expositors have been more divided. The importance of the
passage [Job 19:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025.md) has contributed
much to the anxiety to understand its meaning - since, if it refers to
the Messiah, it is one of the most valuable of all the testimonials now
remaining of the early faith on that subject. The importance of the
passage will justify a somewhat more extended examination of its meaning
than it is customary to give in a commentary of a single passage of
Scripture; and I shall

(1.) Give the views entertained of it by the translators of the ancient
and some of the modern versions;

(2.) Investigate the meaning of the words and phrases which occur in it;
and

(3.) State the arguments, pro and con, for its supposed reference to the
Messiah.

The Vulgate renders it, "For I know that my Redeemer - Redemptor meus -
lives, and that in the last day I shall rise from the earth; and again,
I shall be enveloped - circumdabor - with my skin, and in my flesh shall
I see my God. Whom I myself shall see, and my eyes shall behold, and not
another - this, my hope, is laid up in my bosom." The Septuagint
translate it, "For I know that he is Eternal who is about to deliver me
- ὁ ἐκλύειν με μέλλων ho ekluein me mellōn - to raise again upon earth
this skin of mine, which draws up these things - τὸ ἀναντλοῦν ταῦτα to
anantloun tauta (the meaning of which, I believe, no one has ever been
able to divine.) For from the Lord these things have happened to me of
which I alone am conscious, which my eye has seen, and not another, and
which have all been done to me in my bosom." Thompson's trans. in part.
The Syriac is in the main a simple and correct rendering of the Hebrew.
"I know that my Redeemer liveth, and in the consummation he will be
revealed upon the earth, and after my skin I shall bless myself in these
things, and after my flesh. If my eyes shall see God, I shall see
light." The Chaldee accords with our version, except in one phrase. "And
afterward my skin shall be inflated, (משכי אתפת) - then in my flesh
shall I see God." It will be seen that some perplexity was felt by the
authors of the ancient versions in regard to the passage. Much more has
been felt by expositors. Some notices of the views of the moderns, in
regard to particular words and phrases, will be given in the exposition.

I know - I am certain. On that point Job desires to express the utmost
confidence. His friends might accuse him of hypocrisy - they might
charge him with lack of piety, and he might not be able to refute all
that they said; but in the position referred to here he would remain
fixed, and with this firm confidence he would support his soul. It was
this which he wished to have recorded in the eternal rocks, that the
record might go down to future times. If after ages should be made
acquainted with his name and his sufferings - if they should hear of the
charges brought against him and of the accusations of impiety which had
been so harshly and unfeelingly urged, he wished that this testimony
might be recorded, to show that he had unwavering confidence in God. He
wished this eternal record to be made, to show that he was not a
rejecter of truth; that he was not an enemy of God; that he had a firm
confidence that God would yet come forth to vindicate him, and would
stand up as his friend. It was a testimony worthy of being held in
everlasting remembrance, and one which has had, and will have, a
permanency much greater than he anticipated.

That my Redeemer - This important word has been variously translated.
Rosenmuller and Schultens render it, vindicem; Dr. Good, Redeemer; Noyes
and Wemyss, vindicator; Herder, avenger, Luther, Erloser - Redeemer;
Chaldee and Syriac, Redeemer. The Hebrew word, גאל go'al, is from גאל
gā'al, "to redeem, to ransom." It is applied to the redemption of a farm
sold, by paying back the price, [Lev
25:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#025.md); [Rut
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#004.md), [Rut
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#006.md); to anything consecrated to God
that is redeemed by paying its value, [Lev
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#013.md), and to a slave that is
ransomed, [Lev 25:48-49](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#048.md). The word גאל
go'el, is applied to one who redeems a field, [Lev
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#026.md); and is often applied to God,
who had redeemed his people from bondage, [Exo
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006.md); [Isa
43:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#001.md). See the notes at [Isa
43:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#001.md); and on the general meaning of
the word, see the notes at [Job 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#005.md).
Among the Hebrews, the גאל go'el occupied an important place, as a
blood-avenger, or a vindicator of violated rights.

See [Num 35:12](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#012.md), [Num
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#019.md), [Num
35:21](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#021.md), [Num
35:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#024.md), [Num
35:27](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#027.md); [Deu
19:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#006.md); [Rut
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#001.md), [Rut
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#006.md),[Rut
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#008.md); [Jos
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#003.md). The word גאל go'el, is rendered
kinsman, [Rut 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#001.md), [Rut
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#003.md),[Rut
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#006.md), [Rut
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#008.md); near kinsman, [Rut
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#009.md), [Rut
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#012.md); avenger, [Num
35:12](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#012.md); [Jos
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#003.md); Redeemer, [Job
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025.md); [Psa
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#014.md); [Isa
47:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#004.md); [Isa
63:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#016.md); [Isa
44:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#024.md); [Isa
48:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#017.md); [Isa
54:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#008.md); [Isa
41:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#014.md); [Isa
49:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#026.md); [Isa
60:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#016.md); kin, [Lev
25:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#025.md), et al. Moses found the office
of the גאל go'el, or avenger, already instituted, (see Michaelis's
Commentary on laws of Moses, section cxxxvi.) and he adopted it into his
code of laws. It would seem, therefore, not improbable that it prevailed
in the adjacent countries in the time of Job, or that there may have
been a reference to this office in the place before us. The גאל go'el is
first introduced in the laws of Moses, as having a right to redeem a
mortgaged field, [Lev 25:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#025.md); and
then as buying a right, as kinsman, to the restoration of anything which
had been iniquitously acquired, [Num
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#008.md).

Then he is often referred to in the writings of Moses as the
blood-avenger, or the kinsman of one who was slain, who would have a
right to pursue the murderer, and to take vengeance on him, and whose
duty it would be to do it. This right of a near relative to pursues
murderer, and to take vengeance, seems to have been one that was early
conceded every where. It was so understood among the American Indians,
and probably prevails in all countries before there are settled laws for
the trial and punishment of the guilty. It was a right, however, which
was liable to great abuse. Passion would take the place of reason, the
innocent would be suspected, and the man who had slain another in
self-defense was as likely to be pursued and slain as he who had been
guilty of willful murder. To guard against this, in the unsettled state
of jurisprudence, Moses appointed cities of refuge, where the man-slayer
might flee until he could bare a fair opportunity of trial.

It was impossible to put an end at once to the office of the גאל go'el.
The kinsman, the near relative, would feel himself called on to pursue
the murderer; but the man-slayer might flee into a sacred city, and
remain until he had a fair trial; see Num. 35; [Deu
19:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#006.md). It was a humane arrangement to
appoint cities of refuge, where the man who had slain another might be
secure until he had an opportunity of trial - an arrangement which
eminently showed the wisdom of Moses. On the rights and duties of the
גאל go'el, the reader may consult Michaelis's Com. on the laws of Moses,
art. 136, 137. His essential office was that of a vindicator - one who
took up the cause of a friend, whether that friend was murdered, or was
oppressed, or was wronged in any way. Usually, perhaps always, this
pertained to the nearest male kin, and was instituted for the aid of the
defenceless and the wronged.

In times long subsequent, a somewhat similar feeling gave rise to the
institution of chivalry, and the voluntary defenee of the innocent and
oppressed. It cannot now be determined whether Job in this passage has
reference to the office of the גאל go'el, as it was afterward
understood, or whether it existed in his time. It seems probable that
the office would exist at the earliest periods of the world, and that in
the rudest stages of society the nearest of kin would feel himself
called on to vindicate the wrong done to one of the feebler members of
his family. The word properly denotes, therefore, either vindicator, or
redeemer; and so far as the term is concerned, it may refer either to
God, as an avenger of the innocent, or to the future Redeemer - the
Messiah. The meaning of this word would be met, should it be understood
as referring to God, coming forth in a public manner to vindicate the
cause of Job against all the charges and accusations of his professed
friends; or to God, who would appear as his vindicator at the
resurrection; or to the future Messiah - the Redeemer of the body and
the soul. No argument in favor of either of these interpretations can be
derived from the use of the word.

Liveth - Is alive - חי chay Septuagint, immortal - ἀένναός aennaos. He
seems now to have forsaken me as if he were dead, but my faith is
unwavering in him as a living vindicator. A similar expression occurs in
[Job 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#019.md). "My witness is in heaven,
and my record is on high." It is a declaration of entire confidence in
God, and will beautifully convey the emotions of the sincere believer in
all ages. He may be afflicted with disease, or the loss of property, or
be forsaken by his friends, or persecuted by his foes, but if he can
look up to heaven and say, "I know that my Redeemer live's," he will
have peace.

And that he shall stand - He will stand up, as one does who undertakes
the cause of another. Jerome has rendered this as though it referred to
Job," And in the last day I shall rise from the earth" - de terra
surrecturus sum - as if it referred to the resurrection of the body. But
this is not in accordance with the Hebrew, דקוּם deqûm - "he shall
stand." There is clearly no necessary reference in this word to the
resurrection. The simple meaning is, "he shall appear, or manifest
himself, as the vindicator of my cause."

At the latter day - The word "day" here is supplied by the translators.
The Hebrew is, יאחרין ye'achăryôn - and after, afterward, hereafter, at
length. The word literally means, hinder, hinder part - opposite to
foremost, former. It is applied to the Mediterranean sea, as being
behind when the eye of the geographer was supposed to be turned to the
East; (see the notes at [Job 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#020);.md)
then it means after, later, applied to a generation or age. [Psa
48:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#014.md), to a day - to future times -
(אחרין יום yôm 'achăryôn), [Pro 31:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#025.md);
[Isa 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#008.md). All that this word
necessarily expresses here is, that at some future period this would
occur. It does not determine when it would be. The language would apply
to any future time, and might refer to file coming of the Redeemer, to
the resurrection, or to some subsequent period in the life of Job. The
meaning is, that however long he was to suffer, however protracted his
calamities were, and were likely to be, be had the utmost confidence
that God would at length, or at some future time, come forth to
vindicate him. The phrase, "the latter day," has now acquired a kind of
technical meaning, by which we naturally refer it to the day of
judgment. But there is no evidence that it has any such reference here.
On the general meaning of phrases of this kind, however, the reader may
consult my notes at [Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002.md).

Upon the earth - Hebrew על־עפר ‛al ‛âphâr - upon the dust. Why the word
dust is used, instead of ארץ 'erets earth, is unknown. It may be because
the word dust is emphatic, as being contrasted with heaven, the
residence of the Deity. Noyes. What kited of an appearance God would
assume when he should thus come forth, or how he would manifest himself
as the vindicator and Redeemer of Job, he does not intimate, and
conjecture would be useless. The words do not necessarily imply any
visible manifestation - though such a manifestation would not be
forbidden by the fair construction of the passage. I say, they do not
necessarily imply it; see [Psa 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005.md),
"For the sighing of the needy, now will I arise, (Hebrew: stand up -
אקוּם 'āqûm, saith the Lord." [Psa
44:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#026.md), "arise (Hebrew קוּמה qûmāh -
stand up) for our help." Whether this refers to any visible
manifestation in behalf of Job is to be determined in other words than
by the mere meaning of this word.

[Job 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 19:26</span></span>

And though - Margin, Or, after I shall awake, though this body be
destroyed, yet out of my flesh shall I see God. This verse has given not
less perplexity than the preceding. Noyes renders it,

And though with this skin this body be wasted away,

Yet in my flesh shall I see God.

Dr. Good renders it,

And, after the disease hath destroyed my skin,

That in my flesh I shall see God.

Rosenmuller explains it, "And when after my skin (scil. is consumed and
destroyed) they consume (scil. those corroding, or consuming, that is,
it is corroded, or broken into fragments) this, that is, this structure
of my bones - my body (which he does not mention, because it was so
wasted away that it did not deserve to be called a body) - yet without
my flesh - with my whole body consumed, shall I see God." He translates
it,

Et quum post cutem meam hoc fuerit consumptum,

Tamen absque carne mea videbo Deum.

The Hebrew is literally, "and after my skin." Gesenius translates it,
"After they shall have destroyed my skin, this shall happen - that I
will see God." Herder renders it,

Though they tear and devour this my skin,

Yet in my living body shall I see God.

The fair and obvious meaning, I think, is that which is conveyed by our
translation. Disease had attacked his skin. It was covered with ulcers,
and was fast consuming; compare [Job
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#008.md); [Job
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#005.md). This process of corruption and
decay he had reason to expect would go on until all would be consumed.
But if it did, he would hold fast his confidence in God. He would
believe that he would come forth as his vindicator, and he would still
put his trust in him.

Worms - This word is supplied by our translators. There is not a
semblance of it in the original. That is, simply, "they destroy;" where
the verb is used impersonally, meaning that it would be destroyed; The
agent by which this would be done is not specified. The word rendered
"destroy" נקפו nâqaphû from נקף nâqaph, means "to cut, to strike, to cut
down" (compare the notes at [Job 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#005.md),
for the general meaning of the word), and here means to destroy; that
is, that the work of destruction might go on until the frame should be
wholly wasted away. It is not quite certain that the word here would
convey the idea that he expected to die. It may mean that he would
become entirely emaciated, and all his flesh be gone. There is nothing,
however, in the word to show that he did not expect to die - and perhaps
that would be the most obvious and proper interpretation.

This body - The word body is also supplied by the translators. The
Hebrew is simply זאת zô'th - this. Perhaps he pointed to his body - for
there can be no doubt that his body or flesh is intended. Rosenmuller
supposes that he did not mention it, because it was so emaciated that it
did not deserve to be called a body.

Yet in my flesh - Hebrew "From my flesh" - מבשׂרי mı̂bâśârı̂y. Herder
renders this, "In my living body." Rosenmuller, absque carne mea -
"without my flesh;" and explains it as meaning, "my whole body being
consumed, I shall see God." The literal meaning is, "from, or out of, my
flesh shall I see God." It does not mean in his flesh, which would have
been expressed by the preposition ב (b) - but there is the notion that
from or out of his flesh he would see him; that is, clearly, as
Rosenmuller has expressed it, tho' my body be consumed, and I have no
flesh, I shall see him. Disease might carry its fearful ravages through
all his frame, until it utterly wasted away, yet; he had confidence that
he would see his vindicator and Redeemer on the earth. It cannot be
proved that this refers to the resurrection of that body, and indeed the
natural interpretation is against it. It is, rather, that though without
a body, or though his body should all waste away, he would see God as
his vindicator. He would not always be left overwhelmed in this manner
with calamities and reproaches. He would be permitted to see God coming
forth as his Goal or Avenger, and manifesting himself as his friend.
Calmly, therefore, he would bear these reproaches and trials, and see
his frame waste away, for it would not always be so - God would yet
undertake and vindicate his cause.

Shall I see God - He would be permitted to behold him as his friend and
avenger. What was the nature of the vision which he anticipated, it is
not possible to determine with certainty. If he expected that God would
appear in some remarkable manner to judge the world and to vindicate the
cause of the oppressed; or that he would come forth in a special manner
to vindicate his cause; or if he looked to a general resurrection, and
to the trial on that day, the language would apply to either of these
events.

[Job 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 19:27</span></span>

Whom I shall see for myself - It will not come to be by mere report. I
shall not merely hear of the decision of God in my favor, but I shall
myself behold him. He will at length come forth, and I shall be
permitted to see him, and shall have the delightful assurance that he
settles this controversy in my favor, and declares that I am his friend.
Job was thus permitted to see God [Job
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#005.md), and hear his voice in his favor.
He spake to him from the whirlwind [Job
38:1](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#001.md), and pronounced the sentence in
his favor which he had desired.

And not another - Margin, a stranger. So in the Hebrew. The meaning is,
that his own eyes would be permitted to see him. He would have the
satisfaction of seeing God himself, and of hearing the sentence in his
favor. That expectation he deemed worthy of a permanent record, and
wished it transmitted to future times, that in his darkest days and
severest trials - when God overwhelmed him, and man forsook him, he
still firmly maintained his confidence in God, and his belief that he
would come forth to vindicate his cause.

Though my reins - The margin renders this, "my reins within me are
consumed with earnest desire for that day." Noyes translates it, "For
this my soul panteth within me." Herder,

I shall see him as my deliverer,

Mine eyes shall behold him, as mine,

For whom my heart so long fainted.

So Wemyss, "My reins faint with desire of his arrival." Jerome renders
it (Vulgate), reposita est hoec spes mea in sinu meo - "this, my hope,
is laid up in my bosom." The Septuagint, "All which things have been
done - συντετέλεσται suntetelestai - in my bosom," but what they
understood by this it is difficult to say. The word rendered "reins"
כליה kı̂lyâh - or in the plural כליות kı̂lyôth - in which form only it is
found), means properly the reins, or the kidneys [Job
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#013.md). and then comes to denote the
inward parts, and then the seat of the desires and affections, because
in strong emotions the inward parts are affected. We speak of the heart
as the seat of the affections, but with no more propriety than the
Hebrews did of the upper viscera in general, or of the reins. In the
Scriptures the heart and the reins are united as the seat of the
affections. Thus, [Jer 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#020.md), God
"trieth the reins and the heart;" [Jer
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#010.md); [Jer
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#012.md); [Psa
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#010.md). I see no reason why the word
here may not be used to denote the viscera in general, and that the idea
may be, that he felt that his disease was invading the seat of life, and
his body, in all its parts, was wasting away. Our word vitals, perhaps,
expresses the idea.

Be consumed - Gesenius renders this, "Pine away." So Noyes, Wemyss, and
some others. But the proper meaning of the word is, to consume, to be
wasted, to be destroyed. The word כלה kâlâh strictly means to finish,
complete, render entire; and thence has the notion of completion or
finishing - whether by making a thing perfect, or by destroying it. It
is used with reference to the eyes that fail or waste away with weeping,
[Lam 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#011.md), or to the spirit or heart.
as fainting with grief and sorrow. [Psa
84:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#003.md); [Psa
143:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#007.md); [Psa
69:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#004.md). It is used often in the sense of
destroying. [Jer 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#004.md); [Ezr
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#013.md); [Psa
39:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#011.md); [Isa
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#010.md); [Isa
49:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#004.md); [Gen
41:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#030.md); [Jer
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#012.md); et soepe al. This, I think, is
the meaning here. Job affirms that his whole frame, external and
internal, was wasting away, yet he had confidence that he would see God.

Within me - Margin, in my bosom. So the Hebrew. The word bosom is used
here as we use the word chest - and is not improperly rendered "within
me." In view of this exposition of the words, I would translate the
whole passage as follows:

For I know that my Avenger liveth,

And that hereafter he shall stand upon the earth;

And though after my skin this (flesh) shall be destroyed,

Yet even without my flesh shall I see God:

Whom I shall see for myself,

And mine eyes shall behold, and not another,

Though my vitals are wasting away within me.

It has already been observed, that very various views have been
entertained of this important passage of Scripture. The great question
has been, whether it refers to the Messiah, and to the resurrection of
the dead, or to an expectation which Job had that God would come forth
as his vindicator in some such way as he is declared afterward to have
done. It may be proper, therefore. to give a summary of the arguments by
which these opinions would be defended. I have not found many arguments
stated for the former opinion, though the belief is held by many, but
they would be probably such as the following: -

I. Arguments which would be adduced to show that the passage refers to
the Messiah and to the future resurrection of the dead.

\(1\) The language which is used is such as would appropriately describe
such events. This is undoubted, though more so in our translation than
in the original; but the original would appropriately express such an
expectation.

\(2\) The impression which it would make on the mass of readers, and
particularly those of plain, sober sense, who had no theory to defend.
It is probably a fact, that the great body of the readers of the Bible
suppose that it has such a reference. It is usually a very strong
presumptive proof of the correctness of an interpretation of Scripture
when this can be alleged in its favor, though it is not an infallible
guide.

\(3\) The probability that some knowledge of the Messiah would prevail
in Arabia in the time of Job. This must be admitted, though it cannot be
certainly demonstrated; compare [Num
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017.md). The amount of this is, that it
could not be regarded as so improbable that any such knowledge would
prevail as to demonstrate certainly that this could not be referred to
the Messiah.

\(4\) The probability that there would be found in this book some
allusion to the Redeemer - the great hope of the ancient saints, and the
burden of the Old Testament But this is not conclusive or very weighty,
for there are several of the books of the Old Testament which contain no
distinct allusion to him.

\(5\) The pertinency of such a view to the case, and its adaptedness to
give to Job the kind of consolation which he needed. There can be no
doubt of the truth of this; but the question is, not what would have
imparted consolation, but what knowledge he actually had. There are many
of the doctrines of the Christian religion which would have been
eminently fitted to give comfort in such circumstances to a man in
affliction, which it would be exceedingly unreasonable to expect to find
in the book of Job, and which it is certain were wholly unknown to him
and his friends.

\(6\) The importance which he himself attached to his declaration, and
the solemnity of the manner in which he introduced it. His profession of
faith on the subject he wished to have engraved in the eternal rocks. he
wished it transmitted to future times. He wished a permanent record to
be made, that succeeding ages might read it, and see the ground of his
confidence and his hope. This, to my mind, is the strongest argument
which has occurred in favor of the opinion that the passage refers to
the Redeemer and to the resurrection. These are all the considerations
which have occurred to me, or which I have found stated, which would go
to sustain the position that the passage referred to the resurrection.
Some of them have weight; but the prevailing opinion, that the passage
has such a reference. will be found to be sustained, probably, more by
the feelings of piety than by solid argument and sound exegesis. It is
favored, doubtless, by our common version, and there can be no doubt
that the translators supposed that it had such a reference.

II\. On the other hand, weighty considerations are urged to show that
the passage does not refer to the Messiah, and to the resurrection of
the dead. They are such as the following:

\(1\) The language, fairly interpreted and translated, does not
necessarily imply this. It is admitted that our translators had this
belief, and without doing intentional or actual violence to the passage,
or designing to make a forced translation, they have allowed their
feelings to give a complexion to their language which the original does
not necessarily convey. Hence, the word "Redeemer," which is now used
technically to denote the Messiah, is employed, though the original
"may," and commonly "does," have a much more general signification; and
hence, the phrase "at the latter day," also a technical phrase, occurs,
though the original means no more than "afterward" or "after this;" and
hence, they have employed the phrase "in my flesh," though the original
means no more than "though my flesh be all wasted away." The following I
believe to express fairly the meaning of the Hebrew:" I know that my
deliverer, or avenger, lives, and that he will yet appear in some public
manner on the earth; and though after the destruction of my skin, the
process of corruption shall go on until "all" my flesh shall be
destroyed, yet when my flesh is entirely wasted away, I shall see God; I
shall have the happiness of seeing him for myself, and beholding him
with my own eyes, even though my very vitals shall be consumed. He will
come and vindicate me and my cause. I have such confidence in his
justice, that I do not doubt that he will yet show himself to be the
friend of him who puts his trust in him."

\(2\) It is inconsistent with the argument, and the whole scope and
connection of the book, to suppose that this refers to the Messiah and
to the resurrection of the body after death. The book of Job is strictly
an "argument" - a train of clear, consecutive reasoning. It discusses a
great inquiry about the doctrines of divine Providence and the divine
dealings with people. The three friends of Job maintained that God deals
with men strictly according to their character in this life - that
eminent wickedness is attended with eminent suffering; and that when
people experience any great calamity, it is proof of eminent wickedness.
All this they meant to apply to Job, and all this Job denied. Yet he was
perplexed and confounded. He did not know what to do with the "facts" in
the case; but still he felt embarrassed. All that he could say was, that
God would "yet" come forth and show himself to be the friend of those
who loved him and that though they suffered now, yet he had confidence
that be would appear for their relief.

Now, had they possessed the knowledge of the doctrine of the
"resurrection of the dead," it would have ended the whole debate. it
would not only have met all the difficulties of Job, but we should have
found him perpetually recurring to it - placing it in every variety of
form - appealing to it as relieving his embarrassments, and as demanding
an answer from his friends. But, on the supposition that this refers to
the resurrection, it is remarkable that the passage here stands alone.
Job never adverted to it before, but allowed himself to be greatly
embarrassed for the lack of just such an argument, and he never refers
to it again. He goes on to argue again "as if" he believed no such
doctrine. He does not ask his friends to notice this: he expresses no
surprise that they should pass by, in entire neglect, an argument which
"must have been seen" to be decisive of the controversy. It is equally
unaccountable that his friends should not have noticed it.

If the doctrine of the resurrection was true, it settled the case. It
rendered all their arguments worthless, and would have met the case just
as we meet similar cases now. It was incumbent on them to show that
there was no evidence of the truth of any such doctrine as the
resurrection, and that this could not be urged to meet their arguments.
Yet they never allude to so important and unanswerable an argument, and
evidently did not suppose that Job referred to any such event. It is
equally remarkable that neither Elihu nor God himself, in the close of
the book, make any such allusion, or refer to the doctrine of the
resurrection at all, as meeting the difficulties of the case. In the
argument with which the Almighty is represented as closing the book, the
whole thing is resolved into a matter of "sovereignty," and people are
required to submit because God is great, and is inscrutable in his ways
- not because the dead will be raised, and the inequalities of the
present life will be recompensed in a future state. The doctrine of a
"resurrection" - a great and glorious doctrine, such as, if once
suggested, could not have escaped the profound attention of these sages
- would have solved the whole difficulty; and yet, confessedly, it is
never alluded to by them - never introduced - never examined - never
admitted or rejected - never becomes a matter of inquiry, and is never
referred to by God himself as settling the matter - never occurs in the
book in any form, unless it be in this. This is wholly unaccountable on
the supposition that this refers to the resurrection.

\(3\) The interpretation which refers this to the resurrection of the
dead, is inconsistent with numerous passages where Job expresses a
contrary belief. Of this nature are the following: [Job
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#009.md)," As the cloud is consumed, and
vanisheth away, so he that goeth down to the grave shall come up no
more;" [Job 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#021.md), "I shall sleep in
the dust thou shalt seek me in the morning, but I shall not be;" see
[Job 10:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#021.md), "I go whence I shall
not return - to the land of darkness, and the shadow of death; a land of
darkness as darkness itself;" Job 14 throughout, particularly [Job
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#007.md), [Job
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#009.md),[Job
14:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#011.md)," For there is hope of a
tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender
branch thereof will not cease. But man dieth, and wasteth away; yea, man
giveth up the ghost, and where is he? As the waters fail from the sea,
and the flood decayeth and drieth up, so man lieth down and riseth not;
until the heavens be no more, they shall not awake, nor be raised out of
their sleep."

[Job 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#022.md), "when a few years are
come, then I shall go the way whence I shall not return." These passages
all imply that when he should die, he would not appear again on the
earth. This is not such language as one would use who believed in the
resurrection of the dead. It is true, that in the discourses of Job,
various and sometimes apparently contradictory feelings are expressed.
He was a severe sufferer; and under strong conflicting emotions he
sometimes expressed himself in a manner which he at other times regrets,
and gives vent to feelings which, on mature reflection, he confesses to
have been wrong. But how is it "possible" to believe that a man, in his
circumstances, would ever deny the doctrine of the resurrection if he
held it? How could he forget it? How could he throw out a remark that
"seemed" to imply a doubt of it? If he had known of this, it would have
been a sheet-anchor to his soul in all the storms of adversity - an
unanswerable argument to all that his friends advanced - atopic of
consolation which he could never have lost sight of, much less denied.
He would have clung to that hope as the refuge of his soul, and not for
one moment would he have denied it, or expressed a doubt of its truth.

\(4\) I may urge as a distinct argument what has before been hinted at,
that this is not referred to as a topic of consolation by either of the
friends of Job, by Elihu, or by God himself. Had it been a doctrine of
those times, his friends would have understood it, and it would have
reversed all their theology. Had it been understood by Elihu, he would
have urged it as a reason for resignation in affliction. Had God
designed that it should be known in that age, no more favorable
opportunity could be conceived for the purpose than at the end of the
arguments in this book. What a flood of light would it have thrown on
the design of afflictions! How effectually would it have rebuked the
arguments of the friends of Job! And how clear is it, therefore, that
God did not "intend" that it should then be revealed to man, but meant
that it should be reserved for a more advanced state of the world, and
particularly that it should be reserved as the grand doctrine of the
Christian revelation.

\(5\) A fifth consideration is, that on the supposition that it refers
to the resurrection, it would be inconsistent with the views which
prevailed in the age when Job is supposed to have lived. It is wholly in
advance of that age. It makes little difference in regard to this
whether we suppose him to have lived in the time of Abraham, Jacob, or
Moses, or even at a later period - such a supposition would be equally
at variance with the revelations which had then been given. The clear
doctrine of the resurrection of the dead, is one of the unique doctrines
of Christianity - one of the last truths of revelation, and is one of
the glorious truths which seem to have been reserved for the Redeemer
himself to make known to man. There are, indeed, obscure traces of it in
the Old Testament. Occasionally we meet with a hint on the subject that
was sufficient to excite the hopes of the ancient saints, and to lead
them to suppose that more glorious truths were in reserve to be
communicated by the Messiah. But those hints occur at distant intervals;
are obscure in their character, and perhaps if all in the Old Testament
were collected, they would not be sufficient to convey any very
intelligible view of the resurrection of the dead.

But on the supposition that the passage before us refers to that
doctrine, we have here one of the most clear and full revelations on the
subject, laid far back in the early ages of the world, originating in
Arabia, and entirely in advance of the prevailing views of the age, and
of all that had been communicated by the Spirit of inspiration to the
generations then living. It is admitted, indeed, that it was "possible"
for the Holy Spirit to communicate that truth in its fulness and
completeness to an Arabian sage; but it is not the way in which
revelation, in other respects, has been imparted. It has been done
"gradually." Obscure intimations are given at first - they are increased
from time to time - the light becomes clearer, until some prophet
discloses the whole truth, and the doctrine stands complete before us.
Such a course we should expect to find in regard to the doctrine of the
resurrection, and such is exactly the course pursued, unless "this"
passage teaches what was in fact the highest revelation made by the
Messiah.

\(6\) All which the words and phrases fairly convey, and all which the
argument demands, is fully met by the supposition that it refers to some
such event as is recorded in the close of the book. God appeared in a
manner corresponding to the meaning of the words here upon the earth. He
came as the Vindicator, the Redeemer, the גאל gō'el, of Job. He
vindicated his cause, rebuked his friends, expressed his approbation of
the sentiments of Job, and blessed him again with returning prosperity
and plenty. The disease of the patriarch may have advanced, as he
supposed it would. His flesh may have wasted away, but his confidence in
God was not misplaced, and he came forth as his vindicator and friend.
It was a noble expression of faith on the part of Job; it showed that he
"had" confidence in God, and that in the midst of his trials he truly
relied on him; and it was a sentiment worthy to be engraved in the
eternal rock, and to be transmitted to future times.

It was an invaluable lesson to sufferers, showing them that confidence
could, and should be placed in God in the severest trials. So far as I
can see, all that is fairly implied in the passage, when properly
interpreted, is fully met by the events recorded in the close of the
book. Such an interpretation meets the exigency of the case, accords
with the strain of the argument and with the result, and is the most
simple and natural that has been proposed. These considerations are so
weighty in my mind that they have conducted me to a conclusion, contrary
I confess to what I had "hoped" to have reached, that this passage has
no reference to the Messiah and the doctrine of the resurrection. We do
not "need" it - for all the truths respecting the Messiah and the
resurrection which we need, are fully revealed elsewhere; and though
this is an exquisitely beautiful passage, and piety would love to retain
the belief that it refers to the resurrection of the dead, yet "truth"
is to be preferred to indulgence of the wishes and desires of the heart,
however amiable or pious, and the "desire" to find certain doctrines in
the Bible should yield to what we are constrained to believe the Spirit
of inspiration actually taught.

I confess that I have never been so pained at any conclusion to which I
have come in the interpretation of the Bible, as in the case before us.
I would like to have found a distinct prophecy of the Messiah in this
ancient and venerable book. I would like to have found the faith of this
eminent saint sustained by such a faith in his future advent and
incarnation. I would like to have found evidence that this expectation
had become incorporated in the piety of the early nations, and was found
in Arabia. I would like to have found traces of the early belief of the
doctrine of the resurrection of the dead sustaining the souls of the
patriarchs then, as it does ours now, in trial. But I cannot. Yet I can
regard it as a most beautiful and triumphant expression of confidence in
God, and as wholly worthy to be engraved, as Job desired it might be, in
the solid rock forever, that the passing traveler might see and read it;
or as worthy of that more permanent record which it has received by
being "printed in a book" - by an art unknown then, and sent down to the
end of the world to be read and admired in all generations.

The opinion which has now been expressed, it is not necessary to say,
has been held by a large number of the most distinguished critics.
Grotius says that the Jews never applied it to the Messiah and the
resurrection. The same opinion is held by Grotius himself, by Warburton,
Rosenmuller, Le Clerc, Patrick, Kennicott, Dalthe, and Jahn. Calvin
seems to be doubtful - sometimes giving it an interpretation similar to
that suggested above, and then pursuing his remarks as if it referred to
the Messiah. Most of the fathers, and a large portion of modern critics,
it is to be admitted, suppose that it refers to the Messiah, and to the
future resurrection.

[Job 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 19:28</span></span>

But ye should say - Noyes renders this, "Since ye say, 'How may we
persecute him, and find grounds of accusation against him?'" Dr. Good,

Then shall ye say, "How did we persecute him?"

When the root of the matter is disclosed in me.

The Vulgate, "Why now do ye say, let us persecute him, and find ground
of accusation - "radicem verbi" against him?" The Septuagint, "If you
also say, What shall we say against him? and what ground of accusation -
ῥίζαν λόγου rizan logou - shall we find in him?" Rosenmuller renders it,
"When you say, let us persecute him, and see what ground of accusation
we can find in him, then fear the sword." Most critics concur in such an
interpretation as implies that they had sought a ground of accusation
against him, and that they would have occasion to fear the divine
displeasure on account of it. It seems to me, however, that our
translators have given substantially the fair sense of the Hebrew. A
slight variation would, perhaps, better express the idea: "For you will
yet say, Why did we persecute him? The root of the matter was found in
him - and since this will be the case, fear now that justice will
overtake you for it, for vengeance will not always slumber when a friend
of God is wronged."

Seeing the root of the matter - Margin, "and" what "root of matter is
found in me." The word rendered "matter" (דבר dâbâr), "word or thing."
means, properly, word or thing - and may refer to "any" thing. Here it
is used in one of the two opposite senses, "piety" or "guilt" - as being
"the thing" under consideration. The interpretation to be adopted must
depend on the view taken of the other words of the sentence. To me it
seems that it denotes piety, and that the idea is, that the root of true
piety was in him, or that he was not a hypocrite. The word root is so
common as to need no explanation. It is used sometimes to denote the
"bottom," or the lowest part of anything - as e. g., the foot (see [Job
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#027), "margin".md), the bottom of the
mountains [Job 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#009.md), or of the sea,
[Job 36:30](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#030.md), "margin." Here it means
the foundation, support, or source - as the root is of a tree; and the
sense, I suppose, is, that he was not a dead trunk, but he was like a
tree that had a root, and consequently support and life. Many critics,
however, among whom is Gesenius, suppose that it means that the root of
the controversy, that is, the ground of strife, was in "him," or that he
was the cause of the whole dispute.

[Job 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 19:29</span></span>

Be ye afraid of the sword - Of the sword of justice, of the wrath of
God. In taking such views, and using such language, you ought to dread
the vengeance of God, for he will punish the guilty.

For wrath bringeth the punishments of the sword - The word "bringeth" is
supplied by the translators, and as it seems to me improperly. The idea
is, that wrath or anger such as they had manifested, was proper for
punishment; that such malice as they had shown was a crime that God
would not suffer to escape unpunished. They had, therefore, everything
to dread. Literally, it is, "for wrath the iniquities of the sword;"
that is, wrath is a crime for the sword.

That ye may know that there is a judgment - That there is justice; that
God punishes injuries done to the character, and that he will come forth
to vindicate his friends. Probably Job anticipated that when God should
come forth to vindicate "him," he would inflict exemplary punishment on
"them;" and that this would be not only by words, but by some heavy
judgment, such as he had himself experienced. The vindication of the
just is commonly attended with the punishment of the unjust; the
salvation of the friends of God is connected with the destruction of his
foes. Job seems to have anticipated this in the case of himself and his
friends; it will certainly occur in the great day when the affairs of
this world shall be wound up in the decisions of the final judgment. See
Matt. 25.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 20](job020.md)

</div>
