<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job032)  [Next](job034.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#001.md)

[Job 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 33:1</span></span>

Wherefore, Job, I pray thee - In the next chapter he addresses the three
friends of Job. This is addressed particularly to him.

My speeches - Hebrew, "my words" - מלה millâh. This is the usual word in
the Aramaen languages to express a saying or discourse, though in Hebrew
it is only a poetic form. The meaning is, not that he would address
separate speeches, or distinct discourses, to Job, but that he called on
him to attend to what he had to say.

[Job 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 33:2</span></span>

My tongue hath spoken in my mouth - Margin, "palate." The meaning is,
that since he had ventured to speak, and had actually commenced, he
would utter only that which was worthy to be heard. This is properly the
commencement of his argument, for all that he had before said was merely
an introduction. The word palate - "in my palate" (בחכי bechêkiy) is
used here because of the importance of that organ in the act of
speaking. Perhaps also, there may be reference to the fact that the
Hebrews made much more use of the lower organs of enunciation - the
palate, and the throat, than we do, and much less use of the teeth and
lips. Hence, their language was strongly guttural.

[Job 33:3](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 33:3</span></span>

My words shall be of the uprightness of my heart - I will speak in
sincerity. I will utter nothing that shall be hollow and hypocritical.
What I speak shall be the real suggestion of my heart - what I feel and
know to be true. Perhaps Elihu was the more anxious to make this point
entirely clear, because the three friends of Job might be supposed to
have laid themselves open to the suspicion that they were influenced by
passion or prejudice; that they had maintained their opinions from mere
obstinacy and not from conviction; and that they had been sometimes
disposed to cavil. Elihu claims that all that he was about to say would
be entirely sincere.

Shall utter knowledge clearly - Shall state things just as they are, and
give the true solution of the difficulties which have been felt in
regard to the divine dealings. His object is to guard himself wholly
from the suspicion of partiality.

[Job 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 33:4</span></span>

The Spirit of God hath made me; - see the notes at [Job
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#008.md). There is an evident allusion in
this verse to the mode in which man was created, when God breathed into
him the breath of life and he became a living being; [Gen
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007.md). But it is not quite clear why
Elihu adverts here to the fact that God had made him, or what is the
bearing of this fact on what he proposed to say. The most probable
supposition is, that he means to state that he is, like Job, a man; that
both were formed in the same way - from the same breathing of the
Almighty, and from the same clay [Job
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#006.md); and that although he bad
undertaken to speak to Job in God's stead [Job
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#006.md), yet Job had no occasion to fear
that he would be overawed and confounded by the Divine Majesty. He had
dreaded that, if he should be permitted to bring his case before him
(Notes, [Job 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#007).md), but Elihu says
that now he would have no such thing to apprehend. Though it would be in
fact the same thing as carrying the matter before God - since he came in
his name, and meant to state the true principles of his government, yet
Job would be also really conducting the cause with a man like himself,
and might, unawed, enter with the utmost freedom into the statement of
his views.

[Job 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 33:5</span></span>

If thou canst answer me - The meaning of this verse is this: "The
controversy between you and me, if you choose to reply, shall be
conducted in the most equitable manner, and on the most equal terms. I
will not attempt, as your three friends have done, to overwhelm you with
reproaches; nor will I attempt to overawe you as God would do, so that
you could not reply. I am a man like yourself, and desire that if
anything can be said against what I have to advance, it should be
offered with the utmost fairness and freedom."

Stand up - That is, "maintain your position, unless you are convinced by
my arguments. I wish to carry nothing by mere authority or power."

[Job 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 33:6</span></span>

Behold, I am according to thy wish in Gods stead - Margin, as in Hebrew
"mouth." The mouth is that by which we express our desires, and the word
here is equivalent to wish. Some have, however, rendered this
differently. Umbreit translates it, ich bin, wie du, von Gott - I am, as
thou art, from God. So Noyes, "I, like thee, am a creature of God."
Wemyss, "I am thine equal in the sight of God." Coverdale, "Behold,
before God am I even as thou, for I am fashioned and made even of the
same mould." The Vulgate renders it, "Behold God made me as he made
thee; and of the same clay am I formed." So the Septuagint, "From clay
am I formed as well as thou, and we are formed from the same." This
interpretation seems to be demanded also by the parallelism, where he
says that he was made of the same clay with Job; that is, that he was a
man like him. Still, it seems to me, that the fair and obvious meaning
of the Hebrew is that which is expressed in our common version. The
Hebrew is, לאל כפיך הן־אני כפי hēn'ănı̂y kepiykā lā'ĕl - "lo, I am,
according to thy mouth (word, or wish) for God;" that is, I am in his
place; I speak in his name; I am so commissioned by him that you may
regard yourself as in fact speaking to him when you address his
ambassador. This will also accord with what is said in [Job
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#007.md), and with what Job had so
earnestly desired, that he might be allowed to bring his cause directly
before God; see the notes at [Job
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#003.md).

I also am formed out of the clay - Margin, "cut." The figure is taken
from the act of the potter, who cuts off a portion of clay which he
moulds into a vessel, and there is manifest allusion here to the
statement in Genesis, that God made man of the dust of the ground. The
meaning in this connection is, "Though I am in the place of God, and
speak in his name, yet I am also a man, made of the same frail material
as yourself. In me, therefore, there is nothing to overawe or confound
you as there would be if God spake himself."

[Job 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 33:7</span></span>

Behold my terror shall not make thee afraid - Job had earnestly desired
to carry his cause directly before God, but he had expressed the
apprehension that he would overawe him by his majesty, so that he would
not be able to manage his plea with the calmness and self-possession
which were desirable. He had, therefore, expressed it as his earnest
wish, that if he were so permitted, God would not take advantage of his
majesty and power to confound him; see the notes at [Job
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#021.md). Elihu now says, that the wish
of Job in this could be amply gratified. Though he spake in the name of
God, and it might be considered that the case was fairly carried before
him, yet he was also a man. He was the fellow, the equal with Job. He
was made of the same clay, and he could not overawe him as the Almighty
himself might do. There would be, therefore, in his case all the
advantage of carrying the cause directly up to God, and yet none of the
disadvantage which Job apprehended, and which must ensue when a mere man
undertook to manage his own cause with the Almighty.

Neither shall my hand be heavy upon, thee - Alluding, evidently, to what
Job had said, [Job 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#021.md), that the
hand of God was heavy upon him, so that he could not conduct his cause
in such a manner as to do justice to himself. He had asked, therefore
(see the notes at that place), as a special favor, if he was permitted
to carry his cause before God, that his hand would be so far lightened
that he could be able to state his arguments with the force which they
required. Elihu says now that that wish could be gratified. Though he
was in the place of God, yet he was a man, and his hand would not be
upon him to crush him down so that he could not do justice to himself.
The noun rendered "hand" (אכף 'ekeph) does not elsewhere occur. The verb
אכף 'âkaph occurs once in [Pro 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#026.md),
where it is rendered "craveth" - "He that laboreth, laboreth for
himself; for his mouth craveth it of him" - where the margin is boweth
unto.

The word in Arabic means to lead a beast of burden; to bend, to make to
bow under a lead; and then to impel, to urge on; and hence, it means,
"his mouth, that is, hunger, impels, or urges him on to labor." In like
manner the meaning of the word here (אכף 'ekeph) may be a lead or
burden, meaning "my lead, i. e., my weight, dignity, authority, shall
not be burdensome or oppressive to you." But the parallel place in [Job
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#021.md), is "hand," and that meaning
seems to be required here. Kimchi supposes it is the same as כף kaph -
hand, and the Septuagint has so rendered it, ἡ χείρ μου hē cheir mou. In
the view of the speech of Elihu thus far, we cannot but remark that
there is much that is unique, and especially that he lays decided claim
to inspiration. Though speaking for God, yet he was in human nature, and
Job might speak to him as a friend, unawed and unterrifled by any dread
of overwhelming majesty and power.

On what grounds Elihu based these high pretensions does not appear, and
his claim to them is the more remarkable from his youth. It does not
require the aid of a very lively imagination to fancy a resemblance
between him and the Lord Jesus - the great mediator between God and man
- and were that mode of interpretation which delights to find types and
figures every where a mode that could be vindicated, there is no
character in the Old Testament that would more obviously suggest that of
the Redeemer than the character of Elihu. His comparative youth, his
modesty, his humility, would suggest it. The fact that he comes in to
utter his sentiments where age and wisdom had failed to suggest the
truth, and when pretending sages were confounded and silenced, would
suggest it. The fact that he claims to be in the place of God, and that
a cause might be managed before him as if it were before God and yet
that he was a man like others, and that no advantage would be taken to
overawe by mere majesty and power, are all circumstances that would
constitute a strong and vivid resemblance. But I see no evidence that
this was the design of the introduction of the character of Elihu, and
interesting as the comparison might be, and desirable as it may seem
that the book of Job should be found to contain some reference to the
great work of mediation, yet the just and stern laws of interpretation
exclude such a reference in the absence of proof, and do not allow us to
luxuriate in the conceptions of fancy, however pious the reflections
might be, or to search for typical characters where the Spirit of
inspiration has not revealed them as such, however interesting or
edifying might be the contemplation.

[Job 33:8](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 33:8</span></span>

Surely thou hast spoken in mine hearing - Margin, as in Hebrew "ears."
This shows that Elihu had been present during the debate, and had
attentively listened to what had been said. He now takes up the main
point on which he supposed that Job had erred - the attempt to justify
himself. He professes to adduce the very words which he had used, and
disclaims all design of judging from mere hearsay.

[Job 33:9](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 33:9</span></span>

I am clean - I am pure and holy.

Without transgression - Job had not used these very expressions, nor had
he intended to maintain that he was absolutely free from sin; see [Job
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#020.md). He had maintained that he was
not chargeable with the transgressions of which his three friends
maintained that he was guilty, and in doing that he had used strong
language, and language which even seemed to imply that he was without
transgression; see [Job 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#030.md); [Job
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#007.md); [Job
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#023.md); [Job
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#017.md).

I am innocent - The word used here (חף chaph) is from the verb חפף
chophaph - to cover, to protect; and also, as a secondary meaning, from
the Arabic, to rub, to wipe off; to wash away; to lave. Hence, it
denotes that which is rubbed clean, washed, pure - and then innocent.
The word occurs only in this place. It is not the exact language which
Job had used, and there seems to be some injustice done him in saying
that he had employed such language. Elihu means, doubtless, that he had
used language which implied this, or which was equivalent to it.

[Job 33:10](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 33:10</span></span>

Behold, he findeth occasions against me - That is, God. This is not
exactly the language of Job, though much that he had said had seemed to
imply this. The idea is, that God sought opportunity to oppose him; that
he was desirous to find in him some ground or reason for punishing him;
that he wished to be hostile to him, and was narrowly on the watch to
find an opportunity which would justify his bringing calamity upon him.
The word rendered "occasions" - תנואה tenû'âh, is from נוא nû', in the
Hiphil, הניא hāniy' - to refuse, decline; to hinder, restrain, [Num
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#006.md), [Num
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#009.md),[Num
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#012.md); and hence, the noun means, a
holding back, a withdrawal, an alienation; and hence, the idea is, that
God sought to be alienated from Job. The Vulgate renders it, "He seeks
complaints (querales) against me." The Septuagint, μέμψιν mempsin -
accusation. Umbreit, Feindshaft, enmity. So Gesenius and Noyes. "He
counteth me for his enemy." This is language which Job had used; see
[Job 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#011.md).

[Job 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 33:11</span></span>

He putteth my feet in the stocks - This also is language which Job had
used; see [Job 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#027.md). "He marketh all
my paths;" in [Job 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#027.md), "Thou
lookest narrowly unto all my paths;" see the notes at that verse.

[Job 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 33:12</span></span>

Behold, in this thou art not just - In this view of God, and in these
reflections on his character and government. Such language in regard to
the Deity cannot be vindicated; such views cannot be right. It cannot be
that he wishes to be the foe of man; that he watches with a jealous eye
every movement with a view to find something that will justify him in
bringing heavy calamities upon his creatures, or that he sets himself as
a spy upon the way in which man goes, in order to find out something
that shall make it proper for him to treat him as an enemy. It cannot be
denied that Job had indulged in language making substantially such
representations of God, and that he had thus given occasion for the
reproof of Elihu. It can as little be denied that such thoughts
frequently pass through the minds of the afflicted, though they do not
express them in words, nor is it less doubtful that they should be at
once banished from the soul. They cannot be true. It cannot be that God
thus regards and treats his crea tures; that he wishes to find
"occasion" in them to make it proper for him to bring calamity upon
them, or that he desires to regard them as his foes.

I will answer thee - That is, I will show that this view is unjust."
This he does in the subsequent verses by stating what he supposes to be
the real design of afflictions, and by showing that God in these trials
had a good and benevolent object.

That - - כי kı̂y. Rather, "because," or "for." The object is not to show
that God was greater than man - for that could not be a matter of
information, but to show that because he was far above man he had great
and elevated objects in his dealings with him, and man should submit to
him without a complaint.

God is greater than man - The meaning of this is, that man should
suppose that God has good reasons for all that he does, and that he
might not be qualified to understand the reason of his doings. He should
therefore acquiesce in his arrangements, and not call in question the
equity of the divine dealings. In all our trials it is well to remember
that God is greater than we are. He knows what is best; and though we
may not be able to see the reason of his doings, yet it becomes us to
acquiesce in his superior wisdom.

[Job 33:13](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 33:13</span></span>

Why dost thou strive against him? - By refusing to submit to him, and by
calling in question his wisdom and goodness.

For he giveth not account of any of his matters - Margin, as in Hebrew
"answereth not." The idea is, that it is as useless as it is improper to
contend with God. He does his own pleasure, and deals with man as he
deems best and right. The reason of his doings he does not state, nor
has man any power to extort from him a statement of the causes why he
afflicts us. This is still true. The reason of his doings he does not
often make known to the afflicted, and it is impossible to know now the
causes why he has brought on us the calamity with which we are visited.
The general reasons why men are afflicted may be better known now than
they were in the time of Elihu, for successive revelations have thrown
much light on that subject. But when he comes and afflicts us as
individuals; when he takes away a beloved child; when he cuts down the
young, the vigorous, the useful, and the pious, it is often impossible
to understand why he has done it.

All that we can do then is to submit to his sovereign will, and to
believe that though we cannot see the reasons why he has done it, yet
that does not prove that there are no reasons, or that we may never be
permitted to understand them. We are required to submit to his will, not
to our own reason; to acquiesce because he does it, not because we see
it to be right. If we always understood the reasons why he afflicts us,
our resignation would be not to the will of God, but to our own
knowledge of what is right; and God, therefore, often passes before us
in clouds and thick darkness to see whether we have sufficient
confidence in him to believe that he does right, even when we cannot see
or understand the reason of his doings. So a child reposes the highest
confidence in a parent, when he believes that the parent will do right,
though he cannot understand why he does it, and the parent does not
choose to let him know. May not a father see reasons for what he does
which a child could not understand, or which it might be proper for him
to withhold from him?

[Job 33:14](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 33:14</span></span>

For God speaketh once - The object of what is here said is, to show the
reason why God brings affliction upon people, or to explain the
principles of his government which Elihu supposed had been sadly
misunder stood by Job and his friends. The reason why he brings
affliction, Elihu says, is because all other means of reclaiming and
restraining people fail. He communicates his will to them; he speaks to
them again and again in dreams and visions; he warns them of the error
of their course [Job 33:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#014.md), and
when this is all ineffectual he brings upon them affliction. He lays
them upon their bed where they must reflect, and where there is hope
that they may be reclaimed and reformed, [Job
33:18-28](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#018.md).

Yea, twice - He does not merely admonish him once. He repeats the
admonition when man refuses to hear him the first time, and takes all
the methods which he can by admonition and warning to withdraw him from
his wicked purpose, and to keep him from ruin.

Yet man perceiveth it not - Or, rather, "Although he does not perceive
it or attend to it." Though the sinner is regardless of the admonition,
yet still God repeats it, and endeavors to save him from the commission
of the crimes which would lead him to ruin. This is designed to show the
patience and forbearance of God, and how many means he takes to save the
sinner from ruin. Of the truth of what Elihu here says, there can be no
difference of opinion. It is one of the great principles of the divine
administration that the sinner is often warned, though he heeds it not;
and that God sends repeated admonitions even when people will not regard
them, but are bent on their own ruin.

[Job 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 33:15</span></span>

In a dream - This was one of the methods by which the will of God was
made known in the early periods of the world; see the notes at [Job
4:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#012.md). And for a fuller account of
this method of communicating the divine will, see the introduction to
Isaiah, Section 7 (2).

In a vision of the night - Notes, [Job
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#013.md); compare the introduction to
Isaiah, Section 7 (4).

When deep sleep falleth upon men - This may be designed to intimate more
distinctly that it was from God. It was not the effect of disturbed and
broken rest; not such fancies as come into the mind between sleeping and
waking, but the visitations of the divine Spirit in the profoundest
repose of the night. The word rendered "deep sleep" (תרדמה tardêmâh) is
one that denotes the most profound repose. It is not merely sleep, but
it is sleep of the soundest kind - that kind when we do not usually
dream; see the notes at [Job 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#013.md). The
Chaldee has here rendered it correctly, עמקתא שינתא - sleep that is
deep. The Septuagint renders it, δεινὸς φόβος deinos phobos - dread
horror. The Syriac renders this verse, "Not by the lips does he teach;
by dreams and visions of the night," etc.

In slumberings upon the bed - The word rendered "slumberings" (בתנומה
bitenûmâh) means a light sleep, as contradistinguished from very
profound repose. Our word slumber conveys the exact idea. The meaning of
the whole is, that God speaks to people when their senses are locked in
repose - alike in the profound sleep when they do not ordinarily dream,
and in the gentle and light slumbers when the sleep is easily broken. In
what way, however, they were to distinguish such communications from
ordinary dreams, we have no information. It is scarcely necessary to
remark that what is here and elsewhere said in the Scriptures about
dreams, is no warrant for putting any confidence in them now as if they
were revelations from heaven.

[Job 33:16](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 33:16</span></span>

Then he openeth the ears of men - Margin, as in Hebrew "revealeth," or
"uncovereth." The idea is, that he then reveals to the ear of man
important admonitions or counsels. He communicates valuable truth. We
are not to understand this as saying that the sleeper actually hears God
speak, but as the ear is the organ of hearing, it is employed here to
denote that God then communicates His will to human beinigs. In what way
he had access to the souls of people by dreams, it is impossible to
explain.

And sealeth their instruction - literally, "In their admonition he
seals;" or he affixes a seal. The idea is, that he makes the admonition
or instruction as secure as if a seal were affixed to it. A seal
ratified or confirmed a contract, a will, or a deed, and the sense here
is, that the communications of God to the soul were as firm as if they
had been ratified in like manner. Or possibly it may mean, that the
warnings of God were communicated to the soul like a sealed letter or
message unknown to any other; that is, were made privately to the
individual himself in the slumbers of the night. Others have understood
the word rendered instruction, as denoting castigation, or punishment,
and according to that explanation the meaning would be, that he
announces to them certain punishment if they continued in sin; he made
it as certain to them as if it were ratified by a seal. So Rosenmuller
and Mercer. Schultens supposes it to be equivalent to inspires them, or
communicates instruction by inspiration as if it were confirmed and
ratified by a seal. He observes that the Arabic word hhatham is often
used in the Koran, meaning to inspire. The Septuagint renders it, ἀυτοὺς
ἐξεφόβησεν autous exephobēsen - "he terrifies them" - where they
evidently read יחתם yechathēm instead of יחתם yachthom. The sense is,
that God communicates warnings to people on their beds, in a manner as
solemn and impressive as if it were ratified with a seal, and made as
secure as possible.

[Job 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 33:17</span></span>

That he may withdraw man from his purpose - Margin, "work." The sense is
plain. God designs to warn him of the consequences of executing a plan
of iniquity. He alarms him by showing him that his course will lead to
punishment, and by representing to him in the night visions, the
dreadful woes of the future world into which he is about to plunge. The
object is to deter him from committing the deed of guilt which he had
contemplated, and to turn him to the paths of righteousness. Is it
unreasonable to suppose that the same thing may occur now, and that God
may have a purpose in the dreams which often visit the man who has
formed a plan of iniquity, or who is living a life of sin? It cannot be
doubted that such people often have alarming dreams; that these dreams
are such as are fitted to deter them from the commission of their
contemplated wickedness; and that in fact they not unfrequently do it.

What shall hinder us from supposing that God intends that the workings
of the mind when the senses are locked in repose, shall be the means of
alarming the guilty, and of leading them to reflection? Why should not
mind thus be its own admonisher, and be made the instrument of
restraining the guilty then, as really as by its sober reasonings and
reflections when awake? Many a wicked man has been checked in a career
of wickedness by a frightful dream; and not a few have been brought to a
degree of reflection which has resulted in sound conversion by the alarm
caused on the mind by having the consequences of a career of wickedness
traced out in the visions of the night. The case of Colonel Gardiner
cannot be forgotten - though in that instance it was rather "a vision of
the night" than a dream. He was meditating an act of wickedness. and was
alone in his room awaiting the appointed hour. In the silence of the
night, and in the solitude of his room, he seemed to see the Savior on
the cross. This view, however, it may be accounted for, restrained him
from the contemplated act of wickedness, and he became an eminently
pious man; see Doddridge's Life of Col. Gardiner. The mind, with all its
faculties, is under the control of God, and no one can demonstrate that
he does not make its actings, even in the wanderings of a dream, the
designed means of checking the sinner, and of saving the soul.

And hide pride from man - Probably the particular thing which Elihu here
referred to, was pride and arrogance toward God; or an insolent bearing
toward him, and a reliance on one's own merits. This was the particular
thing in Job which Elihu seems to have thought required animadversion,
and probably he meant to intimate that all people had such
communications from God by dreams as to save them from such arrogance.

[Job 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 33:18</span></span>

He keepeth back his soul from the pit - The word soul in the Hebrew is
often equivalent to self, and the idea is, that he keeps the man from
the pit in this manner. The object of these warnings is to keep him from
rushing on to his own destruction. The word rendered "pit" - שׁחת
shachath, properly means a pit, or pitfall, in which traps are laid for
wild animals; [Psa 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015.md); [Psa
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015.md); then a cistern that is miry;
[Job 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#031.md); a prison, [Isa
51:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#014.md); then the grave, or sepulchre,
as being often a cavern; [Job 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#013.md);
[Psa 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#009.md); see [Job
33:28](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#028.md), [Job
33:30](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#030.md). It evidently means here the
grave, and the sense is, that God thus warns people against pursuing a
course of conduct which would lead them to destruction, or would
speedily terminate their lives.

And his life from perishing by the sword - Margin, "passing by." The
meaning of the Hebrew may be, "to keep his life from passing away by the
sword;" as if the sword were the means by which the life or soul passed
from the body. The word rendered sword here - שׁלח shelach is from שׁלח
shâlach - to send, cast, hurl, and the reference is rather to something
sent, as of an arrow, dart, javelin, than to a sword. The sense is not
materially varied, and the idea referred to is that of a violent death.
The meaning is, that God by these warnings would keep a man from such a
course of life as would lead to a death by violence - either by
punishment for his crime, or by being cut off in war.

[Job 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 33:19</span></span>

He is chastened also with pain - As another means of checking and
restraining him from the commission of sin. When the warnings of the
night fail, and when he is bent on a life of sin, then God lays him on a
bed of pain, and he is brought to reflection there. There he has an
opportunity to think of his life, and of all the consequences which must
follow from a career of iniquity. This involves the main inquiry before
the disputants. It was, why people were afflicted. The three friends of
Job had said that it was a full proof of wickedness, and that when the
professedly pious were afflicted it was demonstrative of insincerity and
hypocrisy. Job had called this position in question, and proved that it
could not be so, but still was at a loss why it was. Elihu now says,
that affliction is a part of a disciplinary government; that it is one
of the means which God adopts, when warnings are ineffectual, to
restrain people and to bring them to reflection and repentance. This
appears to have been a view which was almost entirely new to them.

And the multitude of his bones with strong pain - The bones, as has
before been remarked, it was supposed might be the seat of the acutest
pain; see the notes at [Job 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#017.md);
compare [Job 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#011.md); [Job
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#015.md); [Job
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#030.md). The meaning here is, that the
frame was racked with intense suffering in order to admonish men of sin,
to save them from plunging into deeper transgression, and to bring them
to repentance.

[Job 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 33:20</span></span>

So that his life abhorreth bread - It is a common effect of sickness to
take away the appetite. Elihu here regards it as a part of the wholesome
discipline of the sufferer. He has no relish for the comforts of life.

And his soul dainty meat - Margin, "meat of desire." The Hebrew is,
"food of desire." The word rendered "meat" (מאכל ma'ăkâl) does not
denote animal food only, but any kind of food. So the Old English word
meat was used. The idea is, that the sick man loathes the most delicate
food. It is a part of his discipline that the pleasure which he had in
the days of his health is now taken away.

[Job 33:21](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 33:21</span></span>

His flesh is consumed away, that it cannot be seen - He wastes away. His
flesh, once vigorous, beautiful, and fair, now disappears. This is not a
mere description of the nature of his sickness, but it is a description
of the disciplinary arrangements of God. It is an important part of his
affliction, as a part of the discipline, that his flesh vanishes, and
that his appearance is so changed that he becomes repulsive to the view.

And his bones that were not seen, stick out - His bones were before
invisible. They were carefully concealed by the rounded muscle, and by
the fat which filled up the interstices, so that they were not offensive
to the view. But now the protuberances of his bones can be seen, for God
has reduced him to the condition of a skeleton. This is one of the
common effects of disease, and this shows the strength of the discipline
which God contemplates. The parts of the human frame which in health are
carefully hid from the view, as being unsightly, become now prominent,
and can be hidden no longer. One design is to humble us; to take away
the pride which delighted in the round and polished limb, the rose on
the cheek, the ruby lip, and the smooth forehead; and to show us what we
shall soon be in the grave.

[Job 33:22](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 33:22</span></span>

Yea, his soul draweth near unto the grave - That is, he himself does,
for the word soul is often used to denote self.

And his life to the destroyers - - לממתים lammitiym. literally, "to
those causing death." The interpretation commonly given of this is, "the
angels of death" who were supposed to come to close human life; compare
[Sa2 24:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#016.md). But it probably refers
to diseases and pangs as having power to terminate life, and being the
cause of the close of life. The meaning is, that the afflicted man comes
very near to those acute sufferings which terminate life, and which by
personification are here represented as the authors of death.

[Job 33:23](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 33:23</span></span>

If there be a messenger with him - This part of the speech of Elihu has
given rise to scarcely less diversity of opinion, and to scarcely less
discussion, than the celebrated passage in [Job
19:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025.md). Almost every interpreter has
had a special view of its meaning, and of course it is very difficult,
if not impossible, to determine its true sense. Before the opinions
which have been entertained are specified, and an attempt made to
determine the true sense of the passage, it may be of interest to see
how it is presented in the ancient versions, and what light they throw
on it. The Vulgate renders it, "If there is for him an angel speaking,
one of thousands, that he may announce the righteousness of the man; he
will pity him, and say, Deliver him that he descends not into
corruption: I have found him in whom I will be propitious to him" -
inveni in quo ei propitier. The Septuagint translators render it, "If
there be a thousand angels of death (ἄγγελοι θανατηφόροι angeloi
thanatēforoi), not one of them can mortally wound him (τρώσῃ ἀυτόν trōsē
auton). If he determine in his heart to turn to the Lord, when he shall
have shown man his charge against him, and shown his folly, he will
support him that he may not fall to death, and renew his body, like
plastering on a wall (ὥσπερ ἀλοιφην ἐπὶ τοίχου hōsper aloifēn epi
toichou), and will fill his bones with marrow, and make his flesh soft
like an infant." The Chaldee renders it, "If there is merit זכותא
z-k-w-t-' in him, an angel is prepared, a comforter (פרקליטא, Paraclete,
Gr. παρύκλητος paraklētos), one among a thousand accusers (קטיגוריא, Gr.
κατήγορός katēgoros), that he may announce to man his rectitude. And he
spares him, and says, Redeem him, that he may not descend to corruption;
I have found a ransom." Schultens has divided the opinions which have
been entertained of the passage into three classes. They are,

I. The opinions of those who suppose that by the messenger, or angel,
here, there is reference to a man. Of those who hold this opinion, he
enumerates no less than seven classes. They are such as these:

\(1\) those who hold that the man referred to is some distinguished
instructor sent to the sick to teach them the will of God, an opinion
held by Munster and Isidorus;

\(2\) those who refer it to a prophet, as Junius et Tremillius:

\(3\) Codurcus supposes that there is reference to the case of
Abimelech, who was made sick on account of Sarah, and that the man
referred to was a prophet, who announced to him that God was righteous;
Gen. 20.

The 4th and 5th cases slightly vary from these specified.

\(6\) Those who hold that Elihu referred to himself as being the angel,
or messenger, that God had sent to make known to Job the truth in regard
to the divine government, and the reason why he afflicts people. Of this
opinion was Gusset, and we may add that this is the opinion of Umbreit.

\(7\) Those who suppose that some faithful servant of God is intended,
without specifying who, who comes to the sick and afflicted, and
announces to them the reason of the divine dispensations.

II\. The second class of opinions is, that an angel is referred to here,
and that the meaning is, that God employs angelic beings to communicate
His will to people, and especially to the afflicted - to make known to
them the reason why they are afflicted, and the assurance that he is
willing to show mercy to them if they will repent. Of those who hold
this, Schultens mentions

\(1\) the Septuagint which renders it, "the angels of death;"

\(2\) the Chaldee paraphrasist, who understands it of the comforting
angel" - the Paraclete;

\(3\) the opinion of Mercer, who supposes it to refer to a good angel,
who, though there be a thousand of a contrary description, if he
announces the will of God, and shows the true reason why He afflicts
people, may be the means of reclaiming them;

\(4\) the opinion of Clerc, who regards it as a mere hypothesis of
Elihu, saying that on the supposition that an angel would thus visit
people, they might be reclaimed;

\(5\) the opinion of Grotius, who supposes it refers to angels regarded
as mediators, who perform their office of mediation in two ways - by
admonishing people, and by praying for them. This was also the opinion
of Maimonides.

\(6\) The opinion of Jerome, who supposes that it refers to the angel
standing in the presence of God, and who is employed by him in
admonishing and correcting mankind.

III\. The third class of opinions consists of those who refer it to the
Messiah. Of those who have held this opinion, the following may be
mentioned: Cocceius - of course; Calovins, Sehmidius, and Augustine.
Amidst this diversity of sentiment, it is difficult, if not impossible,
to determine the real meaning of the passage. The general sentiment is
indeed plain. It is, that God visits people with affliction in order to
restrain them from sin, and to correct them when they have erred. It is
not from hostility to them; not from mere justice; not because he
delights in their sufferings; and not because he wishes to cut them off.
They may suffer much and long, as Job had done. without knowing the true
reason why it was done. They may form erroneous views of the design of
the divine administration, and suppose that God is severe and harsh. But
if there shall come a messenger, in such circumstances, who shall
explain the reason of the divine dealings, and show to the sufferer on
what principles God inflicts pain; and if the sufferer shall hear the
message, and acquiesce in the divine dealings, then God would be willing
to be merciful. He would say that he was satisfied; the object of the
affliction was accomplished, and he would restore the afflicted to
health, and bestow upon him the most satisfactory evidences of his own
favor. An examination of the particular words and phrases occurring in
the passage, may elucidate more clearly this general idea, and lead us
to its true interpretation. The word translated "messenger" מלאך mal'âk,
is that which is usually employed to denote an angel. It means,
properly, one who is sent, from לאך, to send; and is applied

\(1\) to one sent, or a messenger, see [Job
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#014.md); compare [Sa1
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#019.md);

\(2\) to a messenger sent from God, as e. g.,

\(a\) to angels, since angels were employed on messages of mercy or
judgment to mankind, [Exo 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020.md); [Sa2
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#016.md),

\(b\) to a prophet as sent from God, [Hag
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#013.md); [Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001.md);

\(c\) to a priest; [Ecc 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#006.md); [Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007.md). It is rendered here by Jerome,
angel, and by the Septuagint, angels bringing death.

So far as the word is concerned, it may apply to any messenger sent from
God - whether an angel, a prophet, or the Messiah; anyone who should be
commissioned to explain to man the reason why afflictions were sent, and
to communicate the assurance that God was ready to pardon.

An interpreter - That is, an angel-interpreter, or a messenger who
should be an interpreter. The word מליץ mēliyts, is from לוץ lûts, "to
stammer"; to speak in a barbarous tongue; and then in the Hiphil, to
cause to understand a foreign language, or to explain; to interpret.
Hence, it means one who explains or interprets that which was obscure;
and may mean here one who explains to the sufferer the true principles
of the divine administration, or who interprets the design of the divine
dealings. In [Ch2 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#031.md), it is
rendered "ambassadors" - referring to the ambassadors that came from
Babylon to Hezekiah - rendered in the margin, interpreters; in [Isa
43:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#027.md), it is rendered teachers, in the
margin interpreters, referring to the religions teachers of the Jews, or
those who were appointed to explain the law of God. Gesenius supposes
that it means here the same as intercessor, or internuncius, and that
the phrase denotes an interceding angel, or one interceding with God for
people. But there is no instance in which the word מליץ mēliyts is so
employed, and such an interpretation is not demanded by the connection
here. The idea involved in the word here is immediately explained by
Elihu himself. The word denotes one who would "show unto man his
uprightness;" that is, who would be able to vindicate the righteousness
of God, and explain his dealings. This word, also, may therefore be
applicable to a prophet, a sage, an angel, or the Messiah - to anyone
who would be able to explain and interpret the divine dealings. So far
as the language is concerned, there is no reason why it should not be
applied to Elihu himself.

One among a thousand - Such an one as you would scarcely hope to find
among a thousand; that is, one who was endowed with a knowledge of the
ways of God, and who was qualified for this work in a much more eminent
manner than the mass of people. We have now a similar phrase to denote a
man eminent for wisdom, learning, skill, or moral worth. This language
is such as would most properly be applicable to a human messenger. One
would hardly think of making such distinctions among angelic beings, or
of implying that any one of them might not be qualified to bear a
message to man, or that it was necessary to make such a selection as is
implied by the phrase here to explain the dealings of God.

To show unto man his uprightness - This is the office which the
interpreting-messenger was to perform. The "uprightness" referred to
here, I suppose, is that of God, and means the rectitude of his doings;
or, in a more general sense, the justness of his character, the equity
of his administration. So explained, it would mean that the messenger
would come to show that God is worthy of confidence; that he is not
harsh, stern, severe, and cruel. The afflicted person is supposed to
have no clear views on this point, but to regard God as severe and
unmerciful. Elihu in this undoubtedly had Job in his eye, as
entertaining views of God which were far from correct. What was
necessary, he said, was, that someone would come who could show to the
sufferer that God is worthy of confidence, and that his character is
wholly upright. Prof. Lee interprets this as referring wholly to the
Messiah, and as denoting the "righteousness which this Mediator is
empowered to give or impute to those who duly seek it; and thus, as a
Mediator, between God and man, to make it out as their due, by means of
the ransom so found, offered, and accepted."

Noyes explains it as meaning "his duty;" that is, "what reason and
religion require of a man in his situation; repentance, submission, and
prayer to God for pardon." But it seems to me more natural to refer it
to the great principles of the divine government, as being worthy of
confidence. Those principles it was desirable should be so explained as
to inspire such confidence, and particularly this was what Elihu
supposed was needed by Job. On the whole, then, it seems probable that
Elihu, in this passage, by the messenger which he mentions, referred to
someone who should perform the office which he himself purposed to
perform - some man well acquainted with the principles of the divine
administration; who could explain the reasons why people suffer; who
could present such considerations as should lead the sufferer to true
repentance; and who could assure him of the divine mercy. The reasons
for this interpretation may be summed up in few words. They are:

\(1\) That this is all that is fairly and necessarily implied in the
language, or such an interpretation meets the obvious import of all the
expressions, and leaves nothing unexplained.

\(2\) It accords with what Elihu supposed to be the views of Job. He
regarded him as having improper apprehensions of the government of God,
and of the reasons why afflictions were sent upon him. He had patiently
listened to all that he had to say; had heard him give utterance to much
that seemed to be in the spirit of complaint and murmuring; and it was
manifest to Elihu that he had not had right apprehensions of the design
of trials, and that they had not produced the proper effect on his mind.
He still needed someone - an interpreter sent from God - to explain all
this, and to present such views as should lead him to put confidence in
God as a God of mercy and equity.

\(3\) It accords with the character which Elihu had assumed, and which
he all along maintained. He professed to come from God, [Job
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#008.md). He was in the place of God, [Job
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#006.md). He came to explain the whole
matter which had excited so long and so warm a debate - a debate to
which he had attentively listened, and where neither Job nor his friends
had stated the true principles of the divine administration. To
represent himself now us having a clew to the reason why God afflicts
people in this manner, and as being qualified to explain, the perplexing
subject, was in accordance with the character which he maintained.

\(4\) It accords with the effect which he wished to produce on the mind
of Job. He wished to bring him to confide in God; to show him that all
these mysterious dealings were designed to bring him back to his
Creator, and to restore peace and confidence to his agitated and
troubled bosom.

While Elihu, therefore, advances a general proposition, I doubt not that
he meant to represent himself as such a messenger sent from God; and
though in the whole of his speech he manifested almost the extreme of
modesty, yet he regarded himself as qualified to unravel the mystery.
That it refers to the Messiah cannot be demonstrated, and is improbable
because

\(1\) It is nowhere applied to him in the New Testament - a
consideration not indeed decisive, but of some force, since it is not
very safe to apply passages to him from the Old Testament without such
authority. At least, the general rule is to be repudiated and rejected,
that every passage is to be supposed to have such a reference which can
be possibly made to apply to him, or where the language can be made to
describe his person and offices.

\(2\) The work of the "interpreter," the "angel," or "messenger,"
referred to here, is not that of the Messiah. The effect which Elihu
says would be produced would be, that the life of the sufferer would be
spared, his disease removed, and his flesh restored with infantile
freshness. But this is not the work which the Redeemer came to perform,
and is not that which he actually does.

\(3\) The subject here discussed is not such as is applicable to the
work of the Messiah. It is here a question solely about the design of
affliction. That was the point to be explained; and explanation was what
was needed, and what was proposed to be done. But this is not the
special work of the Messiah. His was a much larger, wider office; and
even if this had been his whole work, how would the reference to that
have met the point under discussion? I am inclined, therefore, to the
opinion, that Elihu had himself particularly in his view, and that he
meant to represent himself as at that time sustaining the character of a
messenger sent from God to explain important principles of his
administration.

[Job 33:24](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 33:24</span></span>

Then he is gracious unto him - That is, on the supposition that he hears
and regards what the messenger of God communicates. If he rightly
understands the reasons of the divine administration, and acquiesces in
it, and if he calls upon God in a proper manner [Job
33:26](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#026.md), he will show him mercy, and
spare him. Or it may mean, that God is in fact gracious to him by
sending him a messenger who can come and say to him that it is the
divine purpose to spare him; that he is satisfied, and will preserve him
from death. If such a messenger should come, and so announce the mercy
of God, then he would return to the rigoar of his former days, and be
fully restored to his former prosperity. Elihu refers probably to some
method of communication, by which the will of God was made known to the
sufferer, and by which it was told him that it was God's design not to
destroy, but to discipline and save him.

Deliver him - Hebrew, פדעהו pâda‛hû, "redeem him". The word used here
(פדע pâda‛) properly means "to let loose, to cut loose"; and then "to
buy loose"; that is, "to redeem, to ransom for a price." Sometimes it is
used in the general sense of freeing or delivering, without reference to
a price, compare [Deu 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#008.md); [Jer
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#021.md); [Psa
34:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#022.md); [Job
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#023.md); but usually there is a reference
to a price, or to some valuable consideration, either expressed or
implied; compare the notes at [Isa
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003.md). Here the appropriate idea is
expressed, for it is said, as a reason for redeeming or rescuing him, "I
have found a ransom." That is, the "ransom" is the valuable
consideration on account of which he was to be rescued from death.

From going down to the pit - The grave, the world of darkness. Notes,
[Job 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#018.md). That is, he would keep him
alive, and restore him again to health. It is possible that by the word
pit here, there may be a reference to a place of punishment, or to the
abodes of the dead as places of gloom and horror especially in the case
of the wicked but the more probable interpretation is, that it refers to
death alone.

I have found - That is, there is a ransom; or, I have seen a reason why
he should not die. The idea is, that God was looking for some reason on
account of which it would be proper to release the sufferer, and restore
him to the accustomed tokens of his favor and that such a ransom had now
appeared. There was now no necessity why those sufferings should be
prolonged, and he could consistently restore him to health.

A ransom - Margin, or, "an atonement." Hebrew, כפר kôpher. On the
meaning of this word, see the notes at [Isa
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003.md). The expression here means that
there was something which could be regarded as a valuable consideration,
or a reason why the sufferer should not be further afflicted, and why he
should be preserved from going down to the grave. What that price, or
valuable consideration was, is not specified; and what was the actual
idea which Elihu attached to it, it is now impossible with certainty to
determine. The connection would rather lead us to suppose that it was
something seen in the sufferer himself; some change done in his mind by
his trials; some evidence of acquiescence in the government of God, and
some manifestation of true repentance, which was the reason why the
stroke of punishment should be removed, and why the sufferer should be
saved from death. This might be called by Elihu "a ransom" - using the
word in a very large sense.

There can be no doubt that such "a fact" often occurs. God lays his hand
on his erring and wandering children. He brings upon them afflictions
which would consign them to the grave, if they were not checked. Those
afflictions are effectual in the case. They are the means of true
repentance; they call back the wanderer; they lead him to put his trust
in God, and to seek his happiness again in him; and this result of his
trials is a reason why they should extend no further. The object of the
affliction has been accomplished, and the penitence of the sufferer is a
sufficient reason for lightening the hand of affliction, and restoring
him again to health and prosperity. This is not properly an atonement,
or a ransom, in the sense in which the word is now technically used, but
the Hebrew word used here would not be inappropriately employed to
convey such an idea. Thus, in [Exo
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#030.md), the intercession of Moses is
said to be that by which an atonement would be made for the sin of the
people.

"Moses said unto the people, Ye have sinned a great sin; and now I will
go up unto the Lord; peradventure I shall make an atonement (אכפרה
'ekâpharâh, from כפר kâphar), for your sin." Here, it is manifest that
the act of Moses in making intercession was to be the public reason, or
the "ransom," why they were not to be punished. So the boldness, zeal,
and fidelity of Phinehas in resisting idolatry, and punishing those who
had been guilty of it, are spoken of as the atonement or ransom on
account of which the plague was stayed, and the anger of God removed
from his people; [Num 25:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#012.md),
"Behold, I give unto him my covenant of peace - because he was zealous
for his God, and made an atonement (ויכפר vaykâphar) for the children of
Israel." Septuagint, ἐξιλάσατο exilasato. In this large sense, the sick
man's repentance might be regarded as the covering, ransom, or public
reason why he should be restored.

That word literally means that which covers, or overlays any thing; and
then an atonement or expiation, as being such a covering. See Gen. 20,
16; [Exo 21:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#030.md). Cocceius, Calovius,
and others suppose that the reference here is to the Messiah, and to the
atonement made by him. Schultens supposes that it has the same reference
by anticipation - that is, that God had purposed such a ransom, and that
in virtue of the promised and pre-figured expiation, he could now show
mercy. But it cannot be demonstrated that Elihu had such a reference;
and though it was undoubtedly true that God designed to show mercy to
people only through that atonement, and that it was, and is, only by
this that release is ever given to a sufferer, still, it does not follow
that Elihu fully understood this. The general truth that God was
merciful, and that the repentance of the sick man would be followed by a
release from suffering, was all that can reasonably be supposed to have
been understood at that. period of the world. Now, we know the reason,
the mode, and the extent of the ransom; and taking the words in their
broadest sense, we may go to all sufferers, and say, that they may be
redeemed from going down to the dark chambers of the eternal pit, for
God has found a ransom. A valuable consideration has been offered, in
the blood of the Redeemer, which is an ample reason why they should not
be consigned to hell, if they are truly penitent.

[Job 33:25](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 33:25</span></span>

His flesh shall be fresher than a child's - Margin, "childhood." The
meaning is obvious. He would be restored again to health. The calamity
which had been brought upon him for purposes of discipline, would be
removed. This was the theory of Elihu in regard to afflictions, and he
undoubtedly meant that it should be applied to Job. If he would now,
understanding the nature and design of affliction, turn to God, he would
be recovered again, and enjoy the health and rigor of his youth. We are
not to suppose that this is universally true, though it is undoubtedly
often a fact now, that if those who are afflicted become truly penitent,
and call upon God, the affliction will be removed. It will have
accomplished its object, and may be withdrawn. Hence, they who pray that
their afflictions may be withdrawn, should first pray that they may
accomplish on their own hearts the effect which God designs, producing
in them penitence, deadness to the world, and humiliation, and then that
his hand may be withdrawn.

He shall return to the days of his youth - That is, to health and rigor.

[Job 33:26](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 33:26</span></span>

He shall pray unto God ... - That is, when he fully understands the
design of affliction; and when his mind is brought to a proper state of
penitence for his past conduct, then he will find God merciful and ready
to show him kindness.

And he shall see his face with joy - The face of God. That is, he shall
be able to look up to him with peace and comfort. This language is
similar to that which is so frequently employed in the Scriptures, in
which God is said to lift upon us the light of his countenance. The
meaning here is, that the afflicted man would be again permitted to look
by faith on God, being reconciled to him, and would see in his face no
indication of displeasure.

For he will render unto man his righteousness - He will deal with him in
justice and equity. When he sees evidence of penitence, he will treat
him accordingly; and if in the afflicted man he discerns true piety, he
will regard and treat him as his friend. The meaning is, that if there
is in the sufferer any sincere love to God, he will not be indifferent
to it, but will treat him as possessing it. This is still true, and
universally true. If there is in the heart of one who is afflicted any
real piety, God will not treat him as an impenitent sinner, but will
manifest his mercy to him, and show to him the favors which he confers
only on his friends.

[Job 33:27](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 33:27</span></span>

He looketh upon men - Margin, "or, he shall look upon men, and say, I
have sinned." Umbreit renders this, Nun singt er jubelnd zu den Menschen
- "now he sings joyfully among men." So Noyes, "He shall sing among men,
and say." Prof. Lee "He shall fully consider or pronounce right to men,
so that one shall say, I have sinned." Coverdale, "Such a respect hath
he unto men. Therefore let a man confess and say, I have offended." The
Septuagint renders it, Εἷτα τὸτε άπιμέμψεται ἄνθρωπος άυτος ἑαυτῳ Eita
tote apomempsetai anthrōpos autos heautō, "then shall a man blame
himself," etc. These various renderings arise from the difference of
signification attached to the Hebrew word ישׁר yāshor. According to our
interpretation, it is derived from שׁיר shı̂yr, "to sing," and then the
meaning would be, "he sings before men," and thus the reference would be
to the sufferer, meaning that he would have occasion to rejoice among
men. See Gesenius on the word. According to the other view, the word is
derived from שׁור shûr, "to look round"; "to care for, or regard"; and
according to this, the reference is to God, meaning that he carefully
and attentively observes people in such circumstances, and, if he sees
evidence that there is true penitence, he has compassion and saves. This
idea certainly accords better with the scope of the passage than the
former, and it seems to me is to be regarded as correct.

And if any say, I have sinned - Hebrew "And says," that is, if the
sufferer, under the pressure of his afflictions, is willing to confess
his faults, then God is ready to show him mercy. This accords with what
Elihu purposed to state of the design of afflictions, that they were
intended to bring people to reflection, and to be a means of wholesome
discipline. There is no doubt that he meant that all this should be
understood by Job as applicable to himself, for he manifestly means to
be understood as saying that he had not seen in him the evidence of a
penitent mind, such as he supposed afflictions were designed to produce.

And perverted that which was right - That is, in regard to operations
and views of the divine government. He had held error, or had cherished
wrong apprehensions of the divine character. Or it may mean, that he had
dealt unjustly with people in his contact with them.

And it profited me not - The word used here (שׁוה shâvâh) means properly
to be even or level; then to be equal, or of like value; and here may
mean, that he now saw that it was no advantage to him to have done
wickedly, since it brought upon him such a punishment, or the benefit
which he received from his life of wickedness was no equivalent for the
pain which he had been called to suffer in consequence of it. This is
the common interpretation. Rosenmuller, however, suggests another, which
is, that he designs by this language to express his sense of the divine
mercy, and that it means "my afflictions are in no sense equal to my
deserts. I have not been punished as I might justly have been, for God
has interposed to spare me." It seems to me, however, that the former
interpretation accords best with the meaning of the words and the scope
of the passage. It would then be the reflection of a man on the bed of
suffering, that the course of life which brought him there had been
attended with no advantage, but had been the means of plunging him into
deserved sorrows. from which he could be rescued only by the grace of
God.

[Job 33:28](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 33:28</span></span>

He will deliver his soul - Margin, "He hath delivered my soul." There
are various readings here in the text, which give rise to this diversity
of interpretation. The present reading in the text is נפשׁי nepheshay -
"my soul"; and according to this, it is to be regarded as the language
of the sufferer celebrating the mercy of God, and is language which is
connected with the confession in the previous verse, "I have sinned; I
found it no advantage; and he hath rescued me from death." Many
manuscripts, however, read נפשׁו nepheshô - "his soul"; and according to
this, the language would be that of Elihu, saying, that in those
circumstances God would deliver him when he made suitable confession of
his sin. The sense is essentially the same. The Vulgate has, "He will
deliver his soul;" the Septuagint, "Save my soul."

From going into the pit - Notes [Job
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#018.md).

And his life shall see the light - Here there is the same variety of
reading which occurs in regard to the word soul. The present Hebrew text
is (חיתי chayātay) "my life"; many manuscripts read (חיתו chayātô), "his
life." The phrase "to see the light" is equivalent to live. Death was
represented as going down into regions where there was no ray of light.
See [Job 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#005.md); [Job
10:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#021.md).

[Job 33:29](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 33:29</span></span>

Lo, all these things worketh God - That is, he takes all these methods
to warn people, and to reclaim them from their evil ways.

Oftentimes - Hebrew as in the margin, twice, thrice. This may be taken
either as it is by our translators, to denote an indefinite number,
meaning that God takes frequent occasion to warn people, and repeats the
admonition when they disregard it, or more probably Elihu refers here to
the particular methods which he had specified, and which were three in
number. First, warnings in the visions of the night, [Job
33:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#014.md). Second, afflictions, [Job
33:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#019.md). Third, the messenger which
God sent to make the sufferer acquainted with the design of the
affliction, and to assure him that he might return to God, [Job
33:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#023.md). So the Septuagint
understands it, which rendered it, ὁδοὺς τρεῖς hodous treis - three
ways, referring to the three methods which Elihu had specified.

[Job 33:30](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">job 33:30</span></span>

To bring back his soul from the pit - To keep him from descending to the
grave, and to the dark world beneath. He takes these methods of warning
people, in order that they may not bring destruction on themselves. See
[Job 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#018.md).

To be enlightened with the light of the living - That he may still enjoy
life, and not descend to the world of shades.

[Job 33:31](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">job 33:31</span></span>

Mark well, O Job, hearken unto me ... - Elihu designs to intimate that
he had much more to say which demanded close attention. He begged,
therefore, that Job would hear him patiently through.

[Job 33:32](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">job 33:32</span></span>

If thou hast anything to say, answer me - In the previous verse, Elihu
had asked that Job would hear all that he had to say. Yet here, in view
of what he had said, he asks of him that if there were any thing from
which he dissented, he would now express his dissent. We may suppose
that he paused at this part of his speech, and as what he had said
related particularly to Job, he felt that it was proper that he should
have an opportunity to reply.

For I desire to justify thee - I would do you justice. I would not
pervert what you have said, or attribute to you any wrong opinions or
any improper motives Perhaps there may be included also a wish to
vindicate him, if he possibly could. He did not desire to dispute for
the sake of disputing, or to blame him if he could avoid it, but his aim
was the truth; and if he could, he wished to vindicate the character of
Job from the aspersions which had been cast upon it.

[Job 33:33](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">job 33:33</span></span>

If not, hearken unto me ... - If nothing has been said from which you
dissent, then listen to me, and I will explain further the perplexing
subject which has excited so much discussion. These remarks of Elihu
imply great confidence in the truth of what he had to say, but they are
not arrogant and disrespectful. He treats Job with the utmost deference;
is willing to hear all that could be said in opposition to his own
views, and is desirous of not wounding his feelings or doing injustice
to his cause. It may be supposed that he paused here, to give Job an
opportunity to reply, but as he made no remarks, he resumed his
discourse in the following chapter. The views which he had expressed
were evidently new to Job, and were entirely at variance with those of
his three friends, and they appear to have been received by all with
profound and respectful silence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 34](job034.md)

</div>
