<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job017)  [Next](job019.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#001.md)

[Job 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 18:2</span></span>

How long will it be ere ye make an end of words? - It has been made a
question to whom this is addressed. It is in the plural number, and it
is not usual in Hebrew when addressing an individual to make use of the
plural form. Some have supposed that it is addressed to Job and to
Eliphaz, as being both "long-winded" and tedious in their remarks.
Others have supposed that it refers to Job "and the members of his
family," who possibly interposed remarks, and joined Job in his
complaints. Others suppose that it refers to Eliphaz and Zophar, as
being silent during the speech of Job, and not arresting his remarks as
they ought to have done. Rosenmuller supposes that it refers to Job and
those similar to him, who were mere feigners of piety, and that Bildad
means to ask how long it would be before they would be effectually
silenced, and their complaints hushed. I see no great difficulty in
supposing that the reference is to Job. The whole strain of the
discourse evidently supposes it; and there is no evidence that any of
the family of Job had spoken, nor does it seem at all probable that
Bildad would reprove his own friends either for the length of their
speeches, or for not interrupting an other. The custom in the East is to
allow a man to utter all that he has to say without interruption.

Mark - Hebrew understand; or be intelligent - תבינו tābı̂ynû; that is,
either speak distinctly, clearly, intelligently; or consider and weigh
our arguments. The former is the interpretation of Schultens, and seems
to me to be the true one. The idea is this: "You, Job, have been
altering mere words. They are words of complaint, without argument.
Speak now in a different manner; show that you understand the case;
advance arguments that are worthy of attention, and then we will reply."

[Job 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 18:3</span></span>

Wherefore are we counted as beasts? - "Why are we treated in your
remarks as if we had no sense, and were unworthy of sound argument in
reply to what we say?" It is possible that there may be reference here
to what Job said [Job 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#007.md) - that even
the beasts could give them information about God. But the general idea
is, that Job had not treated their views with the attention which they
deserved, but had regarded them as unworthy of notice.

And reputed vile - The word used here (טמה ṭâmâh) means to be unclean,
or polluted; and the idea is, that Job regarded them as worthless or
impious.

[Job 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 18:4</span></span>

He teareth himself - More correctly, "thou that tearest thyself in
anger!" It is not an affirmation about Job, but it is a direct address
to him. The meaning is, that he was in the paryoxysms of a violent rage;
he acted like a madman.

Shall the earth be forsaken for thee? - A reproof of his pride and
arrogance. "Shall everything be made to give way for you? Are you the
only man in the world and of so much importance, that the earth is to be
made vacant for you to dwell in? Are the interests of all others to be
sacrificed for you, and is everything else to give place for you? Are
all the laws of God's government to be made to yield rather than that
you should be punished?" Similar modes of expression to denote the
insignificance of anyone who is proud and arrogant, are still used among
the Arabs. "Since Muhammed died, the Imams govern." "The world will not
suffer loss on your account." "The world is not dependent on anyone
man." T. Hunt, in Lowth's Lectures on Hebrew Poetry. Rosenmuller's
Morgenland, in lec.

And shall the rock be removed out of his place? - "Shall the most firm
and immutable things give way for your special accommodation? Shall the
most important and settled principles of the divine administration be
made to bend on your account?" These were not the principles and
feelings of Job; and great injustice was done to him by this
supposition. He was disposed to be submissive in the main to the divine
arrangement. But this will describe the feelings of many a man of pride,
who supposes that the divine arrangements should be made to bend for his
special accommodation, and that the great, eternal principles of justice
and right should give way rather than that he should be dealt with as
common sinners are, and rather than that he should be cast into hell.
Such people wish a special place of salvation for themselves. They are
too proud to be saved as others are. They complain in their hearts that
they are made to suffer, to lose their property, to be sick, to die - as
others do. They would wish to be treated with special mercy, and to have
special enactments in their favor, and would have the eternal laws of
right made to bend for their special accommodation Such is the pride of
the human heart!

[Job 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 18:5</span></span>

Yea - Truly; or, behold. Bildad here commences his remarks on the
certain destiny of the wicked, and strings together a number of
apparently proverbial sayings, showing that calamity in various forms
would certainly overtake the wicked. There is nothing particularly new
in his argument, though the use of the various images which he employs
shows how deep was the conviction of this doctrine at that time, and how
extensively it prevailed.

The light of the wicked shall be put out - Light here is an emblem of
prosperity.

The spark of his fire - Hebrew the flame of his fire. There may be an
allusion here to the customs of Arabian hospitality. This was, and is,
their national glory, and it is their boast that no one is ever refused
it. The emblem of fire or flame here may refer to the custom of kindling
a fire on an eminence, near a dwelling, to attract the stranger to share
the hospitality of the owner of it; or it may refer to the fire in his
tent, which the stranger was always at liberty to share. In the
collection of the Arabian poems, called the Hamasa, this idea occurs
almost in the words of Bildad. The extract was furnished me by the Rev.
Eli Smith. It is a boast of Salamiel, a prince of Tema. In extolling the
virtues of his tribe, he says, "No fire of ours was ever extinguished at
night without a guest; and of our guests never did one disparage us."
The idea here is, that the wicked would attempt to show hospitality, but
the means would be taken away. He would not be permitted to enjoy the
coveted reputation of showing it to the stranger, and the fire which
might invite the traveler, or which might confer comfort on him, would
be put out in his dwelling. The inability to extend the offer of a
liberal hospitality would be equivalent to the deepest poverty or the
most trying affliction.

[Job 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 18:6</span></span>

And his candle - Margin, lamp. The reference is to a lamp that was
suspended from the ceiling. The Arabians are fond of this image. Thus,
they say, "Bad fortune has extinguished my lamp." Of a man whose hopes
are remarkably blasted, they say, "He is like a lamp which is
immediately extinguished if you let it sink in the oil." See Schultens.
The putting out of a lamp is to the Orientals an image of utter
desolation. It is the universal custom to have a light burning in their
houses at night. "The houses of Egypt, in modern times, are never
without lights; they burn lamps all the night long, and in every
occupied apartment. So requisite to the comfort of a family is this
custom reckoned, and so imperious is the power which it exercises, that
the poorest people. would rather retrench part of their food than
neglect it." Paxton. It is not improbable that this custom prevailed in
former times in Arabia, as it does now in Egypt; and this consideration
will give increased beauty and force to this passage.

[Job 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 18:7</span></span>

The steps of his strength - Strong steps. "Steps of strength" is a
Hebraism, to denote firm or vigorous steps.

Shall be straitened - Shall be compressed, embarrassed, hindered.
Instead of walking freely and at large, he shall be compressed and
limited in his goings. "Large steps," "free movement," etc. are
proverbial expressions among the Arabs, to denote freedom, prosperity,
etc. RosenmulIer. Schultens quotes the following illustrations from the
Arabic poets. From Ibn Doreid, "He who does not confine himself within
human limits, his vast strides shall be straitened." And from
Taurizius," After the battle of Bedrense, the steps were straitened."
The meaning here is, that he would be greatly impeded in his movements,
instead of going forth at large and in full vigor as he had formerly
done.

And his own counsel - His own plans shall be the means of his fall.

[Job 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 18:8</span></span>

For he is cast into a net by his own feet - He is caught in his own
tricks, as if he had spread a net or dug a pitfall for another, and had
fallen into it himself. The meaning is, that he would bring ruin upon
himself while he was plotting the rain of others; see [Psa
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#016.md), "The wicked is snared by the
work of his own hands;" compare the note at [Job
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013.md). The phrase "by his own feet"
here means, that he walks there himself. He is not led or driven by
others, but he goes himself into the net. Wild animals are sometimes
driven, but he walks along of his own accord into the net, and has no
one to blame but himself.

And he walketh upon a snare - Or a pitfall. This was formerly the mode
of taking wild beasts. It was done by excavating a place in the earth,
and covering it over with turf, leaves, etc. supported in a slender
manner; so that the lion, or elephant or tiger that should tread on it,
would fall through. These methods of taking wild beasts have been
practiced from the earliest times, and are practiced everywhere.

[Job 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 18:9</span></span>

The gin - Another method of taking wild beasts. It was a snare so made
as to spring suddenly on an animal, securing him by the neck or feet. We
use a trap for the same purpose. The Hebrew word (פח pach) may denote
anything of this kind - a snare, net, noose, etc. with which birds or
wild animals are taken.

By the heel - By the foot.

And the robber shall prevail - He shall be overpowered by the
highwayman; or the plunderer shall make a sudden descent upon him, and
strip him of his all. The meaning is, that destruction would suddenly
overtake him. There can be no doubt that Bildad meant to apply all this
to Job.

[Job 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 18:10</span></span>

The snare is laid - All this language is taken from the modes of taking
wild beasts; but it is not possible to designate with absolute certainty
the methods in which it was done. The word used here (חבל chebel) means
a cord, or rope; and then a snare, gin, or toil, such as is used by
hunters. It was used in some way as a noose to secure an animal. This
was concealed (Hebrew) "in the earth" - so covered up that an animal
would not perceive it, and so constructed that it might be made to
spring upon it suddenly.

And a trap - We have no reason to suppose that at that time they
employed steel to construct traps as we do now, or that the word here
has exactly the sense which we give to it. The Hebrew word (מלכדת
malkôdeth) is from לכד lâkad - "to take," "to catch," and means a noose,
snare, spring - by which an animal was seized. It is a general term;
though undoubtedly used to denote a particular instrument, then well
known. The general idea in all this is, that the wicked man would be
suddenly seized by calamities, as a wild animal or a bird is taken in a
snare. Independently of the interest of the entire passage [Job
18:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#008.md) as a part of the argument of
Bildad, it is interesting from the view which it gives of the mode of
securing wild animals in the early periods of the world. They had no
guns as we have; but they early learned the art of setting gins and
snares by which they were taken. In illustrating this passage, it will
not be inappropriate to refer to some of the modes of hunting practiced
by the ancient Egyptians. The same methods were practiced then in
catching birds and taking wild beasts as now, and there is little
novelty in modern practices. The ancients had not only traps, nets, and
springs, but also bird-lime smeared upon twigs, and made use of
stalking-horses, setting dogs, etc. The various methods in which this
was done, may be seen described at length in Wilkinson's Manners and
Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, vol. iii. pp. 1-81. The noose was
employed to catch the wild ox, the antelope, and other animals.

This seems to be a self-acting net, so constructed that the birds, when
coming in contact with it, close it upon themselves.

This trap appears as if in a vertical position, although, doubtless, it
is intended to represent a trap lying upon the ground.

There are other traps very similar to this, except that they are oval;
and probably have a net like the former. They are composed of two arcs,
which, being kept open by machinery in the middle, furnish the oval
frame of the net; but when the bird flies in, and knocks out the pin in
the center, the arcs collapse enclosing the bird in the net. One
instance occurs, in a painting at Thebes, of a trap, in which a hyaena
is caught, and carried on the shoulders of two men. It was a common
method of hunting to enclose a large tract of land by a circle of nets,
or to station men at convenient distances, and gradually to contract the
circle by coming near to each other, and thus to drive all the wild
animals into a narrow enclosure, where they could be easily slain. Some
idea of the extent of those enclosures may be formed from the by no
means incredible circumstance related by Plutarch, that when the
Macedonian conquerors were in Persia, Philotos, the son of Armenio, had
hunting-nets that would enclose the space of an hundred furlongs. The
Oriental sovereigns have sometimes employed whole armies in this species
of hunting. Picture Bible.

[Job 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 18:11</span></span>

Terrors shall make him afraid - He shall be constantly subject to
alarms, and shall never feel secure. "Terrors here are represented as
allegorical persons, like the Furies in the Greek poets." Noyes. The
idea here is substantially the same as that given by Eliphaz, [Job
15:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#021.md).

And shall drive him to his feet - Margin, scatter. This is a literal
translation of the Hebrew. The idea is, that he will be alarmed by such
terrors; his self-composure will be dissipated, and he will "take to his
heels."

[Job 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 18:12</span></span>

His strength shall be hungerbitten - Shall be exhausted by hunger or
famine.

And destruction shall be ready at his side - Hebrew "Shall be fitted"
נכוּן nākûn "to his side." Some have supposed that this refers to some
disease, like the pleurisy, that would adhere closely to his side. So
Jerome understands it. Schultens has quoted some passages from Arabic
poets, in which calamities are represented as "breaking the side."
Bildad refers probably, to some heavy judgments that would crush a man;
such that the ribs, or the human frame, could not bear; and the meaning
is, that a wicked man would be certainly crushed by misfortune.

[Job 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 18:13</span></span>

It shall devour the strength of his skin - Margin, bars. The margin is a
correct translation of the Hebrew. The word used (בדי badēy, construct
with עורו ‛ôrô - his skin) means bars, staves, branches, and here
denotes his limbs, members; or, more literally, the bones, as supports
of the skin, or the human frame. The bones are regarded as the bars, or
the framework, holding the other parts of the body in their place, and
over which the skin is stretched. The word "it" here refers to the
"first-born of death" in the other hemistich of the verse; and the
meaning is, that the strength of his body shal be entirely exhausted.

The first-born of death - The "first-born" is usually spoken of as
distinguished for vigor and strength; [Gen
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003.md), "Reuben, thou art my first-born,
my might, and the beginning of my strength;" and the idea conveyed here
by the "first-born of death" is the most fearful and destructive disease
that death has ever engendered; compare Milton's description of the
progeny of sin, in Paradise Los. Diseases are called "the sons or
children of death" by the Arabs, (see Schultens in loc.,) as being
begotten by it.

[Job 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 18:14</span></span>

His confidence shall be rooted out of his tabernacle - Security shall
forsake his dwelling, and he shall be subject to constant alarms. There
shall be nothing there in which he can confide, and all that he relied
on as sources of safety shall have fled.

And it shall bring him - That is, he shall be brought.

To the king of terrors - There has been much variety in the explanation
of this verse. Dr. Noyes renders it, "Terror pursues him like a king."
Dr. Good, "Dissolution shall invade him like a monarch." Dr. Stock says.
"I am sorry to part with a beautiful phrase in our common version, the
king of terrors, as descriptive of death, but there is no authority for
it in the Hebrew text." Wemyss renders it, "Terror shall seize him as a
king." So Schultens translates it, "Gradientur in eum, instar regis,
terrores." Rosenmuller renders it as it is in our version. The Vulgate:
Et calcet super eum, quasi rex, interitus - "destruction shall tread
upon him as a king." The Septuagint "and distress shall lay hold on him
with the authority of a king" - αἰτίᾳ βασιλικῃ satia basilikē. The
Chaldee renders it, "shall be brought to the king of terrors" - רגושתא
למלך is not evident, therefore, that we are to give up the beautiful
phrase, "king of terrors."

The fair construction of the Hebrew, as it seems to me, is that which is
conveyed in our common version - meaning, that the wicked man would be
conducted, not merely to death, but to that kind of death where a
fearful king would preside - a monarch infusing terrors into his soul.
There is something singularly beautiful and appropriate in the phrase,
"the king of terrors." Death is a fearful monarch. All dread him. He
presides in regions of chilliness and gloom. All fear to enter those
dark regions where he dwells and reigns, and an involuntary shudder
seizes the soul on approaching the confines of his kingdom. Yet all must
be brought there; and though man dreads the interview with that fearful
king, there is no release. The monarch reigns from age to age - reigns
over all. There is but one way in which he will cease to appear as a
terrific king. - It is by confidence in Him who came to destroy death;
that great Redeemer who has taken away his "sting," and who can enable
man to look with calmness and peace even on the chilly regions where he
reigns. The idea here is not precisely that of the Roman and Grecian
mythologists, of a terrific king, like Rhadamanthus, presiding over the
regions of the dead but it is of death personified - of death
represented as a king fitted to inspire awe and terror.

[Job 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 18:15</span></span>

It shall dwell in his tabernacle - It is uncertain what is to be
understood as referred to here. Some suppose that the word to be
understood is soul, and that the meaning is "his soul," that is, he
himself, "shall dwell in his tent." Rosenmuller, Noyes, Wemyss, and
others, suppose that the word is terror. "Terror (בלהה ballâhâh) shall
dwell in his tent," the same word which is used in the plural in the
previous verse. This is undoubtedly the correct sense; and the idea is,
that his forsaken tent shall be a place of terror - somewhat, perhaps,
as we speak of a forsaken house as "haunted." It may be that Bildad
refers to some such superstitious fear as we sometimes, and almost
always in childhood, connect with the idea of a house in which nobody
lives.

Because it is none of his - It is no longer his. It is a forsaken,
tenantless dwelling.

Brimstone shall be scattered - Brimstone has been always the image of
desolation. Nothing will grow on a field that is covered with sulphur;
and the meaning here is, that his house would be utterly desolate and
forsaken. Rosenmuller and Noyes suppose that there is an allusion here
to a sudden destruction, such as was that of Sodom and Gomorrha. Grotius
doubts whether it refers to that or to lightning. Others suppose that
lightning is referred to both here and in [Gen
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024.md); [Deu
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#023.md). I can see no evidence here,
however, that there is any reference to Sodom and Gomorrha, or that
there is any allusion to lightning. If the allusion had been to Sodom,
it would have been more full. That was a case "just in point" in the
argument; and the fact that was exactly in point, and would have
furnished to the friends of Job such an irrefragalbe proof of the
position which they were defending, and that it is not worked into the
very texture of their argument, is full demonstration, to my mind, that
that remarkable event is not referred to in this place. The only thing
necessarily implied in the language before us is, that sulphur, the
emblem of desolation, would be scattered on his dwelling, and that his
dwelling would be wholly desolate.

[Job 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 18:16</span></span>

His roots shall be dried up - Another image of complete desolation -
where he is compared to a tree that is dead - a figure whose meaning is
obvious, and which often occurs; see [Job
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#030.md), note; [Job
8:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#012.md), notes.

Above his branch - Perhaps referring to his children or family. All
shall be swept away - an allusion which Job could not well hesitate to
apply to himself.

[Job 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 18:17</span></span>

His remembrance shall perish - His name - all recollection of him.
Calamity shall follow him even after death; and that which every man
desires, and every good man has, and honored name when he is dead, will
be denied him. Men will hasten to forget him as fast as possible;
compare [Pro 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#007.md), "The name of the
wicked shall rot."

No name in the street - Men when they meet together in highways and
places of concourse - when traveler meets traveler, and caravan caravan,
shall not pause to speak of him and of the loss which society has
substained by his death. It is one of the rewards of virtue that the
good will speak of the upright man when he is dead; that they will pause
in their journey, or in their business, to converse about him; and that
the poor and the needy will dwell with affectionate interest upon their
loss. "This" blessing, Bildad says, will be denied the wicked man. The
world will not feel that they have any loss to deplore when he is dead.
No great plan of benvolence has been arrested by his removal. The poor
and the needy fare as well as they did before. The widow and the
fatherless make no grateful remembrance of his name, and the world
hastens to forget him as soon as possible. There is no man, except one
who is lost to all virtue, who does not desire to be remembered when he
is dead - by his children, his neighbors, his friends, and by the
stranger who may read the record on the stone that marks his grave.
Where this desire is "wholly" extinguished, man has reached the lowest
possible point of degradation, and the last hold on him in favor of
virtue has expired.

[Job 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 18:18</span></span>

He shall be driven from light into darkness - Margin, "They shall drive
him." The meaning is, that he should be driven from a state of
prosperity to one of calamity.

And chased out of the world - Perhaps meaning that he should not be
conducted to the grave with the slow and solemn pomp of a respectful
funeral, but in a hurry - as a malefactor is driven from human life, and
hastily commited to the earth. The living would be glad to be rid of
him, and would "chase" him out of life.

[Job 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 18:19</span></span>

He shall neither have son ... - All his family shall be cut off. He
shall have no one to perpetuate his name or remembrance. All this Job
could not help applying to himself, as it was doubtless intended he
should. The facts in his case were just such as were supposed in these
proverbs about the wicked; and hence, his friends could not but conclude
that he was a wicked man; and hence, his friends could not but conclude
that he was a wicked man; and hence, too, since these were undisputed
maxims, Job felt so much embarrassment in answering them.

[Job 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 18:20</span></span>

They that come after him - Future ages; they who may hear of his history
and of the manner in which he was cut off from life. So the passage has
been generally rendered; so, substantially, it is by Dr. Good, Dr.
Noyes, Rosenmuller, and Luther. The Vulgate translates it novissimi; the
Septuagint, ἔσχατοι eschatoi - "the last" - meaning those that should
live after him, or at a later period. But Schultens supposes that the
word used here denotes those in "the West," and the corresponding word
rendered "went before," denotes those in "the East." With this view
Wemyss concurs, who renders the whole verse:

"The West shall be astonished at his end;

The East shall be panic-struck."

According to this, it means that those who dwelt in the remotest regions
would be astonished at the calamities which would come upon him. It
seems to me that this accords better with the scope of the passage than
the other interpretation, and avoids some difficulties which cannot be
separated from the other view. The word translated in our version, "that
come after him" אחרינים 'achăryônı̂ym is from אחר 'âchar, to be after, or
behind; to stay behind, to delay, remain. It then means "after," or
"behind;" and as in the geography of the Orientals the face was supposed
to be turned to "the East," instead of being turned to the North, as
with us - a much more natural position than ours - the word "after," or
"behind," comes to denote West, the right hand the South, the left the
North; see the notes at [Job 23:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#008.md).

Thus, the phrase האחרין הים hayâm hā'achăryôn - "the sea behind, denotes
the Mediterranean sea - the West; [Deu
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#003.md); see also [Deu
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#024.md); [Deu
34:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#002.md); [Joe
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#020.md), where the same phrase in Hebrew
occurs. Those who dwelt in the "West," therefore, would be accurately
referred to by this phrase.

Shall be astonied - Shall be "astonished" - the old mode of writing the
word being "astonied;" [Isa 52:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#014.md). It
is not known, however, to be used in any other book than the Bible.

As they that went before - Margin, or "lived with him." Noyes, "his
elders shall be struck with horror." Vulgate, "et primos invadet
"horror." Septuagint, "amazement seizes "the first" - πρώτους prōtous.
But the more correct interpretation is that which refers it to the
people of the East. The word קדמנים qadmônı̂ym is from קדם qâdam to
precede, to go before; and then the derivatives refer to that which goes
before, which is in front, etc.; and as face was turned to the East by
geographers, the word comes to express that which is in the East, or
near the sun-rising; see [Joe 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#020.md);
[Job 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#008.md); [Gen
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#008.md). Hence, the phrase קדם בני benēy
qedem - "sons of the East" - meaning the persons who dwelt east of
Palestine; [Job 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#003.md); [Isa
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#014.md); [Gen
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#006.md); [Gen
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#001.md). The word used here, (קדמנים
qadmônı̂ym), is used to denote the people or the regions of the East; in
[Eze 47:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#008.md), [Eze
47:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#018.md); [Zac
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#008.md). Here it means, as it seems to
me, the people of the East; and the idea is that people everywhere would
be astonished at the doom of the wicked man. His punishment would be so
sudden and entire as to hold the world mute with amazement.

Were affrighted - Margin, "laid hold on horror." This is a more literal
rendering. The sense is, they would be struck with horror at what would
occur to him.

[Job 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 18:21</span></span>

Surely such are the dwellings of the wicked - The conclusion or sum of
the whole matter. The meaning is, that the habitations of all that knew
not God would be desolate - a declaration which Job could not but regard
as aimed at himself; compare [Job
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#029.md). This is the close of this harsh
and severe speech. It is no wonder that Job should feel it keenly, and
that he "did" feel it is apparent from the following chapter. A string
of proverbs has been presented, having the appearance of proof, and as
the result of the long observation of the course of events, evidently
bearing on his circumstances, and so much in point that he could not
well deny their pertinency to his condition. He was stung to the quick,
and and gave vent to his agonized feelings in the following chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 19](job019.md)

</div>
