<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job030)  [Next](job032.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#001.md)

[Job 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 31:1</span></span>

I made a covenant with mine eyes - The first virtue of his private life
to which Job refers is chastity. Such was his sense of the importance of
this, and of the danger to which man was exposed, that he had solemnly
resolved not to think upon a young female. The phrase here, "I made a
covenant with mine eyes," is poetical, meaning that he solemnly
resolved. A covenant is of a sacred and binding nature; and the strength
of his resolution was as great as if he had made a solemn compact. A
covenant or compact was usually made by slaying an animal in sacrifice,
and the compact was ratified over the animal that was slain, by a kind
of imprecation that if the compact was violated the same destruction
might fall on the violators which fell on the head of the victim. This
idea of cutting up a victim on occasion of making a covenant, is
retained in most languages. So the Greek ὅρκια τέμνειν, πέμνἔιν σπονδάς
horkia temnein, temnein spondas, and the Latin icere foedus - to strike
a league, in allusion to the striking down, or slaying of an animal on
the occasion. And so the Hebrew, as in the place before us, כרת ברית
berı̂yth kârath - to cut a covenant, from cutting down, or cutting in
pieces the victim over which the covenant was made; see this explained
at length in the notes at [Heb 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#016.md).
By the language here, Job means that he had resolved, in the most solemn
manner, that he would not allow his eyes or thoughts to endanger him by
improperly contemplating a woman.

Why then should I think upon a maid - Upon a virgin - על־בתולה
‛al-bethûlâh; compare [Pro 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#025.md), "Lust
not after her beauty in thine heart; neither let her take thee with her
eyelids;" see, also, the fearful and solemn declaration of the Saviour
in [Mat 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028.md). There is much emphasis
in the expression used here by Job. He does not merely say that he had
not thought in that manner, but that the thing was morally impossible
that he should have done it. Any charge of that kind, or any suspicion
of it, he would repel with indignation. His purpose to lead a pure life,
and to keep a pure heart, had been so settled, that it was impossible
that he could have offended in that respect. His purpose, also, not to
think on this subject, showed the extent of the restriction imposed on
himself. It was not merely his intention to lead a chaste life, and to
avoid open sin, but it was to maintain a pure heart, and not to suffer
the mind to become corrupted by dwelling on impure images, or indulging
in unholy desires. This strongly shows Job's piety and purity of heart,
and is a beautiful illustration of patriarchal religion. We may remark
here, that if a man wishes to maintain purity of life, he must make just
such a covenant as this with himself - one so sacred, so solemn, so
firm, that he will not suffer his mind for a moment to harbor an
improper thought. "The very passage of an impure thought through the
mind leaves pollution behind it;" and the outbreaking crimes of life are
just the result of allowing the imagination to dwell on impure images.
As the eye is the great source of danger (compare [Mat
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028.md); [Pe2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014).md), there should be a solemn
purpose that that should be pure, and that any sacrifice should be made
rather than allow indulgence to a wanton gaze: compare [Mar
9:47](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#047.md). No man was ever too much guarded
on this subject; no one ever yet made too solemn a covenant with his
eyes, and with his whole soul to be chaste.

[Job 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 31:2</span></span>

For what portion of God is there from above? - Or, rather, "What portion
should I then have from God who reigns above?" Job asks with emphasis,
what portion or reward he should expect from God who reigns on high, if
he had not made such a covenant with his eyes, and if he had given the
reins to loose and wanton thoughts? This question he himself answers in
the following verse, and says, that he could have expected only
destruction from the Almighty.

[Job 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 31:3</span></span>

Is not destruction to the wicked? - That is, Job says that he was well
aware that destruction would overtake the wicked, and that if he had
given indulgence to impure desires he could have looked for nothing
else. Well knowing this, he says, he had guarded himself in the most
careful manner from sin, and had labored with the greatest assiduity to
keep his eyes and his heart pure.

And a strange punishment - - ונכר weneker. The word used here, means
literally strangeness - a strange thing, something with which we were
unacquainted. It is used here evidently in the sense of a strange or
unusual punishment; something which does not occur in the ordinary
course of events. The sense is, that for the sin here particularly
referred to, God would interpose to inflict vengeance in a manner such
as did not occur in the ordinary dealings of his providence. There would
be some punishment adopted especially to this sin, and which would mark
it with his special displeasure. Has it not been so in all ages? The
Vulgate renders it, alienatio, and the Septuagint translates it in a
similar manner - ἀπαλλοτρίωσις apallotriōsis - and they seem to have
understood it as followed by entire alienation from God; an idea which
would be every where sustained by a reference to the history of the sin
referred to by Job. There is no sin that so much poisons all the
fountains of pure feeling in the soul, and none that will so certainly
terminate in the entire wreck of character.

[Job 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 31:4</span></span>

Doth he not see my ways? - This either means that God was a witness of
all that he did - his thoughts, words, and deeds, and would punish him
if he had given indulgence to improper feelings and thoughts; or that
since God saw all his thoughts, he could boldly appeal to him as a
witness of his innocence in this matter, and in proof that his life and
heart were pure. Rosenmuller adopts the latter interpretation; Herder
seems to incline to the former. Umbreit renders it, "God himself must be
a witness that I speak the truth." It is not easy to determine which is
the true meaning. Either of them will accord well with the scope of the
passage.

[Job 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 31:5</span></span>

If I have walked with vanity - This is the second specification in
regard to his private deportment. He says that his life had been
sincere, upright, honest. The word vanity here is equivalent to
falsehood, for so the parallelism demands, and so the word (שׁוא shâv')
is often used; [Psa 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003.md); [Psa
41:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#007.md); [Exo
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#001.md); [Deu
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#020.md); compare Isa, [Deu
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#013.md). The meaning of Job here is, that
he had been true and honest. In his dealings with others he had not
defrauded them; he had not misrepresented things; he had spoken the
exact truth, and had done that which was without deception or guile.

If my foot hath hasted to deceit - That is, if I have gone to execute a
purpose of deceit or fraud. He had never, on seeing an opportunity where
others might be defrauded, hastened to embrace it. The Septuagint
renders this verse, "If I have walked with scoffers - μετα γελοιαστῶν
meta geloiastōn - and if my foot has hastened to deceit."

[Job 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 31:6</span></span>

Let me be weighed in an even balance - Margin, him weigh me in balances
of justice. That is, let him ascertain exactly my character, and treat
me accordingly. If on trial it be found that I am guilty in this
respect, I consent to be punished accordingly. Scales or balances are
often used as emblematic of justice. Many suppose, however, that this
verse is a parenthesis, and that the imprecation in [Job
31:8](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#008.md), relates to [Job
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#005.md), as well as to [Job
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#007.md). But most probably the meaning
is, that he consented to have his life tried in this respect in the most
exact and rigid manner, and was willing to abide the result. A man may
express such a consciousness of integrity in his dealings with others,
without any improper self-reliance or boasting. It may be a simple fact
of which he may be certain, that he has never meant to defraud any man.

[Job 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 31:7</span></span>

If my step hath turned out of the way - The path in which I ought to
walk - the path of virtue.

And mine heart walked after mine eyes - That is, if I have coveted what
my eyes have beheld; or if I have been determined by the appearance of
things rather than by what is right, I consent to bear the appropriate
punishment.

And if any blot hath cleaved to mine hands - To have clean hands is
emblematic of innocence; [Job 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#009.md);
[Psa 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#004.md); compare [Mat
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#024.md). The word blot here means stain,
blemish: [Dan 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004.md). The idea is, that
his hands were pure, and that he had not been guilty of any act of fraud
or violence in depriving others of their property.

[Job 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 31:8</span></span>

Then let me sow, and let another eat - This is the imprecation which he
invokes, in case he had been guilty in this respect. He consented to sow
his fields, and let others enjoy the harvest. The expression used here
is common in the Scriptures to denote insecurity of property or calamity
in general; see [Lev 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#016.md) : "And ye
shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it;" compare
[Deu 28:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#030.md); [Amo
9:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#013.md).

Yea, let my offspring be rooted out - Or, rather, "Let what I plant be
rooted up." So Umbreit, Noyes, Schultens, Rosenmuller, Herder, and Lee
understand it. There is no evidence that he here alludes to his
children, for the connection does not demand it, nor does the word used
here require such an interpretation. The word צאצאים tse'ĕtsâ'iym -
means properly shoots; that is, what springs out of anything - as the
earth, or a tree - from יצא yâtsâ' - to go out, to go forth. It is
applied to the productions of the earth in [Isa
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#005.md); [Isa
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#001.md), and to children or posterity, in
[Isa 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#024.md); [Isa
61:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#009.md); [Isa
65:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#023.md); [Job
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#025.md); [Job
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#008.md). Here it refers evidently to the
productions of the earth; and the idea is, that if he had been guilty of
dishonesty or fraud in his dealings, he wished that all that he had
sowed should be rooted up.

[Job 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 31:9</span></span>

If mine heart have been deceived by a woman - If I have been enticed by
her beauty. The word rendered "deceived" פתה pâthâh means to open, to
expand. It is then applied to that which is open or ingenuous; to that
which is unsuspicious - like a youth; and thence is used in the sense of
being deceived, or enticed; [Deu
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#016.md); [Exo
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#016.md); [Pro
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#010.md); [Pro
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#029.md). The word "woman" here probably
means a married woman, and stands opposed to "virgin" in ver. 1. The
crime which he here disclaims is adultery, and he says that his heart
had never been allured from conjugal fidelity by the charms or the arts
of a woman.

Or if I have laid wait at my neighbor's door - That is, to watch when he
would be absent from home. This was a common practice with those who
were guilty of the crime referred to here; compare [Pro
7:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#008.md).

[Job 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 31:10</span></span>

Then let my wife grined unto another - Let her be subjected to the
deepest humiliation and degradation. Probably Job could not have found
language which would have more emphatically expressed his sense of the
enormity of this crime, or his perfect consciousness of innocence. The
last thing which a man would imprecate on himself, would be that which
is specified in this verse. The word "grind" (טחן ṭâchan) means to
crush, to beat small; then to grind, as in a handmill; [Jdg
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#021.md); [Num
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#008.md). This was usually the work of
females and slaves; see the notes at [Isa
47:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#002.md). The meaning here is, "Let my
wife be the mill-wench to another; be his abject slave, and be treated
by him with the deepest indignity." This passage has been understood by
many in a different sense, which the parallelism might seem to demand,
but which is not necessarily the true interpretation. The sense referred
to is this: Cogatur uxor mea ad patiendum alius concubitum, ut verbum
molendi hoc loco eodem sensu sumatur, quo non raro a Latinis usurpatur
ut in illo Horatii (Satyr. L. i. Ecl. ii. verse 35), alienas permolere
uxores.

In this sense the rabbinic writers understand [Jdg
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#021.md) and [Lam
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#013.md). So also the Chaldee renders the
phrase before us (חורן תשמשעם אנתתי) coeat cure alio uxor mea; and so
the Septuagint seems to have understood it - ἀρέσαι ἄρα κὰι ἡ γυνή μου
ἑτέρῳ aresai ara kai hē gunē mou heterō. But probably Job meant merely
that his wife should be reduced to the condition of servitude, and be
compelled to labor in the employ of another. We may find here an answer
to the opinion of Prof. Lee (in his notes at [Job
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#001).md), that the wife of Job was at
this time dead, and that he was meditating the question about marrying
again. May we not here also find an instance of the fidelity and
forgiving spirit of Job toward a wife who is represented in the early
part of this book as manifesting few qualities which could win the heart
of an husband? There is no expression of impatience at her temper and
her words on the part of Job, and he here speaks of it as the most
serious of all calamities that could happen; the most painful of all
punishments, that that same wife should be reduced to a condition of
servitude and degradation.

[Job 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 31:11</span></span>

For this is an heinous crime - This expresses Job's sense of the
enormity of such an offence. He felt that there was no palliation for
it; he would in no way, and on no pretence, attempt to vindicate it.

An iniquity to be punished by the judges - A crime for the judges to
determine on and decide. The sins which Job had specified before this,
were those of the heart; but here he refers to a crime against society -
an offence which deserved the interposition of the magistrate. It may be
observed here, that adultery has always been regarded as a sin "to be
punished by the judges." In most countries it has been punished with
death; see the notes at [Joh 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#005.md).

[Job 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 31:12</span></span>

For it is a fire that consumeth to destruction - This may mean that such
an offence would be a crime that would provoke God to send destruction,
like a consuming fire upon the offender (Rosenmuller and Noyes), or more
likely it is designed to be descriptive of the nature of the sin itself.
According to this, the meaning is, that indulgence in this sin tends
wholly to ruin and destroy a man. It is like a consuming fire, which
sweeps away everything before it. It is destructive to the body, the
morals, the soul. Accordingly, it may be remarked that there is no one
vice which pours such desolation through the soul as licentiousness. See
Rush on the Diseases of the Mind. It corrupts and taints all the
fountains of morals, and utterly annihilates all purity of the heart. An
intelligent gentleman, and a careful observer of the state of things in
society, once remarked to me, that on coming to the city of
Philadelphia, it was his fortune to be in the same boarding-house with a
number of young men, nearly all of whom were known to him to be of
licentious habits. He has lived to watch their course of life; and he
remarked, that there was not one of them who did not ultimately show
that he was essentially corrupt and unprincipled in every department of
morals. There is not any one propensity of man that spreads such a
withering influence over the soul as this; and, however it may be
accounted for, it is certain that indulgence in this vice is a certain
evidence that the whole soul is corrupt, and that no reliance is to be
placed on the man's virtue in any respect, or in reference to any
relation of life.

And would root out all mine increase - By its desolating effects on my
heart and life. The meaning is, that it would utterly ruin him; compare
[Luk 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#013.md), [Luk
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#030.md). How many a wretched sensualist
can bear testimony to the truth of this statement! How many a young man
has been wholly ruined in reference to his worldly interests, as well as
in reference to his soul, by this vice compare Prov. 7: No young man
could do a better service to himself than to commit the whole of that
chapter to memory, and so engrave it on his soul that it never could be
forgotten.

[Job 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 31:13</span></span>

If I did despise the cause of my man-servant - Job turns to another
subject, on which he claimed that his life had been upright. It was in
reference to the treatment of his servants. The meaning here is, "I
never refused to do strict justice to my servants when they brought
their cause before me, or when they complained that my dealings with
them had been severe."

When they contended with me - That is, when they brought their cause
before me, and complained that I had not provided for them comfortably,
or that their task had been too hard. If in any respect they supposed
they had cause of complaint, I listened to them attentively, and
endeavored to do right. He did not take advantage of his sower to
oppress them, nor did he suppose that they had no rights of any kind. It
is evident, from this, that Job had those who sustained to him the
relation of servants; but whether they were slaves, or hired servants,
is not known. The language here will agree with either supposition,
though it cannot be doubted that slavery was known as early as the time
of Job. There is no certain evidence that he held any slaves, in the
proper sense of the term, nor that he regarded slavery as right; compare
the notes at [Job 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#003.md). He here refers
to the numerous persons that had been in his employ in the days of his
prosperity, and says that he had never taken advantage of his power or
rank to do them wrong.

[Job 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 31:14</span></span>

What then shall I do when God riseth up? - That is, when he rises up to
pronounce sentence upon people, or to execute impartial justice. Job
admits that if he had done injustice to a servant, he would have reason
to dread the divine indignation, and that he could have no excuse. "I
tremble," said President Jefferson, speaking of slavery in the United
States "when I remember that God is just!" Notes on Virginia.

And when he visiteth - When he comes to inspect human conduct. Umbreit
renders it "when he punishes." The word visit is often used in this
sense in the Scriptures.

[Job 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 31:15</span></span>

Did not he that made me in the womb make him? - Had we not one and the
same Creator, and have we not consequently the same nature? We may
observe in regard to this sentiment, (1.) That it indicates a very
advanced state of view in regard to man. The attempt has been always
made by those who wish to tyrannize over others, or who aim to make
slaves of others, to show that they are of a different race, and that in
the design for which they were made, they are wholly inferior. Arguments
have been derived from their complexion, from their supposed inferiority
of intellect, and the deep degradation of their condition, often little
above that of brutes, to prove that they were originally inferior to the
rest of mankind. On this the plea has been often urged, and oftener felt
than urged, that it is right to reduce them to slavery. Since this
feeling so early existed, and since there is so much that may be
plausibly said in defense of it, it shows that Job had derived his views
from something more than the speculations of people, and the desire of
power, when he says that he regarded all people as originally equal, and
as having the same Creator. It is in fact a sentiment which people have
been practically very reluctant to believe, and which works its way very
slowly even yet on the earth; compare [Act
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026). (2..md) This sentiment, if fairly
embraced and carried out, would soon destroy slavery everywhere.

If people felt that they were reducing to bondage those who were
originally on a level with themselves - made by the same God, with the
same faculties, and for the same end; if they felt that in their very
origin, in their nature, there was that which could not be made mere
property, it would soon abolish the whole system. It is kept up only
where people endeavor to convince themselves that there is some original
inferiority in the slave which makes it proper that he should be reduced
to servitude and be held as property. But as soon as there can be
diffused abroad the sentiment of Paul, that "God hath made of one blood
all nations of men," [Act 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026.md), or
the sentiment of the patriarch Job, that "the same God made us and them
in the womb," that moment the shackles of the slave will fall, and he
will be free. Hence it is apparent, how Christianity, that carries this
lesson on its fore-front, is the grand remedy for the evils of slavery,
and needs only to be universally diffused to bring the system to an end.

And did not one fashion us in the womb - Margin, Or, did he not fashion
us in one womb? The Hebrew will bear either construction, but the
parallelism rather requires that given in the text, and most expositors
agree in this interpretation. The sentiment is, whichever interpretation
be adopted, that they had a common origin; that God would watch over
them alike as his children; and that, therefore, they had equal rights.

[Job 31:16](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 31:16</span></span>

If I have withheld the poor from their desire - Job now turns to another
class of virtues, regarded also as of great importance in the
patriarchal ages, kindness to the poor and the afflicted; to the
fatherless and the widow. He appeals to his former life on this subject;
affirms that he had a good conscience in the recollection of his
dealings with them, and impliedly declares that it could not have been
for any deficiency in the exercise of these virtues that his calamities
had come upon him. The meaning here is, that he had not denied to the
poor their wish. If they had come and desired bread of him, he had not
withheld it; see [Job 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#007.md).

Or caused the eyes of the widow to fail - That is, I have not frustrated
her hopes, or disappointed her expectations, when she has looked
intently upon me, and desired my aid. The "failing of the eyes" refers
to failing of the object of their expectation; or the expression means
that she had not looked to him in vain; see [Job
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#020.md).

[Job 31:17](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 31:17</span></span>

Or have eaten my morsel myself alone - If I have not imparted what I had
though ever so small, to others. This was in accordance with the
Oriental laws of hospitality. It is regarded as a fixed law among the
Arabians, that the guest shall always be helped first, and to that which
is best; and no matter how needy the family may be, or how much
distressed with hunger, the settled laws of hospitality demand that the
stranger-guest shall have the first and best portion. Dr. Robinson, in
his "Biblical Researches," gives an amusing instance of the extent to
which this law is carried, and the sternness with which it is executed
among the Arabs. In the journey from Suez to Mount Sinai, intending to
furnish a supper for the Arabs in their employ, he and his
fellow-travelers had bought a kid, and led it along to the place of
their encampment. At night the kid was killed and roasted, and the Arabs
were anticipating a savory supper.

But those of whom they had bought the kid, learned in some way that they
were to encamp near, and naturally concluded that the kid was bought to
be eaten, and followed them to the place of encampment, to the number of
five or six persons. "Now the stern law of Arabian hospitality demands,
that whenever a guest is present at a meal, whether there be much or
little, the first and best portion must be laid before the stranger. In
this instance the five or six guests attained their object, and had not
only the selling of the kid, but also the eating of it, while our poor
Arabs, whose mouths had long been watering with expectation, were forced
to take up with the fragments." Vol. 1:118. There is often, indeed, much
ostentation in the hospitality of the Orientals, but the law is stern
and inflexible. "No sooner," says Shaw (Travels, vol. 1:p. 20), "was our
food prepared, than one of the Arabs, having placed himself on the
highest spot of ground in the neighborhood, called out thrice with a
loud voice to all their brethren, the sons of the faithful, to come and
partake of it; though none of them were in view, or perhaps within a
hundred miles of them." The great law of hospitality Job says he had
carefully observed, and had not withheld what he had from the poor and
the fatherless.

[Job 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 31:18</span></span>

For from my youth he was brought up with me - This verse is usually
regarded as a parenthesis, though very various expositions have been
given of it. Some have understood it as denying that he had in any way
neglected the widow and the fatherless, and affirming that the orphan
had always, even from his youth, found a father in him, and the widow a
guide. Others, as our translators, suppose that it is a parenthesis
thrown in to indicate his general course of life, although the
imprecation which he makes on himself, if he had neglected the widow and
the orphan, is found in [Job 31:22](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#022.md).
Luther reads the two previous verses as questions, and this as an answer
to them, and so also do Rosenmuller and Noyes. Umbreit regards this
verse as a parenthesis. This is probably to be considered as the correct
interpretation, for this better agrees with the Hebrew than the other
proposed. It implies a denial of having neglected the widow and the
orphan, but the full expression of his abhorrence of a charge of having
done so, is to be found in the strong language in [Job
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#022.md). The unusual Hebrew word גדלני
gâdalniy probably stands for עמי גדל gâdal ‛imy - "he was brought up
with me." This form of the word does not occur elsewhere.

As with a father - That is, he always found in me one who treated him as
a father. The meaning is, that he had always had under his care those
who were orphans; that from his very youth they had been accustomed to
look up to him as a father; and that they had never been disappointed in
him. It is the language of one who seems to have been born to rank, and
who had the means of benefiting others, and who had done it all his
life. This accords also with the Oriental notions of kindness -
requiring that it should be shown especially to the widow and the
fatherless.

I have guided her - Margin, "That is, the widow." The meaning is, that
he had been her counsellor and friend.

From my mother's womb - This cannot be literally true, but it means that
he had done it from early life; or as we would say, he had always done
it.

[Job 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 31:19</span></span>

If I have seen any perish ... - He turns to another virtue of the same
general class - that of providing for the poor. The meaning is clear,
that he had always assisted the poor and needy.

[Job 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 31:20</span></span>

If his loins have not blessed me - This is a personification by which
the part of the body that had been clothed by the benevolence of Job, is
supposed to speak and render him thanks.

[Job 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 31:21</span></span>

If I have lifted up my hand against the fatherless - That is, if I have
taken advantage of my rank, influence, and power, to oppress and injure
him.

When I saw my help in the gate - The gate of a city was a place of
concourse; a place where debates were held, and where justice was
administered. Job speaks here of that part of his life when he was
clothed with authority as a magistrate, or when he had power and
influence as a public man. He says that he had never abused this power
to oppress the fatherless. He had never taken advantage of his influence
to injure them, because he saw he had a strong party under his control,
or because he had power enough to carry his point, or because he had
those under him who would sustain him in an oppressive measure. This is
spoken with reference to the usually feeble and defenseless condition of
the orphan, as one who is deprived of his natural protector and who is,
therefore, liable to be wronged by those in power.

[Job 31:22](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 31:22</span></span>

Then let mine arm - The strong language which Job uses here, shows his
consciousness of innocence, and his detestation of the offences to which
he here refers, [Job 31:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#016.md). The
word rendered "arm" here (כתף kâthêph) means properly the shoulder. [Isa
46:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#007.md); [Isa
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#022.md); [Num
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#009.md); compare the notes at [Isa
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#014.md). There is no instance, it is
believed, unless this is one, in which it means arm, and the meaning
here is, that he wished, if he had been guilty, his shoulder might
separate from the blade. So Herder, Rosenmuller, Umbreit, and Noyes
render it; and so the Vulgate and the Septuagint.

From my shoulder-blade - The scapula - the flat bone to which the upper
arm is attached. The wish of Job is, that the shoulder might separate
from that, and of course the arm would be useless. Such a strong
imprecation implies a firm consciousness of innocence.

And mine arm - The word arm here denotes the forearm - the arm from the
elbow to the fingers.

From the bone - Margin, "the chanelbone." Literally, "from the reed" -
מקנה miqâneh. Umbreit renders it, Schneller als ein Rohr - quicker than
a reed. The word קנה qâneh means properly a reed, cane, calamus (see the
notes at [Isa 43:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#024).md), and is here
applied to the upper arm, or arm above the elbow, from its resemblance
to a reed or cane. It is applied, also, to the arm or branch of a
chandelier, or candlestick, [Exo
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031.md), and to the rod or beam of a
balance, Isa. xlvi. 6. The meaning here is, that he wished that his arm
should be broken at the elbow, or the forearm be separated from the
upper arm, if he were guilty of the sins which he had specified. There
is allusion, probably, and there is great force and propriety in the
allusion, to what he had said in [Job
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#002.md) l: "If his arm had been lifted up
against an orphan, he prayed that it might fall powerless."

[Job 31:23](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 31:23</span></span>

For destruction from God was a terror to me - The destruction which God
would bring upon one who was guilty of the crime here specified, awed
and restrained me. He was deterred from this crime of oppressing the
fatherless by the fear of God. He could have escaped the judgment of
people. He had power and influence enough not to dread the penalty of
human law. He could have done it in such a way as not to have been
arraigned before any earthly tribunal, but he remembered that the eye of
God was upon him, and that he was the avenger of the fatherless and the
widow.

And by reason of his highness - On account of his majesty, exaltation,
glory.

I could not endure - אוכל לא lo''ûkôl - I could not; that is, I could
not do it. I was so much awed by his majesty; I had such a veneration
for him, that I could not be guilty of such an offence.

[Job 31:24](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 31:24</span></span>

If I have made gold my hope - That is, if I have put my trust in gold
rather than in God; if I have fixed my affections with idolatrous
attachment on riches rather than on my Maker. Job here introduces
another class of sins, and says that his conscience did not charge him
with guilt in respect to them. He had before spoken mainly of social
duties, and of his manner of life toward the poor, the needy, the widow,
and the orphan. He here turns to the duty which he owed to God, and says
that his conscience did not charge him with idolatry in any form. He had
indeed been rich, but he had not fixed his affections with idolatrous
attachment on his wealth.

Or have said to fine gold - The word used here (כתם kethem) is the same
which is employed in [Job 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#016.md), to
denote the gold of Ophir. It is used to express that which was most pure
- from the verb כתם kâtham - to hide, to hoard, and then denoting that
which was hidden, hoarded, precious. The meaning is, that he had not put
his trust in that which was most sought after, and which was deemed of
the highest value by people.

[Job 31:25](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 31:25</span></span>

If I have rejoiced because my wealth was great - That is, if I have
rejoiced as if I might now confide in it, or put my trust in it. He had
not found his principal joy in his property, nor had he attempted to
find in that the happiness which he ought to seek in God.

And because mine hand had gotten much - Margin, found. Prof. Lee
translates this, "When as a mighty man my hand prevailed." But the usual
interpretation is given in our translation, and this accords better with
the connection. The word found better expresses the sense of the Hebrew
than gotten, but the sense is not materially varied.

[Job 31:26](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 31:26</span></span>

If I beheld the sun when it shined - Margin, light. The Hebrew word (אור
'ôr) properly means light, but that it here means the sun is manifest
from the connection, since the moon occurs in the parallel member of the
sentence. Why the word light is used here rather than sun, can be only a
matter of conjecture. It may be because the worship to which Job refers
was not primarily and originally that of the sun, the moon, or the
stars, but of light as such, and that he mentions this as the essential
feature of the idolatry which he had avoided. The worship of light in
general soon became in fact the worship of the sun - as that is the
principal source of light. There is no doubt that Job here refers to
idolatrous worship, and the passage is particularly valuable, as it
describes one of the forms of idolatry then existing, and refers to some
of the customs then prevalent in such worship.

The word light is used, also, to denote the sun in [Job
37:2](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#002.md) l; compare [Isa
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#004.md); [Hab
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#004.md). So, also, Homer speaks of the sun
not only as λαμπρὸν φάος ἡελίοιο lampron faos hēelioio - bright light of
the sun, but simply as φάος faos - light. Odyssey r. 335. The worship
here referred to is that of the heavenly bodies, and it is known that
this existed in the early periods of the world, and was probably one of
the first forms of idolatry. It is expressly mentioned by Ezekiel as
prevailing in his time, [Eze 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#016.md),
"And they worshipped the sun toward the east." That it prevailed in the
time of Moses, is evident from the caution which he gives in [Deu
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#019.md); compare [Kg2
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#005.md). It is well known, also, that the
worship of the heavenly bodies was common in the East, and particularly
in Chaldea - near to which Job is supposed to have lived, and it was a
remarkable fact that one who was surrounded with idolaters of this
description had been enabled always to keep himself pure.

The principle on which this worship was founded was, probably, that of
gratitude. People adored the objects from which they derived important
benefits, as well as deprecated the wrath of those which were supposed
to exert a malignant influence. But among the objects from which people
derived the greatest benefits were the sun and moon, and hence, they
were objects of worship. The stars, also, were supposed to exert
important influences over people, and hence, they also early became
objects of adoration. An additional reason for the worship of the
heavenly bodies may have been, that light was a natural and striking
symbol of the divinity, and those shining bodies may have been at first
honored as representatives of the Deity. The worship of the heavenly
bodies was called Sabaism, from the Hebrew word צבא tsâbâ' - host, or
army - as being the worship of the hosts of heaven.

It is supposed to have had its origin in Persia, and to have spread
thence to the West. That the moon was worshipped as a deity, is
abundantly proved by the testimony of the ancient writers. Hottinger,
Hist. Orient. Lib. 1:c. 8, speaking of the worship of the Zabaists,
adduces the testimony of Ali Said Vaheb, saying that the first day of
the week was devoted to the sun; the second to the moon; the third to
Mars, etc. Maimonides says that the Zabaists worshipped the moon, and
that they also said that Adam led mankind to that species of worship.
Mor. Nev. P. 3: Clemens Alexandr. says (in Protrepto) κὰι προσεκίνησαν
ἥλιον ὡς ἰνδοὶ κὰι σελήνην ὡς φρύγες kai prosekinēsan hēlion hōs indoi
kai selēnēn hōs fruges. Curtius says of the people of Lybia (Liv. iv. in
Melp.) θυὸνσι δὲ ἡλίῳ κὰι οελήνη μόυνοισι thuousi de hēliō kai oelēnē
mounoisi.

Julius Caesar says of the Germans, that they worshipped the moon, Lib.
6: de B. G. p. 158. The Romans had a temple consecrated to the moon,
Taci. Ann. Lib. 15: Livy, L. 40: See Geor. Frid. Meinhardi Diss. de
Selenolatria, in Ugolin's Thesau. Sacr. Tom. 23:p. 831ff. Indeed, we
have a proof of the worship of the moon in our own language, in the name
given to the second day of the week - Monday, i. e. moon-day, implying
that it was formerly regarded as devoted to the worship of the moon. The
word "beheld" in the passage before us must be understood in an
idolatrous sense. "If I have looked upon the sun as an object of
worship." Schultens explains this passage as referring to splendid and
exalted characters, who, on account of their brilliance and power, may
be compared to the sun at noon-day, and to the moon in its brightness.
But the more obvious and common reference is to the sun and moon as
objects of worship.

Or the moon walking in brightness - Margin, bright. The word "walking,"
here applied to the moon, may refer either to its course through the
heavens, or it may mean, as Dr. Good supposes, advancing to her full;
"brightly, or splendidly progressive." The Septuagint renders the
passage strangely enough. "Do we not see the shining sun eclipsed? and
the moon changing? For it is not in them."

[Job 31:27](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 31:27</span></span>

And my heart hath been secretly enticed - That is, away from God, or led
into sin.

Or my mouth hath kissed my hand - Margin, my hand hath kissed my mouth.
The margin accords with the Hebrew. It was customary in ancient worship
to kiss the idol that was worshipped; compare [Kg1
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018.md), "I have left me seven thousand
in Israel - and every mouth which hath not kissed him." See, also, [Hos
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#002.md). The Muslims at the present day,
in their worship at Mecca, kiss the black stone which is fastened in the
corner of the Beat Allah, as often as they pass it, in going round the
Caaba. If they cannot come near enough to kiss it, they touch it with
the hand, and kiss that. An Oriental pays his respects to one of a
superior station by kissing his hand and putting it to his forehead.
Paxton. See the custom of kissing the hand of a Prince, as it exists in
Arabia, described by Niebuhr, Reisebeschreib. 1, S. 414. The custom
prevailed, also, among the Romans and Greeks. Thus, Pliny (Hist. Nat.
28:2) says, Inter adorandum dexterarm ad osculum referimus, et totum
corpus circumagimus. So Lucian in the book, περὶ ὀρχήτεως peri
orchēseōs, says, "And the Indians, rising early, adore the sun - not as
we, kissing the hand - τὴν χείρα κύσαντες tēn cheira kusantes - think
that our vow is perfect." The foundation of the custom here alluded to,
is the respect and affection which is shown for one by kissing; and as
the heavenly bodies which were worshipped were so remote that the
worshippers could not have access to them, they expressed their
veneration by kissing the hand. Job means to say, that he had never
performed an act of homage to the heavenly bodies.

[Job 31:28](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 31:28</span></span>

This also were an iniquity to be punished by the judqe - Note [Job
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#011.md). Among the Hebrews idolatry was
an offence punishable by death by stoning; [Deu
17:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#002.md). It is possible, also, that
this might have been elsewhere in the patriarchal times a crime
punishable in this manner. At all events, Job regarded it as a heinous
offence, and one of which the magistrate ought to take cognizance.

For I should have denied the God that is above - The worship of the
heavenly bodies would have been in fact the denial of the existence of
any Superior Being. This, in fact, always occurs, for idolaters have no
knowledge of the true God.

[Job 31:29](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 31:29</span></span>

If I rejoiced at the destruction of him that hated me - Job here
introduces another class of offences, of which he says he was innocent.
The subject referred to is the proper treatment of those who injure us.
In respect to this, he says that he was entirely conscious of freedom
from exultation when calamity came upon a foe, and that he had never
even wished him evil in his heart. The word "destruction" here, means
calamity, disappointment, or affliction of any kind. It had never been
pleasant to him to see one who hated him suffer. It is needless to
remark how entirely this accords with the New Testament. And it is
pleasant to find such a sentiment as this expressed in the early age of
the world, and to see how the influence of true religion is at all times
the same. The religion of Job led him to act out the beautiful sentiment
afterward embodied in the instructions of the Savior, and made binding
on all his followers; [Mat 5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044.md). True
religion will lead a man to act out what is embodied in its precepts,
whether they are expressed in formal language or not.

Or lifted up myself - Been elated or rejoiced.

When evil found him - When calamity overtook him.

[Job 31:30](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">job 31:30</span></span>

Neither have I suffered my mouth - Margin, as in Hebrew, palate. The
word is often used for the mouth in general, and especially as the organ
of the voice from the use and importance of the palate in speaking. [Pro
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#007). "For my palate (חכי chikiy.md)
speaketh truth." It is used as the organ of taste, [Job
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#011.md); compare [Job
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#030.md); [Psa
119:103](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#103.md).

By wishing a curse to his soul - It must have been an extraordinary
degree of piety which would permit a man to say this with truth, that he
had never harbored a wish of injury to an enemy. Few are the people,
probably, even now, who could say this, and who are enabled to keep
their minds free from every wish that calamities and woes may overtake
those who are seeking their hurt. Yet this is the nature of true
religion. It controls the heart, represses the angry and revengeful
feelings, and creates in the soul an earnest desire for the happiness
even of those who injure us.

[Job 31:31](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">job 31:31</span></span>

If the men of my tabernacle - The men of my tent; or those who dwell
with me. The reference is doubtless to those who were in his employ, and
who, being constantly with him, had an opportunity to observe his manner
of life. On this verse there has been a great variety of exposition, and
interpreters are by no means agreed as to its meaning. Herder connects
it with the previous verse, and renders it,

"No! my tongue uttered no evil word,

Nor any imprecation against him,

When the men of my tent said,

'O that we had his flesh, it would satisfy us.'"

That is, though he were the bitterest enemy of my house, and all were in
open violence. Noyes translates it,

"Have not the men of my tent exclaimed,

'Who is there that hath not been satisfied with his meat?'"

Umbreit supposes that it is designed to celebrate the benevolence of
Job, and that the meaning is, that all his companions - the inmates of
his house - could bear him witness that not one of the poor was allowed
to depart without being satisfied with his hospitality. They were
abundantly fed, and their needs supplied. The verse is undoubtedly to be
regarded as connected, as Ikenius supposes, with the following, and is
designed to illustrate the hospitality of Job. His object is to show
that those who dwelt with him, and who had every opportunity of knowing
all about him, could never say that the stranger was not hospitably
entertained. The phrase, "If the men of my tabernacle said not," means,
that a case never occurred in which they could not make use of the
language which follows, they never could say that the stranger was not
hospitably entertained.

Oh that we had - The phrase נתן מי mı̂y nâthan, commonly means, "O that"
- as the Latin Utinam - implying a wish or desire. See [Job
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#023.md); [Job
31:35](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#035.md). But here the phrase seems to be
used in the sense of "Who will give, or who will show or furnish"
(compare [Job 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#004).md); and the sense is,
"Who will refer to one instance in which the stranger has not been
hospitably entertained?"

Of his flesh! we cannot be satisfied - Or, rather, "Who will refer to an
instance in which it can be said that we have not been satisfied from
his flesh, that is, from his table, or by his hospitality?" The word
flesh here cannot mean, as our translation would seem to imply, the
flesh of Job himself, as if it were to be torn and lacerated with a
spirit of revenge, but that which his table furnished by a generous
hospitality. The Septuagint renders this, "If my maid-servants have
often said, O that we had some of his flesh to eat! while I was living
luxuriously." For a great variety of opinions on the passage, see
Schultens in loc. The above interpretation of Ikenius is the most
simple, natural, and obvious of any which have been proposed, and is
adopted by Schultens and Rosenmuller.

[Job 31:32](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">job 31:32</span></span>

The stranger did not lodge in the street - This is designed to
illustrate the sentiment in the previous verse, and to express his
consciousness that he had showed the most generous hospitality.

But I opened my doors to the traveler - Margin, or way. The word used
here ארח 'ôrach means properly way, path, road; but it also denotes
those who travel on such a way; see [Job
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#019.md), "The troops of Tema looked,"
Hebrew ארח תימא têymâ' 'ôrach - the ways, or paths of Tema; that is,
those who traveled in those paths. Vulgate here, viatori. Septuagint,
"To everyone that came" - παντί ἐλθόντι panti elthonti. This was one of
the methods of hospitality - the central and crowning virtue among the
Arabs to this day, and among the Orientals in all ages. Among the boasts
of hospitality, showing the place which this virtue had in their
estimation, and the methods by which it was practiced, we may refer to
such expressions as the following: "I occupy the public way with my
tent;" that is, to every traveler without distinction, my tent is open
and my table is spread. "He makes the public path the place for the
cords of his tent;" that is, he fixed the pins and cords of his tent in
the midst of the public highway, so that every traveler might enter.
These examples are quoted by Schultens from the Hamasa. Another
beautiful example may be taken from the same collection of Arabic poems.
I give the Latin translation of Schultens:

Quam saepe latratum imitanti viatori, cui resonabat echo

Suscitavi ignem, cujus lignum luculentum

Properusque surrexi ad eum, ut praedae mihi loco esset,

Prae metu ne populus mens eum ante me occuparet.

That is, "How often to the traveler, imitating the bark of the dog, and
the echo of whose voice was heard, have I kindled a fire, the shining
wood of which I quick raised up to him, as one would hasten to the prey,
in fear lest someone of my own people should anticipate me in the
privileges and rites of hospitality." The allusion to the imitation of
the barking of a dog here, refers to the custom of travelers at night,
who make this noise when they need a place of rest. This sound is
responded to by the dogs which watch around the tents of their masters,
and the sound is the signal for a general rush to show hospitality to
the stranger. Burckhardt, speaking of the inhabitants of the Houran -
the country east of the Jordan, and south of Damascus, says, "A traveler
may alight at any house he pleases; a mat will be immediately spread for
him, coffee made, and a breakfast or dinner set before him. In entering
a village it has often happened to me, that several persons presented
themselves, each begging that I would lodge at his house. It is a point
of honor with the host never to receive the smallest return from a
guest. Besides the private habitations, which offer to every traveler a
secure night's shelter, there is in every village the Medhafe of the
Sheikh, where all strangers of decent appearance are received and
entertained. It is the duty of the Sheikh to maintain this Medhafe,
which is like a tavern, with the difference that the host himself pays
the bill. The Sheikh has public allowance to defray these expenses, and
hence a man of the Houran, intending to travel about for a fortnight
never thinks of putting a single para in his pocket; he is sure of being
every where well received, and of living better, perhaps, than at his
own home." Travels in Syria, pp. 294, 295.

[Job 31:33](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">job 31:33</span></span>

If I covered my transgressions as Adam - That is, if I have attempted to
hide or conceal them; if, conscious of guilt, I have endeavored to cloak
my sins, and to appear righteous. There has been great variety of
opinion about the meaning of this expression. The margin reads it,
"After the manner of men." Luther, renders it, "Have I covered my
wickedness as a man" - Habe ich meine Schalkheit wie ein Menseh gedecht.
Coverdale, "Have I ever done any wicked deed where through I shamed
myself before men." Herder, "Did I hide my faults like a mean man."
Schultens, "If I have covered my sin as Adam." The Vulgate, Quasi homo -
"as a man." The Septuagint, "If when I sinned unwillingly (ᾶκουσίως
akousiōs - inadvertently, undesignedly) I concealed my sin." Noyes,
"After the manner of men." Umbreit, Nach Menschenart - "After the manner
of men." Rosenmuller, As Adam. The Chaldee, כאדם, meaning, as
Rosenmuller remarks, as Adam; and the Syriac, As men.

The meaning may either be, as people are accustomed to do when they
commit a crime - referring to the common practice of the guilty to
attempt to cloak their offences, or to the attempt of Adam to hide his
sin from his Maker after the fall; [Gen
3:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#007.md). It is not possible to decide
with certainty which is the correct interpretation, for either will
accord with the Hebrew. But in favor of the supposition that it refers
to the effort of Adam to conceal his sin, we may remark, (1.) That there
can be little or no doubt that that transaction was known to Job by
tradition. (2.) it furnished him a pertinent and striking illustration
of the point before him. (3.) the illustration is, by supposing that it
refers to him, much more striking than on the other supposition. It is
true that people often attempt to conceal their guilt, and that it may
be set down as a fact very general in its character; but still it is not
so universal that there are no exceptions. But here was a specific and
well-known case, and one which, as it was the first, so it was the most
sad and melancholy instance that had ever occurred of an attempt to
conceal guilt. It was not an attempt, to hide it from man - for there
was then no other man to witness it; but an attempt to hide it from God.
From such an attempt Job says he was free.

By hiding mine iniquity in my bosom - By attempting to conceal it so
that others would not know it. Adam attempted to conceal his fault even
from God; and it is common with people, when they have done wrong, to
endeavor to hide it from others.

[Job 31:34](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">job 31:34</span></span>

Did I fear a great multitude - Our translators have rendered this as if
Job meant to say that he had not been deterred from doing what he
supposed was right by the fear of others; as if he had been independent,
and had done what he knew to be right, undeterred by the fear of popular
fury, or the loss of the favor of the great. This version is adopted
also by the Vulgate, by Herder, and substantially by Coverdale and
Luther. Another interpretation has, however, been proposed, and is
adopted by Schultens, Noyes, Good, Umbreit, Dathe, and Scott, which is,
that this is to be regarded as an imprecations, or that this is the
punishment which he invoked and expected if he had been guilty of the
crime which is specified in the previous verses. The meaning then would
be "Then let me be confounded before the great multitude! Let the
contempt of families cover me with shame! Let me keep silence, and let
me never appear abroad!" The Hebrew will admit of either construction,
and either of them will accord well with the connection. The latter,
however, regarding it as an imprecation, seems to me to be preferable,
for two reasons:

\(1\) It will accord more forcibly with what he had said in the previous
verse. The sense then would be, as expressed by Patrick, "If I have
studied to appear better than I am, and have not made a free confession,
but, like our first parent, have concealed or excused my faults, and,
out of self-love, have hidden mine iniquity, because I dread what the
people will say of me, or am terrified by the contempt into which the
knowledge of my guilt will bring me with the neighboring families, then
am I content my mouth should be stopped, and that I never stir out of my
door any more."

\(2\) This interpretation seems to be required, in order to make a
proper close of his remarks. The general course in this chapter has been
to specify an offence, and then to utter an imprecation if he had been
guilty of it. In the previous verses he had specified crimes of which he
had declared himself innocent; but unless this verse be so regarded,
there is no invocation of any corresponding punishment if he had been
guilty. It seems probable, therefore, that this verse is so to be
regarded. According to this, the phrase "Did I fear a great multitude"
means, "Then let me be terrified by a multitude - by the opinions of the
world, and let this be the punishment of my sin. Since by the fear of
others I was led to hide my sin in my bosom, let it be my lot to lose
all popular favor, and feel that I am the object of public scorn and
contempt!"

Or did the contempt of families terrify me - Let the contempt of
families crush me; let me be despised and abhorred by them. If I was led
to hide sins in my bosom because I feared them, then let me be doomed to
the total loss of their favor, and become wholly the object of their
scorn.

That I kept silence - Or let me keep silence as a punishment. That is,
let me not be admitted as a counsellor, or allowed to express my
sentiments in the public assemblies.

And went not out at the door - That is, "Let me not go out at the door.
Let me be confined to my dwelling, and never be allowed to appear in
public, to mingle in society, to take part in public affairs - because
by the fear of the world I attempted to hide my faults in my bosom. Such
a punishment would be appropriate to such an offence. The retribution
would be no more than a suitable recompense for such an act of guilt -
and I would not shrink from it."

[Job 31:35](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">job 31:35</span></span>

O that one would hear me! - This refers undoubtedly to God. It is,
literally, "Who will give to me one hearing me;" and the wish is that
which he has so often expressed, that he might get his cause fairly
before God. He feels assured that there would be a favorable verdict, if
there could be a fair judicial investigation; compare the notes at [Job
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#003.md).

Behold, my desire is - Margin, "Or, my sign is that 'the Almighty will
answer me.'" The word rendered in the text desire, and in the margin
sign, (תו tâv), means properly a mark, or sign, and is also the name of
the last letter of the Hebrew alphabet. Then the word means, according
to Gesenius (Lex.), a mark, or cross, as subscribed to a bill of
complaint; hence, the bill itself, or, as we should say, the pleading.
According to this, Job means to say that he was ready for trial, and
that there was his bill of complaint, or his pleading, or his bill of
defense. So Herder renders it, "See my defense." Coverdale, "Lo, this is
my cause." Miss Smith renders it, "Behold my gage!" Umbreit, Meinel
Kagschrift - My accusation. There can be no doubt that it refers to the
forms of a judicial investigation, and that the idea is, that Job was
ready for the trial. "Here" says he, "is my defense, my argument, my
pleading, my bill! I wait that my adversary should come to the trial."
The name used here as given to the bill or pleading (תו tâv, mark, or
sign), probably had its origin from the fact that some mark was affixed
to it - of some such significance as a seal - by which it was certified
to be the real bill of the party, and by which he acknowledged it as his
own. This might have been done by signing his name, or by some
conventional mark that was common in those times.

That the Almighty would answer me - That is, answer me as on trial; that
the cause might be fairly brought to an issue. This wish he had
frequently expressed.

And that mine adversary - God; regarded as the opposite party in the
suit.

Had written a book - Or, would write down his charge. The wish is, that
what God had against him were in like manner entered in a bill or
pleading that the charge might be fairly investigated. On the word book,
compare the notes at [Job 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#023.md). It
means here a pleading in court, a bill, or charge against anyone. There
is no irreverence in the language here. Job is anxious that his true
character should be investigated, and that the great matter at issue
should be determined; and he draws his language and illustrations from
well-known practices in courts of law.

[Job 31:36](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">job 31:36</span></span>

Surely, I would take it upon my shoulder - That is, the book or bill
which the Almighty would write in the case. Job says that he has such
confidence that what God would record in his case would be in his favor,
such confidence that he had no charge of hypocrisy against him, and that
he who knew him altogether would not bring such an accusation against
him, that he would bear it off triumphantly on his shoulders. It would
be all that he could desire. This does not refer to what a judge would
decide if the cause were submitted to him, but to a case where an
opponent or adversary in court should bring all that he could say
against him. He says that he would bear even such a bill on his
shoulders in triumph, and that it would be a full vindication of his
innocence. It would afford him the best vindication of his character,
and would be that which he had long desired.

And bind it as a crown to me - I would regard it as an ornament - a
diadem. I would bind it on my head as a crown is worn by princes, and
would march forth exultingly with it. Instead of covering me with shame,
it would be the source of rejoicing, and I would exhibit it every where
in the most triumphant manner. It is impossible for anyone to express a
more entire consciousness of innocence from charges alleged against him
than Job does by this language.

[Job 31:37](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">job 31:37</span></span>

I would declare unto him the number of my steps - That is, I would
disclose to him the whole course of my life. This is language also
appropriate to a judicial trial, and the meaning is, that Job was so
confident of his integrity that he would approach God and make his whole
course of life known to him.

As a prince would I go near unto him - With the firm and upright step
with which a prince commonly walks. I would not go in a base, cringing
manner, but in a manner that evinced a consciousness of integrity. I
would not go bowed down under the consciousness of guilt, as a
self-condemned malefactor, but with the firm and elastic foot-tread of
one conscious of innocence. It must be remembered that all this is said
with reference to the charges which had been brought against him by his
friends, and not as claiming absolute perfection. He was accused of
gross hypocrisy, and it was maintained that he was suffering the
judicial infliction of heaven on account of that. So far as those
charges were concerned, he now says that he could go before God with the
firm and elastic tread of a prince - with entire cheerfulness and
boldness. We are not, however, to suppose that he did not regard himself
as having the common infirmities and sinfulness of our fallen nature.
The discussion does not turn at all on that point.

[Job 31:38](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">job 31:38</span></span>

If my land cry against me - This is a new specification of an offence,
and an imprecation of an appropriate punishment if he had been guilty of
it. Many have supposed that these closing verses have been transferred
from their appropriate place by an error of transcribers, and that they
should have been inserted between [Job
31:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#023.md) - or in some previous part of
the chapter. It is certain that [Job
31:35-37](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#035.md) would make an appropriate and
impressive close of the chapter, being a solemn appeal to God in
reference to all the specifications, or to the general tenor of his
life; but there is no authority from the MSS. to make any change in the
present arrangement. All the ancient versions insert the verses in the
place which they now occupy, and in this all versions agree, except,
according to Kennicott, the Teutonic version, where they are inserted
after [Job 31:25](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#025.md). All the MSS. also
concur in the present arrangement.

Schultens supposes that there is manifest pertinency and propriety in
the present arrangement. The former specification, says he, related
mainly to his private life, this to his more public conduct; and the
design is to vindicate himself from the charge of injustice and crime in
both respects, closing appropriately with the latter. Rosenmuller
remarks that in a composition composed in an age and country so remote
as this, we are not to look for or demand the observance of the same
regularity which is required by the modern canons of criticism. At all
events, there is no authority for changing the present arrangement of
the text. The meaning of the phrase "if my land cry out against me" is,
that in the cultivation of his land he had not been guilty of injustice.
He had not employed those to till it who had been compelled to do it,
nor had he imposed on them unreasonable burdens, nor had he defrauded
them of their wages. The land had not had occasion to cry out against
him to God, because fraud or injustice had been done to any in its
cultivation; compare [Gen 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#010.md); Hab.
ii. 11.

Or that the furrows likewise thereof complain - Margin, weep. The Hebrew
is, "If the furrows weep together," or "in like manner weep." This is a
beautiful image. The very furrows in the field are personified as
weeping on account of injustice which would be done them, and of the
burdens which would be laid on them, if they were compelled to
contribute to oppression and fraud.

[Job 31:39](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">job 31:39</span></span>

If I have eaten the fruits thereof - Margin, strength. The strength of
the earth is that which the earth produces or which is the result of its
strength. We speak now of a "strong soil " - meaning that it is capable
of bearing much.

Without money - Hebrew "without silver " - silver being the principal
circulating medium in early times. The meaning here is, "without paying
for it;" either without having paid for the land, or for the labor. "Or
have caused the owners thereof." Margin, the soul of the owners thereof
to expire, or breathe out. The Hebrew is, "If I have caused the life of
the owners (or lords) of it to breathe out." The meaning is, if I have
appropriated to myself the land or labor of others without paying for
it, so that their means of living are taken away. He disclaims all
injustice in the case. He had not deprived others of their land by
violence or fraud, so that they had no means of subsistence.

[Job 31:40](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">job 31:40</span></span>

Let thistles grow; - [Gen 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#018.md).
Thistles are valueless; and Job is so confident of entire innocence in
regard to this, that he says he would be willing, if he were guilty, to
have his whole land overrun with noxious weeds.

And cockle - Cockle is a well known herb that gets into wheat or other
grain. It has a bluish flower, and small black seed, and is injurious
because it tends to discolor the flour. It is not certain by any means,
however, that this is intended here. The margin is, noisome weeds. The
Hebrew word באשׁה bo'shâh is from באשׁ bâ'ash, "to have a bad smell, to
stink," and was given to the weed here referred to on that account,
compare [Isa 34:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#003.md). The cockle however,
has no unpleasant odor, and the word here probably means noxious weeds.
So it is rendered by Herder and by Noyes. The Septuagint has βάτος
batos, bramble; the Vulgate, spina, thorn; Prof. Lee, prunus sylvestris,
"a bramble resembling the hawthorn;" Schultens, labrusca, wild vine.

The words of Job are ended - That is, in the present speech or argument;
his discussions with his friends are closed. He spoke afterward, as
recorded in the subsequent chapters, but not in controversy with them.
He had vindicated his character, sustained his positions, and they had
nothing to reply. The remainder of the book is occupied mainly with the
speech of Elihu, and with the solemn and sublime address which God
himself makes.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 32](job032.md)

</div>
