<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job001)  [Next](job003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#001)

[Job 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 2:1</span></span>

Again there was a day ... - See the notes at [Job
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006). These seasons are represented as
periodical, when the angels came, as it were, to make report to God of
what they had observed and done. The Chaldee renders this, "And there
was a day of the great judgment (רבא דינא יום yôm dı̂ynā' rābā'), a day
of the remission of sins (שבוק יום סרחניא) and there came bands (כתי) of
angels."

To present himself before the Lord - This does not occur in the former
statement in [Job 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006). It here means
that he came before the Lord after he had had permission to afflict;
Job. The Chaldee renders it "that he might stand in judgment דין dı̂yn
before the Lord."

[Job 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 2:2</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Satan ... - See the notes at [Job
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#007).

[Job 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 2:3</span></span>

Hast thou considered - Notes, [Job
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#008).

That there is none like him in the earth - The same addition is made
here by the Septuagint which occurs in [Job
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001); see the notes at that verse.

And still he holdeth fast his integrity - Notwithstanding all the
efforts made to show that his piety was the result of mere selfishness.
The word "integrity" here תמה tûmmâh means "perfection;" another form of
the word which is rendered "perfect" in [Job
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001); see the notes at that verse.

Although thou movedst me - The word rendered "movedst" סוּת sûth means
to incite, to impel, to urge, to irritate against anyone; [Jos
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#018); [Jdg
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#014); [Ch2
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#002); [Sa1
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#019); [Jer
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#003). The Septuagint renders this in a
special manner, "And thou hast ordered (εἶπας eipas) his property to be
destroyed in vain" (διακενῆς diakenēs), that is, without accomplishing
the purpose intended.

To destroy him - The word used here (from בלע bela‛) means properly to
swallow, to devour, with the idea of eagerness or greediness. It is then
used in the sense of to consume, or destroy; compare [Job
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#018); [Pro
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#012); [Num
16:30](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#030); [Psa
69:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#015). In the margin it is rendered
"swallow him up."

Without cause - Without any sufficient reason. The cause assigned by
Satan [Job 1:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#009) was, that the piety
of Job was selfish, and that if God should remove his possessions, he
would show that he had no true religion. God says now that it was
demonstrated that there was no reason for having made the trial. The
result had shown that the charge was unfounded, and that his piety still
remained, though he was stripped of all that he had. This passage may
remind us of the speech of Neptune in favor of Aeneas, Iliad v. 297:

And can ye see this righteous chief atone

With guiltless blood for vices not his own?

To all the gods his constant vows were paid;

Sure though he wars for Troy he claims our aid.

Fate wills not this - Pope

[Job 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 2:4</span></span>

Skin for skin - This is a proverbial expression, whose origin is
unknown, nor is its meaning as "a proverb" entirely clear. The general
sense of the passage here is plain, for it is immediately explained that
a man would give everything which he had to save his life; and the idea
here is, that if Job was so afflicted in his body that he was likely to
die, he would give up all his religion in order to purchase life. His
religion, which had berne the comparatively trifling test before applied
to it, would not bear the severer trial if his life was endangered. In
regard to the proverb itself, a great variety of explanations has been
given. The ancient versions throw no light on it. The Vulgate renders
it, "Pellem pro pelle." The Septuagint Δέρμα ὑπέρ δέρυατος derma huper
dermatos - skin for, or instead of, skin. The Chaldee renders it,
"member for member," אברא אמטול אברא - and the author of that paraphrase
seems to have supposed that it means that a man would give the members
of his body or his limbs to preserve his life. Parkhurst renders it,
"skin after skin," meaning, as he explains it, that a man may bear to
part with all that he has, and even to have his skin, as it were,
stripped off again and again, provided only that his life is safe. Noyes
supposes that it means that any man will give the skin or life of
another, whether animal or man, to save his own; and that: Job gave up
all, without complaint, from the selfish fear of exposing his own life
to danger. Dr. Good remarks on the passage, that the skins or spoils of
beasts, in the rude and early ages of man, were the most valuable
property he could acquire, and that for which he most frequently
combated. Thus, Lucretius says,

Tam igitur "pelles," nunc aurum et purpura, curis

Exercent hominum vitam, belloque fatigant.

v\. 1422.

"Then man for "skins" contended; purple now,

And gold, forever plunge him into war."

In various parts of the book of Job, however, Dr. Good remarks, the word
skin imports the "person" of a man as well as his "property," the whole
living body which it envelopes, as in [Job
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#013); [Job
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026). "It is," says he, "upon the
double meaning of the same term, and the play which is here given to it,
by employing the term first in one sense and then in the other, that the
gist of the proverb, as of a thousand others similarly constructed,
depends. 'Skin for skin' is in this view, in plain English, 'property
for person,' or 'the skin forming property for the skin forming
person.'" See a somewhat similar view presented by Callaway, in Bush's
Illustrations, "in loco." The editor of the Pictorial Bible coincides
mainly with this view, and supposes that the reference is to the time
when trade was conducted by barter, and when the skins of animals, being
a most frequent and valuable commodity, were used to represent property.

Tributes, ransoms, etc., he observes, were paid in skins. According to
this, it means that a man would give "skin upon skin;" that is, would
pile one piece of property upon another, and give "all" that he had, in
order to save his life. It refers to the necessity of submitting to one
great evil rather than incur a greater, answering to the Turkish
proverb, "We must give our beards to save our heads." According to
Gesenius, it means "life for life." Drusius explains it as meaning, that
he would give the skin of others, as of his sons, to save his own; that
is, that he was unmoved so long as his own skin or life was safe. The
same view is given by Ephrem the Syrian. "Skin for skin; the skin not
only of flocks, but even of his sons will he give, in order to save his
own." This view also is adopted by Urnbreit. That is, his religion was
supremely selfish. The loss of property and even of children he could
bear, provided his person was untouched.

His own health, and life; his own skin and body were dearer to him than
anything else. Other people would have been afflicted by the loss of
children and property. But Job was willing to part with any or all of
these, provided he himself was safe. Rosenmuller supposes that the word
skin here is used for the whole body; and says that the sense is, that
he would give the body of another for his own, as in [Exo
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#023). "The meaning of this proverbial
formula," says he, "is, that any one would redeem his own safety by the
skin of others; that is, not only by the skins or lives of oxen, camels,
servants, but even of his own children." Schultens supposes it means
that a man would submit to any sufferings in order to save his life;
that he would be willing to be flayed alive; to be repeatedly
excoriated; to have, so to speak. one skin stripped off after another,
if he might save his own life.

According to this, the idea is, that the loss of life was the great
calamity to be feared, and that a man would give "any" thing in order to
save it. Umbreit says, "there is nothing so valuable to a man that he
will not exchange it - one thing for another; one outward good for
another, 'skin for skin.' But life, the inward good, is to him of no
value that can be estimated. That he will give for nothing; and much
more, he will offer everything for that." Another solution is offered in
the Biblische Untersuchungen ii. Th. s. 88. "Before the use of gold,
traffic was conducted chiefly by barter. Men exchanged what was valuable
to themselves for what others had which they wanted. Those who hunted
wild beasts would bring their skins to market, and would exchange them
for bows and arrows. Since these traffickers were exposed to the danger
of being robbed, they often took with them those who were armed, who
agreed to defend them on condition that they should have a part of the
skins which they took, and in this way they purchased their property and
life."

That is, they gave the skins of animals for the safety of their own; all
that they had they would surrender, in order that their lives might be
saved. See Rosenmuller's Morgenland, "in loc." None of these solutions
appear to me perfectly satisfactory, and the proverb is involved in
perplexity still. It seems to refer to some kind of barter or exchange,
and to mean that a man would give up one thing for another; or one piece
of property of less value in order to save a greater; and that in like
manner he would be willing to surrender "everything," in order that his
life, the most valuable object, might be preserved. But the exact
meaning of the proverb, I suspect, has not yet been perceived.

Yea, all that a man hath - This is evidently designed to express the
same thing as the proverb, "skin for skin," or to furnish an
illustration of that. The meaning is plain. A man is willing to
surrender all that he has, in order to preserve his life. He will part
with property and friends, in order that he may be kept alive. if a man
therefore is to be reached in the most tender and vital part; if any
thing is to be done that shall truly reveal his character, his life must
be put in danger, and his true character will then be revealed. The
object of Satan is to say, that a test had not been applied to Job of
sufficient severity to show what he really was. What he had lost was a
mere trifle compared with what would be if he was subjected to severe
bodily sufferings, so that his life would be in peril. it is to be
remembered that these are the words of Satan, and that they are not
necessarily true.

Inspiration is concerned only in securing "the exact record" of what is
said, not in affirming that all that is said is true. We shall have
frequent occasion to illustrate this sentiment in other portions of the
book. In regard to the sentiment here expressed, however, it is in
general true. Men will surrender their property, their houses, and
lands, and gold, to save their lives. Many, too, would see their friends
perish, in order that they might be saved. It is not universally true,
however. It is possible to conceive that a man might so love his
property as to submit to any torture, even endangering life, rather than
surrender it. Many, too, if endangered by shipwreck, would give up a
plank in order to save their wives or children, at the risk of their own
lives. Many will give their lives rather than surrender their liberty;
and many would die rather than abandon their principles. Such were the
noble Christian martyrs; and such a man was Job. Satan urged that if his
life were made wretched, he would abandon his integrity, and show that
his professed piety was selfish, and his religion false and hollow. The
Syriac and Arabic add, "that he may be safe."

[Job 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 2:5</span></span>

But put forth thine hand now - Satan felt that he had no power to
afflict Job without permission. Malignant as he was, he knew that God
only could subject the holy man to this trial - another proof that Satan
is under the control of the Almighty, and acts only as he is "permitted"
to act in tempting and trying the good.

And touch his bone - See the note at [Job
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#011). Afflict his body so as to
endanger his life. The words "bone" and "flesh" denote the whole body.
The idea was, that the whole body should be subjected to severe pain.

And he will curse thee to thy face - Notes at [Job
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#011).

[Job 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 2:6</span></span>

Behold, he is in thine hand - He is at thy disposal; see [Job
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#012), Margin.

But save his life - Margin, "only." This was to be the only limitation.
It would seem that he had the power to make any selection of disease,
and to afflict him in any manner, provided it did not terminate fatally.
The keen sorrows which Job afterward endured showed the malignancy of
the tempter; evinced his ingenuity in inflicting pain, and his knowledge
of what thc human frame could be made to bear.

[Job 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 2:7</span></span>

So went Satan forth - [Job 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#012).

And smote Job with sore boils - The English word boil denotes the
well-known turnout upon the flesh, accompanied with severe inflammation;
a sore angry swelling. "Webster." The Hebrew word, however, is in the
singular number שׁחין shechı̂yn, and should have been so rendered in our
translation. Dr. Good renders it "a burning ulceration." The Vulgate
translates it, "ulcere pessimo." The Septuagint, ἕλκει πονηρῶ helkei
ponērō - "with a foul ulcer." The Hebrew word שׁחין shechı̂yn means a
burning sore; an inflamed ulcer, a bile. "Gesenius." It is derived from
שׁכן shâkan, an obsolete root, retained in Arabic, and meaning to be hot
or inflamed. It is translated "bile" or "boil," in [Exo
9:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#009); [Lev
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#018); [Kg2
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#007);: [Isa
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#021), (see the notes on that place),
[Lev 13:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#019); [Job
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#007); and "botch," [Deu
28:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#027), [Deu
28:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#035). The word does not occur
elsewhere in the Scriptures. In [Deu
28:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#027), it means "the botch of Egypt,"
some species of leprosy, undoubtedly, which prevailed there.

In regard to the disease of Job, we may learn some of its
characteristics, not only from the usual meaning of the word, but from
the circumstances mentioned in the book itself. It was such that he took
a potsherd to scrape himself with, [Job
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#008); such as to make his nights
restless, and full of tossings to and fro and to clothe his flesh with
clods of dust, and with worms, and to break his flesh, or to constitute
a running sore or ulcer, [Job 7:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#004);
such as to make him bite his flesh for pain, [Job
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#014), and to make him like a rotten
thing, or a garment that is moth eaten, [Job
13:28](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#028); such that his face was foul
with weeping, [Job 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#016), and such as
to fill him with wrinkles, and to make his flesh lean, [Job
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#008); such as to make his breath
corrupt, [Job 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001), and his bones
cleave to his skin, [Job 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#020), [Job
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026); such as to pierce his bones
with pain in the night, [Job 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#017),
and to make his skin black, and to burn up his bones with heat, [Job
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#030).

It has been commonly supposed that the disease of Job was a species of
black leprosy commonly called "elephantiasis," which prevails much in
Egypt. This disease received its name from ἐλέφας elefas, "an elephant,"
from the swelling produced by it, causing a resemblance to that animal
in the limbs; or because it rendered the skin like that of the elephant,
scabtons and dark colored. It is called by the Arabs judhām (Dr. Good),
and is said to produce in the countenance a grim, distorted, and
"lion-like" set of features, and hence has been called by some
"Leontiasis." It is known as the black leprosy, to distinguish it from a
more common disorder called "white leprosy" - an affection which the
Greeks call "Leuce," or "whiteness." The disease of Job seems to have
been a universal ulcer; producing an eruption over his entire person,
and attended with violent pain, and constant restlessness. A universal
bile or groups of biles ever the body would accord with the account of
the disease in the various parts of the book. In the elephantiasis the
skin is covered with incrustations like those of an elephant. It is a
chronic and contagious disease, marked by a thickening of the legs, with
a loss of hair and feeling, a swelling of the face, and a hoarse nasal
voice. It affects the whole body; the bones as well as the skin are
covered with spots and tumors, at first red, but afterward black. "Coxe,
Ency. Webster." It should be added that the leprosy in all its forms was
regarded as contagious, and of course involved the necessity of a
separation from society; and all the circumstances attending this
calamity were such as deeply to humble a man of the former rank and
dignity of Job.

[Job 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 2:8</span></span>

And he took him a potsherd - The word used here חרשׁ chârâsh means a
fragment of a broken vessel; see the notes at [Isa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#009). The Septuagint renders it
ὄστρακον ostrakon - "a shell." One object of taking this was to remove
from his body the filth accumulated by the universal ulcer, compare [Job
7:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#004); and another design probably
was, to "indicate" the greatness of his calamity and sorrow. The
ancients were accustomed to show their grief by significant external
actions (compare the notes at [Job
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#020)), and nothing could more strongly
denote the greatness of the calamity, than for a man of wealth, honor,
and distinction, to sit down in the ashes, to take a piece of broken
earthen-ware, and begin to scrape his body covered over with undressed
and most painful sores. It does not appear that anything was done to
heal him, or any kindness shown in taking care of his disease. It would
seem that he was at once separated from his home, as a man whom none
would venture to approach, and was doomed to endure his suffering
without sympathy from others.

To scrape himself withal - The word used here גרד gârad has the sense of
grating, scraping, sawing; or to scrape or rasp with an edged tool. The
same word identically, as to letters, is used at present among the
Arabs; meaning to rasp or scrape with any kind of tool. The idea here
seems to be, that Job took the pieces of broken pottery that he found
among the ashes to scrape himself with.

And he sat down among the ashes - On the expressions of grief among the
ancients, see the notes at [Job 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#020).
The general ideas of mourning among the nations of antiquity seem to
have been, to strip off all their ornaments; to put on the coarsest
apparel, and to place themselves in the most humiliating positions. To
sit on the ground (see the note at [Isa
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#026)), or on a heap of ashes, or a
pile of cinders, was a common mode of expressing sorrow; see the note at
[Isa 58:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#005). To wear sackcloth to shave
their heads and their beards and to abstain from pleasant food and from
all cheerful society, and to utter loud and long exclamations or
shrieks, was also a common mode of indicating grief. The Vulgate renders
this "sedates in sterquilinio," "sitting on a dunghill." The Septuagint,
"and he took a shell to scrape off the ichor (ἰχῶρα ichōra) the
"sanies," or filth produced by a running ulcer, and sat upon the ashes
"out of the city,"" implying that his grief was so excessive that he
left the city and his friends, and went out to weep alone.

[Job 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 2:9</span></span>

Then said his wife unto him - Some remarkable additions are made by the
ancient versions to this passage. The Chaldee renders it, "and "Dinah"
(דינה dı̂ynâh), his wife, said to him." The author of that paraphrase
seems to have supposed that Job lived in the time of Jacob, and had
married his daughter Dinah; [Gen
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#021). Drusius says, that this was the
opinion of the Hebrews, and quotes a declaration from the Gemara to this
effect: "Job lived in the days of Jacob, and was born when the children
of Israel went down into Egypt; and when they departed thence he died.
He lived therefore 210 years, as long as they were into Egypt." This is
mere tradition, but it shows the ancient impression as to the time when
Job lived. The Septuagint has introduced a remarkable passage here, of
which the following is a translation. "After much time had elapsed, his
wife said unto him, How long wilt thou persevere, saying, Behold, I will
wait a little longer, cherishing the trope of my recovery? Behold, the
memorial of thee has disappeared from the earth - those sons and
daughters, the pangs and sorrows of my womb, for whom I toiled
laboriously in vain. Even thou sittest among loathsome worms, passing
the night in the open air, whilst I, a wanderer and a drudge, from place
to place, and from house to house, watch the sun until his going down,
that I may rest from the toils and sorrows that now oppress me. But
speak some word toward the Lord (τι ῥῆμα εἰς κύριον ti rēma eis kurion)
and die."

Whence this addition had its origin, it is impossible now to say. Dr.
Good says it is found in Theodotion, in the Syriac, and the Arabic (in
this he errs, for it is not in the Syriac and Arabic in Waltoh's
Polyglott), and in the Latin of Ambrose. Dathe suggests that it was
probably added by some person who thought it incredible that an angry
woman could be content with saying so "little" as is ascribed in the
Hebrew to the wife of Job. It may have been originally written by some
one in the margin of his Bible by way of paraphrase, and the
transcriber, seeing it there, may have supposed it was omitted
accidentally from the text, and so inserted it in the place where it now
stands. It is one of the many instances, at all events, which show that
implicit confidence is not to be placed in the Septuagint. There is not
the slightest evidence that this was ever in the Hebrew text. It is not
wholly unnatural, and as an exercise of the fancy is not without
ingenuity and plausibility, and yet the simple but abrupt statement in
the Hebrew seems best to accord with nature. The evident distress of the
wife of Job, according to the whole narrative, is not so much that she
was subjected to trials, and that she was compelled to wander about
without a home, as that Job should be so patient, and that he did not
yield to the temptation.

Dost thou still retain thine integrity? - Notes [Job
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#003). The question implies that, in her
view, he ought not to be expected to mantles, patience and resignation
in these circumstances. He had endured evils which showed that
confidence ought not to be reposed in a God who would thus inflict them.
This is all that we know of the wife of Job. Whether this was her
general character, or whether "she" yielded to the temptation of Satan
and cursed God, and thus heightened the sorrows of Job by her unexpected
impropriety of conduct, is unknown. It is not conclusive evidence that
her general character was bad; and it may be that the strength of her
usual virtue and piety was overcome by accumulated calamities. She
expressed, however, the feelings of corrupt human nature everywhere when
sorely afflicted. The suggestion "will" cross the mind, often with
almost irresistible force, that a God who thus afflicts his creatures is
not worthy of confidence; and many a time a child of God is "tempted" to
give vent to feelings of rebellion and complaining like this, and to
renounce all his religion.

Curse God - See the notes at [Job
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#011). The Hebrew word is the same. Dr.
Good renders it, "And yet dost thou hold fast thine integrity, blessing
God and dying?" Noyes translates it, "Renounce God, and die,"
Rosenmuller and Umbreit, "Bid farewell to God, and die." Castellio
renders it, "Give thanks to God and die." The response of Job, however
[Job 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#010), shows that he understood
her as exciting him to reject, renounce, or curse God. The sense is,
that she regarded him as unworthy of confidence, and submission as
unreasonable, and she wished Job to express this and be relieved from
his misery. Roberts supposes that this was a pagan sentiment, and says
that nothing is more common than for the pagan, under certain
circumstances, to curse their gods. "That the man who has made expensive
offerings to his deity, in hope of gaining some great blessing, and who
has been disappointed, will pour out all his imprecations on the god
whose good offices have (as he believes) been prevented by some superior
deity. A man in reduced circumstances says, 'Yes, yes, my god has lost
his eyes; they are put out; he cannot look after my affairs.' 'Yes, '
said an extremely rich devotee of the supreme god Siva, after he had
lost his property, 'Shall I serve him any more? What, make offerings to
him! No, no. He is the lowest of all gods? '"

And die - Probably she regarded God as a stern and severe Being, and
supposed that by indulging in blasphemy Job would provoke him to cut him
off at once. She did not expect him to lay wicked hands on himself. She
expected that God would at once interpose and destroy him. The sense is,
that nothing but death was to be expected, and the sooner he provoked
God to cut him off from the land of the living, the better.

[Job 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 2:10</span></span>

As one of the foolish women speaketh - The word here rendered "foolish"
נבל nâbâl from נבל nâbêl, means properly stupid or foolish, and then
wicked, abandoned, impious - the idea of "sin" and "folly" being closely
connected in the Scriptures, or sin being regarded as supreme folly;
[Sa1 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#025); [Sa2
3:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#033); [Psa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001); [Psa
53:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#002). The Arabs still use the word
with the same compass of signification. "Gesenius." The word is used
here in the sense of "wicked;" and the idea is, that the sentiment which
she uttered was impious, or was such as were on the lips of the wicked.
Sanctius supposes that there is a reference here to Idumean females,
who, like other women, reproached and cast away their gods, if they did
not obtain what they asked when they prayed to them. Homer represents
Achilles and Menelaus as reproaching the gods. Iliad i. 353, iii. 365.
See Rosenmuller, Morgenland, "in loc."

What shall we receive good at the hand of God - Having received such
abundant tokens of kindness from him, it was unreasonable to complain
when they were taken away, and when he sent calamity in their stead.

And shall we not receive evil? - Shall we not expect it? Shall we not be
willing to bear it when it comes? Shall we not have sufficient
confidence in him to believe that his dealings are ordered in goodness
and equity? Shall we at once lose all our confidence in our great
Benefactor the moment he takes away our comforts, and visits us with
pain? This is the true expression of piety. It submits to all the
arrangements of God without a complaint. It receives blessings with
gratitude; it is resigned when calamities are sent in their place. It
esteems it as a mere favor to be permitted to breathe the air which God
has made, to look upon the light of his sun, to tread upon his earth, to
inhale the fragrance of his flowers, and to enjoy the society of the
friends whom he gives; and when he takes one or all away, it feels that
he has taken only what belongs to him, and withdraws a privilege to
which we had no claim. In addition to that, true piety feels that all
claim to any blessing, if it had ever existed, has been forfeited by
sin. What right has a sinner to complain when God withdraws his favor,
and subjects him to suffering? What claim has he on God, that should
make it wrong for Him to visit him with calamity?

Wherefore doth a living man complain,

A man for the punishment of his sins?

[Lam 3:39](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#039).

In all this did not Job sin with his lips - See the notes at [Job
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#022). This remark is made here perhaps
in contrast with what occurred afterward. He subsequently did give
utterance to improper sentiments, and was rebuked accordingly, but thus
far what he had expressed was in accordance with truth, and with the
feelings of most elevated piety.

[Job 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 2:11</span></span>

Now when Job's three friends heard - It would seem from this that these
men were his particular friends.

They came every one from his own place - His residence. This was the
result of agreement or appointment thus to meet together.

Eliphaz the Temanite - This was the most prominent of his friends. In
the ensuing discussion he regularly takes the lead, advances the most
important and impressive considerations, and is followed and sustained
by the others. The Septuagint renders this Ελιφὰζ ὁ Θαιμαινῶν βασιλεὺς
Elifaz ho Thaimainōn basileus - Eliphaz, the king of the Themanites. The
Hebrew does not intimate that he held any office or rank. The word
rendered "Temanite" תימני têymânı̂y is a patronymic from תמן têmân,
meaning properly "at the right hand," and then "the South." The Hebrew
geographers are always represented as looking to the East, and not
toward the North, as we do; and hence, with them, the right hand denotes
the South. Teman or Theman was a son of Eliphaz, and grandson of Esau;
see [Gen 36:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#015), where he is spoken of
as "duke" or prince אלוּף 'alûph a head of a family or tribe, a
chieftain.

He is supposed to have lived on the east of Idumea. Eusebius places
Thaeman in Arabia Petrara, five miles from Petra (see the notes at [Isa
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001)), and says that there was a Roman
garrison there. The Temanites were cclebrated for wisdom. "Is wisdom no
more in Teman?" [Jer 49:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007). The country
was distinguished also for producing men of strength: "And thy mighty
men, O Teman, shall be dismayed;" [Oba
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#009). That this country was a part of
Idumea is apparent, not only from the fact that Teman was a descendant
of Esau, who settled there, but from several places in the Scriptures.
Thus, in [Eze 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#013), it is said, "I
will also stretch out mine hand upon Edom, and I will make it desolate
from Toman, and they of Dedan shall fall by the sword." In [Amo
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#012), Teman is mentioned as in the
vicinity of Bozrah, at one time the capital of Idumea: "But I will send
a fire upon Teman, which shall devour the palaces of Bozrah;" see the
notes at [Isa 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#014). The inhabitants
of this country were distinguished in early times for wisdom, and
particularly for that kind of wisdom which is expressed in close
observation of men and manners, and the course of events, and which was
expressed in proverbs. Thus, they are mentioned in the book of Baruch,
3:23: "The merchants of Meran and of Theman, the authors of fables, and
searchers out of understanding," οἱ μυθολόγοι καὶ οἱ ἐκζητηταὶ τῆς
συνέσεως hoi muthologoi kai hoi ekzētētai tēs suneseōs.

And Bildad the Shuhite - The second speaker uniformly in the following
argument. The Septuagint renders this, "Bildad the sovereign of the
Saucheans," Σαυχέων τύραννος Saucheōn turannos. Shuah שׁוּח shûach
(meaning a pit) was the name of a son of Abraham, by Keturah, and also
of an Arabian tribe, descended from him, [Gen
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#002). "The country of the Shuhites,"
says Gesenius, "was not improbably the same with the Σακκαία Sakkaia of
Ptolemy, v. 15, eastward of Batanea." But the exact situation of the
Shubites is unknown. It is difficult to determine the geography of the
tribes of Arabia, as many of them are migratory and unsettled. It would
seem that Bildad did not reside very far from Eliphaz, for they made an
"agreement" to go and visit Job.

And Zophar the Naamathite - An inhabitant of Naamah, whose situation is
unknown. The Septuagint renders this, "Zophar, king of the Minaians -
Μιναίων βασιλεύς Minaiōn basileus. A place by the name of Naamah is
mentioned in [Jos 15:41](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#041), as in the
limits of the tribe of Judah. But this was a considerable distance from
the residence of Job, and it is not probable that Zophar was far from
that region. Conjecture is useless as to the place where he lived. The
Editor of the Pictorial Bible, however, supposes that Zophar was from
the town in Judah mentioned in [Jos
15:41](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#041). He observes that this town is
"mentioned in a list of the uttermost cities of Judah's lot, 'toward the
coast of Edom southward; ' it is further among that portion of those
towns that lay 'in the valley' [Jos
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#033), wbich valley is the same that
contained Joktheel [Jos 15:38](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#038), which
is supposed to have been Petra. Naamah was probably, therefore, in or
near the Ghor or valley which extends from the Dead Sea to the Gulf of
Akaba. - These considerations," he adds, "seem to establish the
conclusion that the scene of this book is laid in the land of Edom." In
the first part of this verse, a remarkable addition occurs in the
Chaldee paraphrase. - It is as follows: "And the three friends of Job
heard of all the evil which had come upon him, and when they saw the
trees of his gardens (Chaldean, "Paradise" פרדסיהון) that they were
dried up, and the bread of his support that it was turned into living
flesh (לבסרא אתהפך סעודתחון ולחם חיא), and the wine of his drink turned
into blood (אתהפך משתיחון וחמר לדמא)."

Here is evidently the doctrine of "transubstantiation," the change of
bread into flesh, and of wine into blood, and bears the marks of having
been interpolated by some friend of the papacy. But when or by whom it
was done is unknown. It is a most stupid forgery. The evident intention
of it was to sustain the doctrine of transubstantiation, by the plea
that it was found far back in the times of Job, and that it could not be
regarded, therefore, as an absurdity. To what extent it has ever been
used by the advocates of that doctrine, I have no means of ascertaining.
Its interpolation here is a pretty sure proof of the conviction of the
author of it that the doctrine is not found in any fair interpretation
of the Bible.

For they had made an appointment together - They had agreed to go
together, and they evidently set out on the journey together. The
Chaldee - or someone who has interpolated a passage in the Chaldee - has
introduced a circumstance in regard to the design of their coming, which
savors also of the Papacy. It is as follows: "They came each one from
his place, and for the merit of this they were freed from the place
destined to them in Gehenna," a passage evidently intended to defend the
doctrine of "purgatory," by the authority of the ancient Chaldee
Paraphrase.

To come to mourn with him, and to comfort him - To show the appropriate
sympathy of friends in a time of special calamity. They did not come
with an intention to reproach him, or to charge him with being a
hypocrite.

[Job 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 2:12</span></span>

And when they lifted up their eyes afar off - "When they saw him at the
distance at which they could formerly recognize him without difficulty,
disease had so altered his appearance that at first sight they knew him
not" - Noyes.

They lifted up their voice - This is a common expression in the
Scriptures, to denote grief; [Gen
27:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#038); [Gen
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#011); [Jdg
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#004); [Rut
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#009); [Sa1
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#016), "et soepe al." We learn to
suppress the expressions of grief. The ancients gave vent to their
sorrows aloud. - They even hired persons to aid them in their
lamentations; and it became a professional business of women to devote
themselves to the office of making an outcry on occasions of mourning.
The same thing prevails in the East at present. Friends sit around the
grave of the dead, or go there at different times, and give a long and
doleful shriek or howl, as expressive of their grief.

And they rent every one his mantle - See the notes at [Job
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#020).

And sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven - Another expression
of sorrow; compare [Lam 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#010); [Neh
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#001); [Sa1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#012); [Jos
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#006); [Eze
27:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#030). Thc indications of grief here
referred to, were such as were common in ancient times. They resemble,
in a remarkable manner, the mode in which Achilles gave utterance to his
sorrow, when informed of the death of Patroclus. Iliad xviii. 21-27.

A sudden horror shot through all the chief,

And wrapp'd his senses in the cloud of grief;

Cast on the ground, with furious hands he spread

The scorching ashes o'er his graceful head,

His purple garments, and his golden hairs,

Those he deforms with dust, and these he tears:

On the hard soil his groaning breast he threw,

And roll'd and grovell'd as to earth he grew.

Pope

Thus far the feelings of the three friends were entirely kind, and all
that they did was expressive of sympathy for the sufferer.

[Job 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 2:13</span></span>

So they sat down with him upon the ground; - see [Job
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#020), note; [Job
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#008), note; compare [Ezr
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#003), "I rent my garment and my mantle,
and plucked off the hair of my head, and my beard, and sat down
astonished."

Seven days and seven nights - Seven days was the usual time of mourning
among the Orientals. Thus, they made public lamentation for Jacob seven
days, [Gen 50:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#010). Thus, on the death
of Saul, they fasted seven days, [Sa1
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#013). So the author of the book of
Ecclesiasticus says," Seven days do men mourn for him that is dead;"
Eccles. 22:12. It cannot be supposed that they remained in the same
place and posture for seven days and nights, but that they mourned with
him during that time in the usual way. An instance of grief remarkably
similar to this, continuing through a period of six days, is ascribed by
Euripides to Orestes:

Ἐντεῦθεν ἀγρίᾳ ξυντακεὶς νόσῳ νοσεῖ

Τλήμων Ὀρέστης; ο δὲ πεσὼν ἐν δεμνίοις

Κεῖται.

Ἓκτου δὲ δὴ τόδ ἦμαρ, κ. τ. λ.

Enteuthen agriacuntakeis nosō nosei

Tlēmōn Orestēs; ho de pesōn en demniois

Keitai.

Hekton de dē tod́ ēmar, etc.

"'Tis hence Orestes, agonized with griefs

And sore disease, lies on his restless bed

Delirious.

Now six morns have winged their flight,

Since by his hands his parent massacred

Burnt on the pile in expiatory flames.

Stubborn the while he keeps a rigid fast,

Nor bathes, nor dresses; but beneath his robes

He skulks, and if he steals a pause from rage,

'Tis but to feel his weight of wo and weep."

And none spake a word to him - - That is, on the subject of his grief.
They came to condole with him, but they had now nothing to say. They saw
that his affliction was much greater than they had anticipated.

For they saw that his grief was very great - This is given as a reason
why they were silent. But "how" this produced silence, or why his great
grief was a cause of their silence, is not intimated. Perhaps one or all
of the following considerations may have led to it.

\(1\) They were amazed at the extent of his sufferings. Amazement is
often expressed by silence. We look upon that which is out of the usual
course of events without being able to express anything. We are "struck
dumb" with wonder.

\(2\) The effect of great calamity is often to prevent utterance.
Nothing is more natural or common than profound silence when we go to
the house of mourning. "It is the lesser cares only that speak; the
greater ones find not language." Curae leves loquuntur, ingentes
stupent.

\(3\) They might not have known what to say. They had come to sympathize
with him, and to offer consolation. But their anticipated topics of
consolation may have been seen to be inappropriate. The calamity was
greater than they had before witnessed. The loss of property and
children; the deep humiliation of a man who had been one of the most
distinguished of the land; the severity of his bodily sufferings, and
his changed and haggard appearance, constituted so great a calamity,
that the usual topics of conversation did not meet the case. What "they"
had to say, was the result of careful observation on the usual course or
events, and it is by no means improbable that they had never before
witnessed sorrows so keen, and that they now saw that their maxims would
by no means furnish consolation for "such" a case.

\(4\) They seem to have been very early thrown into doubt in regard to
the real character of Job. They had regarded him as a pious man, and had
come to him under that impression. But his great afflictions seem soon
to have shaken their confidence in his piety, and to have led them to
ask themselves whether so great a sufferer "could" be the friend of God.
Their subsequent reasonings show that it was with them a settled opinion
that the righteous would be prospered, and that very great calamities
were proof of great criminality in the sight of God. It was not
inconsistent with this belief to suppose that the righteous might be
slightly afflicted, but when they saw "such" sorrows, they supposed they
were altogether beyond what God could send upon his friends; and with
this doubt on their minds, and this change in their views, they knew not
what to say. How "could" they console him when it was their settled
belief that great sufferings were proof of great guilt? They could say
nothing which would not seem to be a departure from this, unless they
assumed that he had been a hypocrite, and should administer reproof and
rebuke for his sins.

\(5\) In this state of things, to administer "rebuke" would seem to be
cruel. It would aggravate the sorrows which already were more than he
could bear. They did, therefore, what the friends of the afflicted are
often compelled to do in regard to specific sufferings; they kept
silence. As they could not comfort him, they would not aggravate his
grief. All they could have said would probably have been unmeaning
generalities which would not meet his case, or would have been
sententious maxims which would imply that he was a sinner and a
hypocrite; and they were therefore dumb, until the bitter complaint of
Job himself Job 3 gave them an opportunity to state the train of thought
which had passed through their minds during this protracted silence. How
often do similar cases occur now - cases where consolation seems almost
impossible, and where any truths which might be urged, except the most
abstract and unmeaning generalities, would tend only to aggravate the
sorrows of the afflicted! When calamity comes upon a person as the
result of his sins; when property is taken away which has been gained in
an unlawful manner; when a friend dies, leaving no evidence that he was
prepared; when it is impossible to speak of that friend without
recalling the memory of his irreligious, prayerless, or dissolute life,
how difficult is it to administer consolation! How often is the
Christian friend constrained to close his lips in silence, or utter only
"torturing" general truths that can give no consolation, or refer to
facts which will tend only to open the wound in the heart deeper! To be
silent at such times is all that can be done; or to commend the sufferer
in humble prayer to God, an expedient which seems not to have been
resorted to either by Job or his friends, It is remarkable that Job is
not represented as calling upon God for support, and it is as remarkable
that his friends during these seven days of silent grief did not commend
the case of their much afflicted friend to the Father of mercies. Had
"Job" prayed, he might have been kept from much of the improper feeling
to which he gave vent in the following chapter; had "they" prayed, they
might have obtained much more just views of the government of God than
they had hitherto possessed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 3](job003)

</div>
