<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job004)  [Next](job006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#001)

[Job 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 5:1</span></span>

Call now - The expressions used here, as Noyes has well observed, seem
to be derived from the law, where the word "call" denotes the language
of the complainant, and answer that of the defendant. According to this,
the meaning of the words "call now" is, in jus voca: that is, call the
Deity to account, or bring an action against him: or more properly,
enter into an argument or litigation, as before a tribunal; see the
notes at [Isa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001), where similar
language occurs.

If there be any that will answer thee - If there is anyone who will
respond to thee in such a trial. Noyes renders this, "See if He will
answer thee;" that is, "See if the Deity will condescend to enter into a
judicial conroversy with thee, and give an account of his dealings
toward thee." Dr. Good renders it, "Which of these can come forward to
thee; that is, "Which of these weakly, ephemeral, perishing insects -
which of these nothings can render thee any assistance?" The meaning is
probably, "Go to trial, if you can find any respondent; if there is any
one willing to engage in such a debate; and let the matter be fairly
adjudicated and determined. Let an argument be entered into before a
competent tribunal, and the considerations pro and con be urged on the
point now under consideration." The desire of Eliphaz was, that there
should be a fair investigation, where all that could be said on one side
or the other of the question would be urged, and where there would be a
decision of the important point in dispute. He evidently felt that Job
would be foiled in the argument before whomsoever it should be
conducted, and whoever might take up the opposite side; and hence, he
says that he could get no one of "the saints" to assist him in the
argument. In the expression, "if there be any that will answer thee," he
may mean to intimate that he would find no one who would be willing even
to go into an investigation of the subject. The case was so plain, the
views of Job were so obviously wrong, the arguments for the opinion of
Eliphaz were so obvious, that he doubted whether anyone could be found
who would be willing to make it the occasion of a set and formal trial,
as if there could be any doubt about it.

And to which of the saints wilt thou turn? - Margin, as in Hebrew
"look." That is, to which of them wilt thou look to be an advocate for
such sentiments, or which of them would be willing to go into an
argument on so plain a subject? Grotins supposes that Eliphaz, having
boasted that he had produced a divine revelation in his favor Job 4, now
calls upon Job to produce, if he can, something of the same kind in his
defense, or to see if there were any of the heavenly spirits who would
give a similar revelation in his favor. The word here rendered "saints"
(קדשׁים qôdeshı̂ym) means properly those who are sanctified or holy; and
it may be either applied to holy men, or to angels. It is generally
supposed that it here refers to angels. So Schultens, Rosenmuller,
Noyes, Good, and others, understand it. The word is often used in this
sense in the Scriptures. So the Septuagint understands it here - ἤ
εἴτινα ἀγγέλων ἁγίων ὄψῃ ē eitina angelōn hagiōn opsē. Such is probably
its meaning; and the sense of the passage is, "Call now upon anyone, and
you will find none willing to be the advocate of such sentiments as you
have urged. No holy beings - human beings or angels - would defend
them." By this, probably, Eliphaz designed to show Job that he differed
from all holy being, and that his views were not those of a truly pious
man. If he could find no one, either among holy angels or pious men, to
be the advocate of his opinions, it followed that he must be in error.

[Job 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 5:2</span></span>

For wrath killeth the foolish man - That is, the wrath of God. The word
foolish here is used as synonymous with wicked, because wickedness is
supreme folly. The general proposition here is, that the wicked are cut
off, and that they are overtaken with heavy calamities in this life. In
proof of this, Eliphaz appeals in the following verses to his own
observation: The implied inference is, that Job, having had all his
possessions taken away, and having been overwhelmed with unspeakably
great personal calamities, was to be regarded as having been a great
sinner. Some suppose, however, that the word "wrath" here relates to the
indignation or the repining of the individual himself, and that the
reference is to the fact that such wrath or repining preys upon the
spirit, and draws down the divine vengeance. This is the view of
Schultens, and of Noyes. But it seems more probable that Eliphaz means
to state the proposition, that the wrath of God burns against the
wicked, and that the following verses are an illustration of this
sentiment, derived from his own observation.

And envy - Margin, "indignation." Jerome, invidia, envy. Septuagint
ζῆλος zēlos. Castellio, severitas ac vehementia. The Hebrew word קנאה
qı̂n'âh means jealousy, envy, ardor, zeal. It may be applied to any
strong affection of the mind; any fervent, glowing, and burning emotion.
Gesenius supposes it means here envy, as excited by the prosperity of
others. To me it seems that the connection requires us to understand it
of wrath, or indignation, as in [Deu
29:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#020); [Psa
79:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#005). As applied to God, it often
means his jealousy, or his anger, when the affections of people are
placed on other objects than himself; [Num
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#011); [Zep
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#018), et al.

Slayeth the silly one - Good and Noyes render this, "the weak man."
Jerome, parvulum, the little one. The Septuagint, πεπλανημένον
peplanēmenon, the erring. Walton, ardelionem, the busy-body. The Hebrew
word פתה poteh is from פתה pâthâh, to open, go expand; and hence, the
participleis applied to one who opens his lips, or whose mouth is open;
that is, a garrulous person, [Pro
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#019); and also to one who is
open-hearted, frank, ingenuous, unsuspicious; and hence, one who is
easily influenced by others, or whose heart may be easily enticed. Thus,
it comes to mean one who is simple and foolish. In this sense it is used
here, to denote one who is so simple and foolish as to be drawn aside by
weak arguments and unfounded opinions. I have no doubt that Eliphaz
meant, by insinuation, to apply this to Job, as being a weak-minded man,
for having allowed the views which he entertained to make such an
impression on his mind, and for having expressed himself as he had done.
The proposition is general; but it would be easy to undertand how he
intended it to be applied.

[Job 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 5:3</span></span>

I have seen the foolish - The wicked. To confirm the sentiment which he
had just advanced, Eliphaz appeals to his own observation, and says that
though the wicked for a time seem to be prosperous, yet he had observed
that they were soon overtaken with calamity and cut down. He evidently
means that prosperity was no evidence of the divine favor; but that when
it had continued for a little time, and was then withdrawn, it was proof
that the man who had been prospered was at heart a wicked man. It was
easy to understated that he meant that this should be applied to Job,
who, though he had been favored with temporary prosperity, was now
revealed to be at heart a wicked man. The sentiment here advanced by
Eliphaz, as the result of his observation, strikingly accords with the
observation of David, as expressed in [Psa
23:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001) :

"I have seen the wicked in great power,

And spreading himself like a green bay-tree;

Yet he passed away, and, lo, he was not:

Yea, I sought him, but he could not be found."

[Psa 23:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001) :35-36.

Taking root - This figure, to denote prosperous and rapid growth, is
often used in the Scriptures. Thus, in [Psa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003) :

"And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water,

That bringeth forth his fruit in his season."

So [Isa 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#006) :

"Those that come out of Jacob shall he cause to take root;

Israel shall blossom and bud,

And shall fill the face of the world with fruit."

So [Psa 80:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#009) :

"Thou preparedst room before it,

And didst cause it to take deep root,

And it filled the land.

The hills were covered with the shadow of it,

And the boughs thereof were like the goodly cedars."

But suddenly - Meaning either that calamity came upon him suddenly - as
it had upon Job, that is, without any apparent preparation, or that;
calamity came before a great while, that is, that this prosperity did
not continue. Probably there is an implied reference hereto the case of
Job, meaning that he had known just such instances before; and as the
case of Job accorded with what he had before seen, he hastened to the
conclusion that Job must have been a wicked man.

I cursed his habitation - I had occasion to regard it as accursed; that
is, I witnessed the downfall of his fortunes, and pronounced his
habitation accursed. I saw that God regarded it as such, and that he had
suddenly punished him. This accords with the observation of David,
referred to above.

[Job 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 5:4</span></span>

His children are far from safety - That is, this is soon manifest by
their being cut off or subjected to calamity. The object of Eliphaz is,
to state the result of his own observation, and to show how calamity
overtook the wicked though they even prospered for a time. He begins
with that which a man would feel most - the calamity which comes upon
his children, and says that God would punish him in them. Every word of
this would go to the heart of Job; for he could not but feel that it was
aimed at him, and that the design was to prove that the calamities that
had come upon his children were a proof of his own wickedness and of the
divine displeasure. It is remarkable that Job listens to this with the
utmost patience. There is no interruption of the speaker; no breaking in
upon the argument of his friend; no mark of uneasiness. Oriental
politeness required that a speaker should be heard attentively through
whatever he might say. See the Introduction, Section 7. Cutting and
severe, therefore, as this strain of remark must have been, the sufferer
sat meekly and heard it all, and waited for the appropriate time when an
answer might be returned.

And they are crushed in the gate - The gate of a city in ancient times
was the chief place of concourse, and was the place where public
business was usually transacted, and where courts of justice were held;
see [Gen 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#010); [Deu
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#019); [Deu
25:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#006); [Rut
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#001) ff: [Psa
127:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#005); [Pro
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#022). The Greeks also held their
courts in some public place of business. Hence, the forum, ἀγορά agora,
was also a place for fairs. See Jahn's Archaeology, section 247. Some
suppose that the meaning here is, that they were oppressed and trodden
down by the concourse in the gate. But the more probable meaning is,
that they found no one to advocate their cause; that they were subject
to oppression and injustice in judicial decisions, and then when their
parent was dead, no one would stand up to vindicate them from respect to
his memory. The idea is, that though there might be temporary
prosperity, yet that it would not be long before heavy calamities would
come upon the children of the wicked.

[Job 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 5:5</span></span>

Whose harvest the hungry eateth up - That is, they are not permitted to
enjoy the avails of their own labor. The harvest field is subject to the
depredations of others, who contrive to possess themselves of it, and to
consume it.

And taketh it even out of the thorns - Or, he seizes it to the very
thorns. That is, the famished robber seizes the whole of the harvest. He
takes it all away, even to the thistles, and chaff, and cockle, and
whatever impure substances there may be growing with the grain. He does
not wait to separate the grain from the other substances, but consumes
it all. He spares nothing.

And the robber swalloweth up their substance - Noyes renders this, as
Gesenius proposes to do, "and a snare gapeth after his substance;" Dr.
Good, "and rigidly swoopeth up their substance." Rosenmuller much
better:

Cujusquo facultates oxhauriebant sitibundi, copying exactly the version
of Castellio. The Vulgate in a similar manner, Et bibent sitientes
divitias ejus - And the thirsty drink up his wealth. The Septuagint,
ἐκσιφωνισθείη αὐτῶν ἡ ἰσχύς eksifōnisthein autōn hē ischus - "should
their power be absorbed." The true sense, as I conceive, is, "the
thirsty gasp, or pant, after their wealth;" that is, they consume it.
The word rendered in our common version "the robber צמים tsammı̂ym is,
according to the ancient versions, the same as צמאים tsâmê'ı̂ym, the
thirsty, and this sense the parallelism certainly requires. So obvious
is this, that it is better to suppose a slight error in the Hebrew text,
than to give it the signification of a snare," as Noyes does, and as
Gesenius (Lexicon) proposes. The word rendered "swalloweth up" (שׁאף
shâ'aph) means, properly, to breathe hard, to pant, to blow; and then to
yawn after, to desire, to absorb; and the sense here is, that the
thirsty consume their property. The whole figure is taken from robbers
and freebooters; and I have no doubt that Eliphaz meant impliedly to
allude to the ease of Job, and to say that he had known just such cases,
where, though there was great temporary prosperity, yet before long the
children of the man who was prospered, and who professed to be pious,
but was not, were crushed, and his property taken away by robbers. It
was this similarity of the case of Job to the facts which he had
observed, that staggered him so much in regard to his cbaracter.

[Job 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 5:6</span></span>

Although affliction cometh not forth of the dust - Margin, "or
iniquity." The marginal reading here has been inserted from the
different meanings attached to the Hebrew word. That word (און 'âven)
properly means nothingness, or vanity; then nothingness as to worth,
unworthiness, wickedness, iniquity; and then the consequences of
iniquity - adversity, calamity, affliction; [Psa
55:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#004); [Pro
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#008); [Psa
90:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010); [Job
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#035). The Septuagint renders it κόπος
kopos, "labor," or "trouble." The Vulgate, Nihil in terra, sine causa -
"there is nothing on the earth without a cause." The general sense is
plain. It is, that afflictions are not to be ascribed to chance, or that
they are not without intelligent design. They do not come up like
thistles, brambles, and thorns, from the unconscious earth. They have a
cause. They are under the direction of God. The object of Eliphaz in the
statement is, to show to Job that it was improper to complain, and that
he should commit his cause to a God of infinite power and wisdom; [Job
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#008) ff. Afflictions, Eliphaz says,
could not be avoided. Man was born unto them. He ought to expect them,
and when they come, they should be submitted to as ordered by an
intelligent, wise, and good Being. This is one true ground of
consolation in afflictions. They do not come from the unconscious earth:
they do not spring up of themselves. Though it is true that man is born
to them, and must expect them, yet it is also true that they are ordered
in infinite wisdom, and that they always have a design.

Neither doth trouble spring out of the ground - The Septuagint renders
this, "Nor will affliction spring up from the mountains."

[Job 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 5:7</span></span>

Yet man is born unto trouble - All this is connected with the sentiment
in [Job 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#008) ff. The meaning is, that
"since afflictions are ordered by an intelligent Being, and since man is
born unto trouble as the sparks fly upward, therefore it is wise to
commit our cause to God, and not to complain against him." Margin, or
labor. The word here (עמל ‛âmâl) rather means trouble, or affliction,
than labor. The sense is, that as certainly as man is born, so sure is
it that he will have trouble. It follows from the condition of our
being, as certainly as that unconscious objects will follow the laws of
their nature - that sparks will ascend. This seems to have a proverbial
cast, and was doubtless regarded as a sentiment universally true. It is
as true now as it was then; for it is still the great law of our being,
that trouble as certainly comes sooner or later, as that material
objects obey the laws of nature which God has impressed on them.

As the sparks fly upward - The Hebrew expression here is very beautiful
- "as רשׁף בני benēy reshep - the sons of flame fly." The word used
(רשׁף reshep) means flame, lightning; the sons, or children of the
flame, are that which it produces; that is, sparks. Gesenius strangely
renders it, "sons of the lightning; that is, birds of prey which fly as
swift as the lightning." So Dr. Good, "As the bird-tribes are made to
fly upwards." So Umbreit renders it, Gleichwie die Brut des
Raubgeflugels sich hoch in Fluge hebt - "as a flock of birds of prey
elevate themselves on the wing." Noyes adopts the construction of
Gesenius; partly on the principle that man would be more likely to be
compared to birds, living creatures, than to sparks. There is
considerable variety in the interpretation of the passage. The
Septuagint renders it, νεοσσοι δε γυπος neossoi de gupos - the young of
the vulture. The Chaldee, מזיקי בני benēy mezēyqēy - "the sons of
demons." Syriac "Sons of birds." Jerome, "Man is born to labor, and the
bird to flight" - et avis ad volatum. Schultens renders it, "glittering
javelins," and Arius Montanus, "sons of the live coal." It seems to me
that our common version has expressed the true meaning. But the idea is
not essentially varied whichever interpretation is adopted. It is, that
as sparks ascend, or as birds fly upward - following the laws of their
being - so is trouble the lot of man. It certainly comes; and comes
under the direction of a Being who has fixed the laws of the inferior
creation. It would be wise for man, therefore, to resign himself to God
in the times when those troubles come. He should not sit down and
complain at this condition of things, but should submit to it as the law
of his being, and should have sufficient confidence in God to believe
that he orders it aright.

[Job 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 5:8</span></span>

I would seek unto God - Our translators have omitted here the
adversative particle אוּלם 'ûlâm but, yet, nevertheless, and have thus
marred the connection. The meaning of Eliphaz, I take to be, "that since
affliction is ordered by an intelligent Being, and does not spring out
of the ground, therefore he would commit his cause to God, and look to
him." Jerome has well expressed it, Quam ob rem ego deprecabor Dominum.
Some have understood this as meaning that Eliphaz himself was in the
habit of committing his cause to God, and that he exhorted Job to
imitate his example. But the correct sense is that which regards it as
counsel given to Job to look to God because afflictions are the result
of intelligent design, and because God had shown himself to be worthy of
the confidence of people. The latter point Eliphaz proceeds to argue in
the following verses.

[Job 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 5:9</span></span>

Which doeth great things - The object of this is, to show why Job should
commit his cause to God. The reason suggested is, that he had showed
himself qualified to govern the world by the great and wonderful acts
which he performed. Eliphaz, therefore, proceeds to expatiate on what
God had done, and thus states the ancient belief in regard to his
sovereignty over the world. This strain of reasoning continues to the
end of the chapter. There is great beauty and force in it; and though we
have, through the revelations of the New Testament, some more enlarged
views of the government of God and of the design of affliction, yet
perhaps there can be found nowhere a more beautiful argument to lead
people to put confidence in God. The reason here stated is, that God
does "great things," and, therefore, we should commit ourselves to him.
His works are vast and boundless; they are such as to impress the mind
with a sense of his own immensity; and in such a being we should confide
rather than in a feeble creature's arm. Who, when he contemplates the
vast universe which God has made, and surveys the starry world under the
light of the modern astronomy, can doubt that God does "great things,"
and that the interests which we commit to him are safe?

And unsearchable - Margin, "There is no search." Septuagint ἀνεξιχνίαστα
anecichniasta) - "whose footsteps cannot be traced." The Hebrew word חקר
chêqer means searching out or examining; and the idea is here, that it
is impossible fully to search out and comprehend what God does. See [Job
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#007). This is stated as a reason why
we should look to him. We should expect things in his administration
which we cannot understand. The argument of Eliphaz seems to be, that it
was a matter of indisputable fact that there are many things in the
government of God which are above our comprehension; and when he
afflicts us, we should feel that this is a part of the doings of the
incomprehensible God. Such mysterious dealings are to be expected, and
they should not be allowed for a moment to shake our confidence in him.

Marvellous things - Things that are wonderful, and are fitted to excite
amazement. See the notes at [Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006).

Without number - Margin, "Until there be no number." The sense is, that
it is impossible to estimate the number of those things in the universe
over which he presides which are adapted to excite admiration. If the
view of the universe entertained in the time of Eliphaz was fitted to
overwhelm the mind by its vastness and by the number of the objects
which were created, this astonishment is much greater now that the
telescope has disclosed the wonders of the heavens above to man, and the
microscope the not less amazing wonders of the world beneath him.
Leuwenhoeck, by the aid of the microscope, discovered, he supposed, a
thousand million animalculae, whose united bulk did not exceed the size
of a grain of sand - all of whom are distinct formations, with all the
array of functions necessary to life. Of the number also of the larger
works of God, much interesting and overpowering truth is presented by
the science of modern astronomy.

As an instance of this, we may refer to the Milky Way, or the whitish,
irregular zone, that goes round the whole heavens, and that can be seen
at any season of the year, but particularly in the months of August,
September, and November. "This vast portion of the heavens is found to
consist wholly of stars, crowded into immense clusters. On first
presenting a telescope of considerable power to this splendid zone, we
are lost in astonishment at the number, the variety, and the beautiful
configuration of the stars of which it is composed. In certain parts of
it, every slight motion of the telescope presents now groups and new
configurations; and the new and wondrous scene is continued over a space
of many degrees in succession. In several fields of view, occupying a
space of not more than twice the breadth of the moon, you perceive more
of these twinkling luminaries, than all the stars visible to the naked
eye throughout the whole canopy of heaven. The late Sir W. Herschel, in
passing his telescope along a space of this zone fifteen degrees long,
and two broad, descried at least fifty thousand stars, large enough to
be distinctly counted; besides which, he suspected twice as many more,
which could be seen only now and then by faint glimpses for lack of
sufficient light; that is, fifty times more than the acutest eye can
discern in the whole heavens during the clearest night; and the space
which they occupy is only the one thousand three hundred and
seventy-fifth part of the visible canopy of the sky.

On another occasion this astronomer perceived nearly six hundred stars
in one field of view of his telescope; so that in the space of a quarter
of an hour, one hundred and sixteen thousand stars passed in review
before him. Now, were we to suppose every part of this zone equally
filled with stars as the places now alluded to, there would be found in
the Milky Way alone, no less than twenty million, one hundred and ninety
thousand stars. In regard to the distance of some of these stars, it has
been ascertained that some of the more remote are not less than five
hundred times the distance of the nearest fixed star, or nearly two
thousand billion of miles; a distance so great, that light, which flies
at the rate of twelve million miles every minute, would require one
thousand six hundred and forty years before it could traverse this
mighty interval! The Milky Way is now, with good reason, considered to
be the cluster of stars in which our sun is situated; and all the stars
visible to the naked eye are only a few scattered orbs near the
extremity of this cluster.

Yet there is reason also to believe that the Milky Way, of which our
system forms a part, is no mere than a single nebula, of which several
thousands have already been discovered, which compose the universe; and
that it bears no more proportion to the whole siderial heavens than a
small dusky speck which our telescopes enable us to descry in the
heavens. Three thousand nebulae have already been discovered. Suppose
the number of stars in the whole Milky Way to be no more than ten
million, and that each of the nebulae, at an average, contains the same
number; supposing further, that only two thousand of the three thousand
nebulae are resolvable into stars, and that the other thousand are
masses of a shining fluid, not yet condensed by the Almighty into
luminous globes, the number of stars or suns comprehended in that
portion of the firmament which is within the reach of our telescopes, is
twenty thousand million." Yet all this may be as nothing compared with
the parts of the universe which we are unable to discover. See in the
Christian Keepsake for 1840, an article by Thomas Dick, entitled" An
Idea of the Universe;" compare the notes at [Job
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#009).

Supplementary Note to [Job 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#009)

The labors of astronomers, aided by instruments of remarkable accuracy
and power, and by improved methods of observation, are ever adding to
our knowledge of the "wonderful things without number" which render the
mechanism of the heavens such a spectacle of sublimity. Among the most
interesting and beautiful of the celestial phenomena are the star
clusters and nebulae. A small number of the star-clusters are bright
enough to be distinguished by the naked eye, to which they appear as a
faint cloudlike patch of light; but it is only when the telescope is
used that their real character becomes known, and they are then seen to
be vast conglomerations of stars-connected systems of suns. The greater
number are of a rounded and apparently globular form, the stars being
densely crowded together in the center; though others are very irregular
in shape. Those of a globular form often consist of an astonishingly
great number of stars. "Herschel has calculated that many clusters
contain 5,000 collected in a space, the apparent dimensions of which are
scarcely the tenth part of the surface of the lunar disk." "The
beautiful cluster in Aquarius, which Sir John Herschel's drawing
exhibits as fine luminous dust, when examined through the Earl of
Rosse's powerful reflector, appeared like a magnificent globular
cluster, entirely separated into stars. But the most beautiful specimen
of this kind is without doubt the splendid cluster in Toucan, quite
visible to the naked eye, in the vicinity of the smaller Magellanic
cloud, in a region of the southern sky entirely void of stars. The
condensation at the center of this cluster is extremely decided; there
are three perfectly distinct gradations, and the orange red color of the
central agglomeration contrasts wonderfully with the white light of the
concentric envelopes."

It was formerly supposed by many that all nebulae were resolvable into
star-clusters, and that it was only the want of instruments of
sufficient power that prevented this from being done; but spectrum
analysis has now demonstrated what was before conjectured, that although
there may be many nebulae that would appear as distinct stars if more
powerful instruments were brought to bear upon them, there are others of
a different nature, consisting, namely, of glowing masses of gaseous
matter. The forms assumed by nebulae are extremely varied, and some of
them very remarkable. The round or globular form is very common; others
resemble rings, circular or oval; others are conical or fanshaped,
resembling the tail of a comet; some consist of spirals, radiating from
a common nucleus; while many assume forms so irregular and bizarre as to
be difficult to describe. The names given to some of them, such as the
Crab Nebula, the Dumb-bell Nebula, the Fish-mouth Nebula (Nebula in
Orion, see Plate), sufficiently intimate the striking aspects that they
sometimes present.

Many of the nebulae, in which the separate stars could not previously be
distinguished, have been resolved by Lord Rosse's great telescope; while
others as seen by it have very different shapes from what less powerful
instruments gave them. This is the case with the Dumb-bell Nebula in
particular, its form as described and figured by Sir John Herschel being
considerably different from that in our engraving, which shows its
aspect under Lord Rosse's telescope. "Two luminous masses symmetrically
placed and bound together by a rather short neck, the whole surrounded
with a light nebulous envelope of oval form, gave it a very marked
appearance of regularity. This aspect was, however, modified by Lord
Rosse's telescope of three feet aperture, and the nebulous masses showed
a decided tendency to resolvability. Later still, with the six-feet
telescope, numerous stars were observed standing out, however, on a
nebulous ground. The general aspect retains its primitive shape, less
regular, but striking nevertheless. "With regard to the nebula in Orion
we extract the following passage from Guillemin's "The Heavens," edited
by John N. Lockyer, F. R. A.S., the work from which the above passages
are taken: - "Sir John Herschel compares the brightest portion to the
head of a monstrous animal, the mouth of which is open, and the nose of
which is in the form of a trunk. Hence, its name, the Fish-mouth Nebula.
It is at the edge of the opening, in a space free from nebula that the
four brightest of the components of θ (th) (a sevenfold star, that is, a
connected system of seven stars which appear to the naked eye a single
luminous point) are to be found; around, but principally above the
trapezium formed by these four stars is a luminous region, with a
mottled appearance, which Lord Rosse and Bond have partly resolved. This
region is remarkable on account, not only of the brilliancy of its
lights, but also of the numerous centers where this light is condensed,
and each of which appears to form a stellar cluster.

The rectangular form of the whole is also worthy of attention. The
nebulous masses surrounding it, the light of which is much fainter than
that of the central region, are lost gradually; according to Bond they
assume a spiral form as indicated in the drawing executed by that
astronomer" (from which our engraving is taken). Writing soon after Lord
Rosse's observation had resolved the nebula of Orion, Dr. Nichol says: -
"The great cluster in Hercules has long dazzled the heart with its
splendors; but we have learned now, that among circular and compact
galaxies, a class to which the nebulous stars belong, there are
multitudes which infinitely surpass it; nay, that schemes of being rise
above it, sun becoming nearer to sun, until their skies must be one
blaze of light, a throng of burning activities! But far aloft stands
Orion, the pre-eminent glory and wonder of the starry universe! - It
would seem almost that if all other clusters, hitherto gauged, were
collected and compressed into one, they would not surpass this mighty
group, in which every wisp, every wrinkle, is a sand heap of stars.
There are cases in which, though imagination has quailed, reason may
still adventure inquiry, and prolong its speculations; but at times we
are brought to a limit across which no human faculty has the strength to
penetrate, and where, as if at the very footstool of the secret throne,
we can only bend our heads, and silently adore!" "These facts furnish a
most impressive commentary upon the words of Eliphaz - which doeth great
things and unsearchable, "marvelous things until there be no number"
(margin) - and become the more significant from their connection with
the constellation of orion, which is more than once mentioned in the
book of Job" [Job 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#009); [Job
38:31](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#031).

[Job 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 5:10</span></span>

Who giveth rain upon the earth - In the previous verse, Eliphaz had
said, in general, that God did wonderful things - things which are
fitted to lead us to put our trust in him. In this and the succeeding
verses, he descends to particulars, and specifies those things which
show that God is worthy to be confided in. This enunciation continues to
[Job 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#016), and the general scope is,
that the agency of God is seen everywhere; and that his providential
dealings are adapted to impress man with elevated ideas of his justice
and goodness. Eliphaz begins with the rain, and says that the fact that
God sends it upon the earth was fitted to lead man to confide in him. He
means, that while the sun, and moon, and seasons have stated times, and
are governed by settled laws, the rain seems to be sent directly by God,
and is imparted at such times as are best. It is wholly under his
control, and furnishes a constant evidence of his benevolence. Without
it, every vegetable would dry up, and every animal on the earth would
soon die. The word earth here refers probably to the cultivated part of
the earth - the fields that are under tillage. Thus, Eichhorn renders
it, Angebauten Feldern. On the interest which the phenomena of rain
excited among the ancient sages of Idumea, and the laws by which it is
produced, see [Job 37:6](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#006), note; [Job
37:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#015), note; [Job
38:22-28](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#022), note.

And sendeth waters - That is, showers.

Upon the fields - Margin, "out-places." Hebrew חוצוּת chûtsôt - out of
doors, outside, abroad, meaning the fields out of cities and towns.
Eichhorn renders it, "the pastures," auf Triften. The meaning is, that
the whole country is watered; and the fact that God gives rain in this
manner, is a reason why we should put confidence in him. It shows that
he is a benevolent Being, since it contributes so essentially to human
life and happiness, and since no other being but God can cause it.

[Job 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 5:11</span></span>

To set up on high - That is, who sets up on high; or God exalts those
who are low. From the works of nature, Eliphaz passes to the dealings of
God with people, as designed to show that he was worthy of confidence.
The first proof is, that he showed himself to be the friend of the
humble and the afflicted, and often exalted those who were in lowly
circumstances, in a manner which evinced his direct interposition. It is
to be remembered here, that Eliphaz is detailing the result of his own
observation, and stating the reasons which he had observed for putting
confidence in God; and the meaning here is, that he had so often seen
this done as to show that God was the friend of the humble and the poor.
This sentiment was afterward expressed with great beauty by Mary, the
mother of the Lord Jesus:

He hath put down the mighty from their seats,

And exalted them of low degree;

He hath filled the hungry with good things,

And the rich he hath sent empty away.

[Luk 1:52-53](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#052).

That those which mourn may be exalted to safety - Or rather, they who
mourn are exalted to a place of safety, The sense is, that God did this;
and that, therefore, there was ground of confidence in him. The word
rendered "those which mourn" קדרים qoderı̂ym is from קדר qâdar, to be
turbid or foul as a torrent, [Job
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#016); hence, to go about in filthy
garments, like mourners, to mourn. The general sense of the Hebrew word,
as in Arabic, is to be squalid, dark, filthy, dusky, obscure; and hence,
it denotes those who are afflicted, which is its sense here. The
Septuagint renders it, ἀπολώλοτας apolōlotas, "the lost," or those who
are perished. The sense is plain. God raises up the bowed down, the
oppressed, and the afflicted. Eliphaz undoubtedly referred to instances
which had come under his own observation, when persons who had been in
very depressed circumstances, had been raised up to situations of
comfort, honor, and safety: and that in a manner which was a manifest
interposition of his Providence. From this he argued that those who were
in circumstances of great trial, should put their trust in him. Cases of
this kind often occur; and a careful observation of the dealings of God
with the afflicted, would undoubtedly furnish materials for an argument
like that on which Eliphaz relied in this instance.

[Job 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 5:12</span></span>

He disappointeth the devices of the crafty - He foils them in their
schemes, or makes their plans vain. This too was the result of close
observation on the part of Eliphaz. He had seen instances where the
plans of crafty, designing, and artful people had been defeated, and
where the straightforward had been prospered and honored. Such cases led
him to believe that God was the friend of virtue, and was worthy of
entire confidence.

So that their hands - So that they. The hands are the instruments by
which we accomplish our plans.

Their enterprise - Margin, Or, "anything." Hebrew תשׁיה tûshı̂yâh. This
word properly means uprightness from ישׁע yâsha‛; then help,
deliverance, [Job 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#013); then purpose,
undertaking, enterprise, that is, what one wishes to set up or
establish. Gesenius. This is its meaning here. Vulgate, "Their hands
cannot finish (implere) what they had begun." Septuagint, "Their hands
cannot perform that which is true" - ὰληθές alēthes. The Chaldee
Paraphrase refers this to the defeat of the purposes of the Egyptians:
"Who made vain the thoughts of the Egyptians, who acted wisely (or
cunningly - דחכימו) that they might do evil to Israel, but their hands
did not perform the work of their wisdom [Job
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013), who took the wise men of Pharaoh
in their own wisdom, and the counsel of their perverse astrologers he
made to return upon them." The general sense is, that artful and
designing men - people who work in the dark, and who form secret
purposes of evil, are disappointed and foiled. Eliphaz probably had seen
instances of this, and he now attributes it to God as rendering him
worthy of the confidence of people. It is still true. The crafty and the
designing are often foiled in such a manner as to show that it is wholly
of God. He exposes their designs in this way, and shows that he is the
friend of the sincere and the honest; and in doing this, he shows that
he is worthy the confidence of his people.

[Job 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 5:13</span></span>

He taketh the wise in their own craftiness - This passage is quoted by
the apostle Paul in [Co1 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#019), with
the usual formula in referring to the Old Testament, γέγραπται γάρ
gegraptai gar, "for it is written," showing that he regarded it as a
part of the inspired oracles of God. The word "wise" here undoubtedly
means the cunning, the astute, the crafty, and the designing. It cannot
mean those who are truly wise in the Scripture sense; but the meaning
is, that those who form plans which they expect to accomplish by cunning
and craft, are often the victims of their own designs. The same
sentiment not unfrequently occurs in the Scriptures and elsewhere, and
has all the aspect of being a proverb. Thus, in [Psa
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015) :

He made a pit and digged it,

And is fallen into the ditch which he made."

So [Psa 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015) :

The pagan are sunk down into the pit that they made;

In the net which they hid is their own foot taken."

So [Psa 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#008) :

Let his net that he hath bid catch himself

Into that very destruction let him fall."

So [Psa 37:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#015) :

Their sword shall enter into their own heart,

And their bow shall be broken."

Compare Eurip. Med. 409:

Κακῶν δὲ πάντων τέκτονες σοφώταται

Kakōn de pantōn tektones sofōtatai.

See also the same sentiment in Lucretius, v. 1151:

Circumretit enim visatque injuria quemque,

Atque, unde exorta cst, ad caim plerumque revertit.

"For force and rapine in their craftiest neta

Oft their own sons entangle; and the plague Ten-fold recoils."

It is to be remembered that Eliphaz here speaks of his own observation,
and of that as a reason for putting confidence in God. The sentiment is,
that he had observed that a straightforward, honest, and upright course,
was followed with the divine favor and blessing; but that a man who
attempted to carry his plans by intrigue and stratagem, would not be
permanently successfu. Sooner or later his cunning would recoil upon
himself, and he would experience the disastrous consequences of such a
course. It is still true. A man is always sure of ultimate success and
prosperity, if he is straightforward and honest. He never can be sure of
it, if he attempts to carry his plans by management. Other men may
evince as much cunning as himself; and when his net springs, it may
include himself as well as those for whom he set it. It will be well for
him if it is not made to spring on him, while others escape.

And the counsel of the froward - The design of the perverse. The word
here rendered "froward," נפתלים nı̂pâthalı̂ym, is from פתל pâthal, to
twist, to twine, to spin. It then means, to be twisted, crooked, crafty,
deceitful. Here it means those who are crooked, artful, designing.
Septuagint, πολυπλόκων poluplokōn, the involved - the much-entangled.

Is carried headlong - Hebrew is precipitated, or hastened. There is not
time for it to be matured; there is a development of the scheme before
it is ripe, and the trick is detected before there is time to put it in
execution. Nothing can be more true than this often is now. Something
that could not be anticipated develops the design, and brings the dark
plot out to mid-day; and God shows that he is the foe of all such
schemes.

[Job 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 5:14</span></span>

They meet with darkness in the day-time - Margin, "run into;" compare
the notes at [Isa 59:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#010). The sense is,
that where there is really no obstacle to the accomplishment of an
honest plan - any more than there is for a man to walk in the day-time -
they become perplexed and embarrassed, as much as a man would be, should
sudden darkness come around him at mid-day. The same sentiment occurs in
[Job 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#025). A life of honesty and
uprightness will be attended with prosperity, but a man who attempts to
carry his plans by trick and art, will meet with unexpected
embarrassments. The sentiment in all these expressions is, that God
embarrasses the cunning, the crafty, and the artful, but gives success
to those who are upright; and that, therefore, he is worthy of
confidence.

[Job 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 5:15</span></span>

But he saveth the poor from the sword - He shows himself to be the
friend and protector of the defenseless. The phrase "from the sword,
from their mouth," has been variously interpreted. Dr. Good renders it,

So he saveth the persecutors from their mouth,

And the helpless from the hand of the violent."

Noyes,

So he saveth the persecuted from their mouth,

The oppressed from the hand of the mighty."

This rendering is obtained by changing the points in the word מחרב
mēchereb, "from the sword," to מחרב māchĕrāb, making it the Hophal
participle from חרב chârab, to make desolate. This was proposed by
Capellus, and has been adopted by Durell, Michaelis, Dathe, Doederlein,
and others. Rosenmuller pronounces it wholly unauthorized. Jerome
renders it, a gladio otis eorum - "from the sword of their mouth." It
seems to me that the whole verse may be literally rendered, "he saveth
from the sword, from their mouth, and from the hand of the strong, the
poor." According to this version, the phrase "from their mouth" may
either mean from the mouth, i. e. the edge of the sword, using the
plural for the singular, or from the mouth of oppressors, using it to
represent their violence, and their disposition to devour the poor. The
latter is more probably the true interpretation, and there is no need of
a ehange in the points in the Hebrew. Thus, interpreted, the sense is,
that God preserves the poor from oppression; or, in other words, that he
befriends them, and is therefore worthy of confidence. This sentiment
accords with what is found everywhere in the Bible.

[Job 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 5:16</span></span>

So the poor hath hope - From the interposition of God. They are not left
in a sad and comfortless condition. They are permitted to regard God as
their protector and friend, and to look forward to another and a better
world. This sentiment accords with all that is elsewhere said in the
Scriptures, that the offers of mercy are specially made to the poor, and
that they are especially the objects of the divine compassion.

And iniquity stoppeth her mouth - That is, the wicked are confounded
when they see all their plans foiled, and find themselves entangled in
the snares which they have laid for others. A similar sentiment occurs
in [Psa 107:41-42](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#041) :

Yet setteth he the poor on high from affliction,

And maketh him families like a flock.

The righteous shall see it and rejoice,

And all iniquity shall stop her mouth."

It is to be remembered that Eliphaz states this as the result of his own
observation, and as clearly demonstrating in his view that there is a
superintending and overruling Providence. A careful observation of the
course of events would lead undoubtedly to the same conclusion, and this
has been embodied in almost every language by some proverbial sentiment.
We express it by saying that "honesty is the best policy;" a proverb
that is undoubtcdly founded in wisdom. The sentiment is, that if a man
wishes long to prosper, he should pursue a straight-forward and an
honest course; that cunning, intrigue, underhanded dealing, and mere
management, will sooner or later defeat itself, and recoil on the head
of him who uses it; and that, therefore, if there were no higher motive
than self-interest, a man should be honest, frank, and open. See this
argument stated at greater length, and with great beauty, in Ps. 37.

[Job 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 5:17</span></span>

Behold, happy is the man whom God correcteth - This verse commences a
new argument, designed to show that afflictions are followed by so
important advantages as to make it proper that we should submit to them
without a complaint. The sentiment in this verse, if not expressly
quoted, is probably alluded to by the apostle Paul in [Heb
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#005). The same thought frequently
occurs in the Bible: see [Jam 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#012);
[Pro 3:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#011). The sense is plain, that
God confers a favor on us when he recalls us from our sins by the
corrections of his paternal hand - as a father confers a favor on a
child whom he restrains from sin by suitable correction. The way in
which this is done, Eliphaz proceeds to state at length. He does it in
most beautiful language, and in a manner entirely in accordance with the
sentiments which occur elsewhere in the Bible. The word rendered
"correcteth" (יכח yâkach) means to argue, convince, reprove, punish, and
to judge.

It here refers to any of the modes by which God calls people from their
sins, and leads them to walk in the paths of virtue. The word "happy"
here, means that the condition of such an one is blessed (אשׁרי
'ēshrēy); Greek μακάριος makarios - not that there is happiness in the
suffering. The sense is, that it is a favor when God recalls his friends
from their wanderings, and from the error of their ways, rather than to
suffer them to go on to ruin. He does me a kindness who shows me a
precipice down which I am in danger of falling; he lays me under
obligation to him who even with violence saves me from flames which
would devour me. Eliphaz undoubtedly means to be understood as implying
that Job had been guilty of transgression, and that God had taken this
method to recall him from the error of his ways. That he had sinned, and
that these calamities had come as a consequence, he seems never once to
doubt; yet he supposes that the affliction was meant in kindness, and
proceeds to state that if Job would receive it in a proper manner, it
might be attended still with important benefits.

Therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty - "Do not
regret (תמאס tı̂m'ās). Septuagint, μή ἀπανάινου mē apanainou - the means
which God is using to admonish you." There is direct allusion here
undoubtedly to the feelings which Job had manifested Job 3; and the
object of Eliphaz is, to show him that there were important benefits to
be derived from affliction which should make him willing to bear it
without complaining. Job had exhibited, as Eliphaz thought, a
disposition to reject the lessons which afflictions were designed to
teach him, and to spurn the admonitions of the Almighty. From that state
of mind he would recall him, and would impress on him the truth that
there were such advantages to be derived from those afflictions as
should make him willing to endure all that was laid upon him without a
complaint.

[Job 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 5:18</span></span>

For he maketh sore - That is, he afflicts.

And bindeth up - He heals. The phrase is taken from the custom of
binding up a wound; see [Isa 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006),
note; [Isa 38:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#021), note. This was a
common mode of healing among the Hebrews; and the practice of medicine
appears to have been confined much to external applications. The meaning
of this verse is, that afflictions come from God, and that he only can
support, comfort, and restore. Health is his gift; and all the
consolation which we need, and for which we can look, must come from
him.

[Job 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 5:19</span></span>

He shall deliver thee in six troubles - Six is used here to denote an
indefinite number, meaning that he would support in many troubles. This
mode of speech is not uncommon among the Hebrews, where one number is
mentioned, so that an extreme number may be immediately added. The
method is, to mention a number within the limit, and then to add one
more, meaning that in all instances the thing referred to would occur.
The limit here is seven, with the Hebrews a complete and perfect number;
and the idea is, that in any succession of troubles, however numerous,
God was able to deliver. Similar expressions not unfrequently occur.
Thus, in [Amo 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#003), [Amo
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#006),[Amo
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#009), [Amo
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#011), [Amo
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#013); [Amo
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#001), [Amo
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#004),[Amo
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#006) :

Thus saith the Lord:

For three transgressions of Damascus, and for four,

I will not turn away the punishment thereof.

Thus saith the Lord:

For three transgressions of Gaza, and for four,

I will not turn away, the punishment thereof.

Thus saith the Lord:

For three transgressions of Tyrus, and for four,

I will not turn away the punishment thereof.

Thus in [Pro 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#015) :

There are three things that are never satisfied,

Yea, four things say not, It is enough.

There be three things that are too wonderful for me,

Yea, four which I know not. [Pro
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#018).

For three things the earth is disquieted,

And for four which it cannot bear." [Pro
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#021).

There be three things that go well,

Yea, four are comely in going:

A lion which is strongest among beasts,

And turneth not away for any;

A grey-hound;

An he-goat also;

And a king, against whom there is no rising up." [Pro
30:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#029).

Compare Homer, Iliad vi. 174:

Εννήμαρ ξείνισσε καὶ ἐννέα βοῦς ἱέρευσεν

Ennēmar ceinisse kai ennea bous hiereusen.

An enumeration, in regard to number similar to the one before us, occurs
in [Pro 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#016) :

These six things doth the Lord hate;

Yea, seven are an abomination to him.

There shall no evil touch thee - That is, permanently; for he could not
mean that he would not be subjected to calamity at all, since by the
very supposition he was a sufferer. But the sense is, that God would
save from those calamities.

[Job 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 5:20</span></span>

In famine he shall redeem thee - That is, will deliver thee from death.
On the meaning of the word "redeem," see the notes at [Isa
43:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#001), [Isa
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003).

From the power of the sword - Margin, as in Hebrew "hands." That is, he
should not be slain by armed men. A mouth is often attributed to the
sword in the Scriptures, because it devours; "hands" are attributed to
it here, because it is by the hand that we perform an undertaking, and
the sword is personified, and represented as acting as a conscious
agent; compare [Eze 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#005), margin. The
meaning is that God would protect those who put their trust in him, in
times of calamity and war. Doubtless Eliphaz had seen instances enough
of this kind to lead him to this general conclusion, where the pious
poor had been protected in a remarkable manner, and where signal
deliverances had been vouchsafed to the righteous in danger.

[Job 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 5:21</span></span>

Thou shalt be hid from the scourge of the tongue - Margin, Or, "when the
tongue scourgeth." The word rendered "scourge" - שׁוט shôṭ - means
properly a whip. It is used of God when he scourges people by calamities
and punishments; [Isa 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#026); [Job
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#023). See the use of the verb שׁוּט
shûṭ in [Job 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#007). Here it is used to
denote a slanderous tongue, as being that which inflicts a severe wound
upon the reputation and peace of an individual. The idea is, that God
would guard the reputation of those who commit themselves to him, and
that they shall be secure from slander, "whose breath," Shakespeare
says, "outvenoms all the worms of Nile."

Neither shalt thou be afraid when destruction cometh - That is, your
mind shall be calm in those calamities which threaten destruction. When
war rages, when the tempest howls, when the pestilence breathes upon a
community, then your mind shall be at peace. A similar thought occurs in
[Isa 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#003) : "Thou wilt keep him in
perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee;" and the same sentiment is
beautifully illustrated at length in Ps. 91. The Chaldee Paraphrase
applies all this to events which had occurred in the history of the
Hebrews. Thus, [Job 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#020) : "In the
famine in Egypt, he redeemed thee from death; and in the war with
Amalek, from being slain by the sword;" [Job
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#021) : "In the injury inflicted by the
tongue of Balaam thou wert hid among the clouds, and thou didst not fear
from the desolation of the Midianites when it came;" [Job
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#022) : "In the desolation of Sihon,
and in the famine of the desert, thou didst laugh; and of the camps of
Og, who was like a wild beast of the earth, thou wert not afraid."

[Job 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 5:22</span></span>

At destruction and famine thou shalt laugh - That is thou shalt be
perfectly safe and happy. They shall not come upon thee; and when they
approach with threatening aspect, thou shalt smile with conscious
security. The word here rendered famine (כפן kâphân) is an unusual word,
and differs from that occurring in [Job
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#020), רעב râ‛âb. This word is derived
from כפן kâphan - to languish, to pine from hunger and thirst. It then
means the languid and feeble state which exists where there is a lack of
proper nutriment. A sentiment similar to that which is here expressed
occurs in Martial, iv. 19, 4. Ridebis ventos line munere tectus, et
imbres. "Neither shalt thou be afraid of the beasts of the earth." Wild
beasts in new countries are always objects of dread, and in the
fastnesses and deserts of Arabia, they were especially so. They abounded
there; and one of the highest images of happiness there would be, that
there would be perfect safety from them. A similar promise occurs in
[Psa 91:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#013) :

Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder;

The young lion and the dragon shalt thou trample under foot.

And a promise similar to this was made by the Savior to his disciples:
"They shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it
shall not hurt them." The sentiment of Eliphaz is, that they who put
their trust in God would find protection, and have the consciousness
that they were secure wherever they were.

[Job 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 5:23</span></span>

For thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field - In the
Hebrew, "There shall be a covenant between thee and the stones of the
field." The sense is, they shall not harm thee. They are here spoken of
as enemies that were made to be at peace, and that would not annoy or
injure. It is to be remembered that this was spoken in Arabia, where
rocks and stones abounded, and where traveling, from that cause, was
difficult and dangerous. The sense here is, as I understand it, that he
would be permitted to make his way in ease and safety. Tindal renders
it:

But the castels in the land shall be confederate with thee;

The beastes of the fealde shall give thee peace.

Some have supposed that the meaning is, that the land would be free from
stones that rendered it barren, and would be rendered fertile if the
favor of God was sought. Shaw, in his Travels, supposes that it refers
to the custom of walking over stones, in which the feet are liable to be
injured every moment, and that the meaning is, that that danger would be
averted by the divine interposition. By others it has been conjectured
that the allusion is to a custom which is known as skopelism, of which
Egmont and Heyman (Reisen, II. Th. S. 156), give the following account:
"that in Arabia, if anyone is living at variance with another he places
on his land stones as a warning that no one should dare to plow it, as
by doing it he would expose himself to the danger of being punished by
him who had placed the stones there." This custom is also referred to by
Ulpian (L. ix. de officio Proconsulis), and in the Greek Pandects, Lib.
lx. Tit. xxii. Leg. 9. It may be doubted, however, whether this custom
was as early as the time of Job, or was so common then as to make it
probable that the allusion is to it. Rosenmuller supposes the meaning to
be, "Thy field shall be free from stones, which would render it
unfruitful." Alte u. neue Morgenland, in loc. Other explanations may be
seen in Rosenmuller (Commentary), but it seems to me that the view
presented above, that traveling would be rendered safe and pleasant, is
the true one. Such a promise would be among the rich blessings in a
country like Arabia.

[Job 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 5:24</span></span>

And thou shalt know that thy tabernacle shall be in peace - Thy tent -
אהלך 'âhelēkāh - showing that it was common then to dwell in tents. The
sense is, that when he was away from home he would have confidence that
his dwelling was secure, and his family safe. This would be an assurance
producing no small degree of consolation in a country abounding in wild
beasts and robbers. Such is the nature of the blessing which Eliphaz
says the man would have who put his confidence in God, and committed his
cause to him. To a certain extent this was, and is, undoubtedly true. A
man cannot indeed have miraculous assurance when from home, that his
wife and children are still alive, and in health; nor can he be certain
that his dwelling is not wrapped in flames, or that it has been
preserved from the intrusion of evil-minded men. But he may feel assured
that all is under the wise control of God; that whatever occurs will be
by his permission and direction, and will tend to ultimate good. He may
also, with calmness and peace, commit his home with all that is dear to
him to God, and feel that in his hands all is safe.

And thou shalt visit thy habitation - That is, on the return from a
journey.

And not sin - This is a very unhappy translation. The true sense is thou
shalt not miss thy dwelling; thou shalt not wander away lost, to return
no more. The word used here, and which is rendered "sin" in our common
version, is חטא châṭâ'. It is true that it is commonly rendered to sin,
and that it often has this sense. But it properly means "to miss;" that
is, not to hit the mark, spoken of a slinger. [Jdg
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#016); then to make a false step, to
stumble or fall, [Pro 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#002). It thus
accords exactly in sense with the Greek ἁμαρτάνω hamartanō. Here the
original sense of the Hebrew word should bo retained, meaning that he
would not miss the way to his dwelling; that is, that he would be
permitted to return to it in safety. Gesenius, however, renders it,
"thou musterest thy pasture (flocks), and missest naught:" that is,
nothing is gone; all thy flocks are there. But the more obvious sense,
and a sense which the connection demands, is that which refers the whole
description to a man who is on a journey, and who is exposed to the
dangers of wild beasts, and to the perils of a rough and stony way, but
who is permitted to visit his home without missing it or being
disappointed. A great variety ofinterpretations have been given of the
passage, which may be seen in Rosenmuller and Good. Many suppose it
means that he should review his domestic aflfairs, and find all to his
mind; or should find that everything was in its place, or was as it
should be. It can, not be doubted that the Hebrew word "visit" (פקד
pâqad) will bear this interpretation, but that above proposed seems to
me best to suit the connection. The margin correctly renders it, err.

[Job 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 5:25</span></span>

Thou shalt know also that thy seed shall be great - Margin, "much." That
is, thy posterity shall be numerous. This was one of the blessings
supposed to be connected with the favor of God; see the notes at [Isa
53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010).

And thine offspring as the grass of the earth - On the meaning of the
word here rendered offspring, see the notes at [Isa
48:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#019). Nothing is more common in the
Scriptures, than to compare a prosperous and a happy man to a green and
flourishing tree; see [Psa 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003); [Psa
92:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#012). The idea here is, that the
righteous would have a numerous and a happy posterity, and that the
divine favor to them would bc shown by the blessing of God on their
children; compare [Psa 128:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#001), [Psa
128:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#003).

Blessed is every one that feareth the Lord,

That walketh in his ways.

Thy wife shall be a fruitful vine by the side of thine house;

Thy children like olive-plants round about thy table.

[Job 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 5:26</span></span>

Thou shalt come to thy grave in full age - That is, thou shalt have long
life; thou shalt not be cut down prematurely, nor by any sudden
calamity. It is to be remembered that long life was regarded as an
eminent blessing in ancient times; see the notes at [Isa
65:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#022).

Like as a shock of corn cometh in in his season - Margin, "ascendeth."
As a sheaf of grain is harvested when it is fully ripe. This is a
beautiful comparison, and the meaning is obvious. He would not be cut
off before his plans were fully matured; before the fruits of
righteousness had ripened in his life. He would be taken away when he
was ripe for heaven - as the yellow grain is for the harvest. Grain is
not cut down when it is green; and the meaning of Eliphaz is, that it is
as desirable that man should live to a good old age before he is
gathered to his fathers, as it is that grain should be suffered to stand
until it is fully ripe.

[Job 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 5:27</span></span>

Lo this - All this that I have said; the truth of all the remarks which
I have made.

We have searched it - We have by careful observation of the course of
events come to these conclusions. These are our views of the providence
of God, and of the principles of his government, as far as we have had
the opportunity of observing, and they are well worthy of your
attention. The sentiments in these two chapters indicate close and
accurate observation; and if we think that the observation was not
always wholly accurate, or that the principles were carried further than
facts would warrant, or that Eliphaz applied them with somewhat undue
severity to the case of Job, we are to remember that this was in the
infancy of the world, that they had few historical records, and that
they had no written revelation. If they were favored with occasional
revelations, as Eliphaz claimed ([Job
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#012) ff), yet they were few in number,
and at distant intervals, and the divine communications pertained to but
few points.

Though it may without impropriety be maintained that some of the views
of Eliphaz and his friends were not wholly accurate, yet we may safely
ask, Where among the Greek and Roman sages can views of the divine
government be found that equal these in correctness, or that are
expressed with equal force and beauty? For profound and accurate
observation, for beauty of thought and sublimity of expression, the sage
of Teman will not fall behind the sages of Athens; and not the least
interesting thing in the contemplation of the book of Job, is the
comparison which we are almost of necessity compelled to make between
the observations on the course of events which were made in Arabia, and
those which were made by the philosophers of the ancient pagan world. Is
it improper to suppose that one design of this book was to show how far
the human mind could go, with the aid of occasional revelations on a few
points, in ascertaining the principles of the divine administration, and
to demonstrate that, after all, the mind needed a fuller revelation to
enable man to comprehend the truths pertaining to the kingdom of God?
"Hear it for thy good." Margin, as in Hebrew "thyself." These principles
are such that they are of importance for you to understand and to apply.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 6](job006)

</div>
