<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job039)  [Next](job041.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#001.md)

[Job 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 40:1</span></span>

Moreover, the Lord answered Job - The word "answered" is used here as it
is often in the Scriptures, not to denote a reply to what had been
immediately said, but to take up or continue an argument. What God said
here was designed as a reply to the spirit which Job had so frequently
manifested.

[Job 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 40:2</span></span>

Shall he that contendeth with the A mighty instruct him? - Gesenius
renders this, "Contending shall the reprover of God contend with the
Almighty?" Prof. Lee, "Shall one by contending with the Almighty correct
this?" On the grammatical construction, see Gesenius on the word יסור
yissôr, and Rosenmuller and Lee, in loc. The meaning seems to be this:
"Will he who would enter into a controversy with the Almighty now
presume to instruct him? He that was so desirous of arguing his cause
with God, will he now answer?" All the language used here is taken from
courts, and is such as I have had frequent occasion to explain in these
notes. The reference is to the fact that Job had so often expressed a
wish to carry his cause, as before a judicial tribunal, directly up to
God. He had felt that if he could get it there, he could so argue it as
to secure a verdict in his favor; that he could set arguments before the
Almighty which would secure a reversal of the fearful sentence which had
gone out against him, and which had caused him to be held as a guilty
man. God now asks whether he who had been so anxious to have a legal
argument, and to carry his cause himself before God - a man disposed to
litigation before God (רוב rûb) - was still of the same mind, and felt
himself qualified to take upon himself the office of an instructor, a
corrector, an admonisher (יסור yissôr) of God? He had the opportunity
now, and God here paused, after the sublime exhibition of his majesty
and power in the previous chapters, to give him an opportunity, as he
wished, to carry his cause directly before him. The result is stated in
[Job 40:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#003.md). Job had now nothing to
say.

He that reproveth God - Or rather, "He that is disposed to carry his
cause before God," as Job had often expressed a wish to do. The word
used here (יכח yâkach) is often employed, especially in the Hiphil, in a
"forensic sense," and means "to argue, to show, to prove" anything; then
"to argue down, to confute, to convict;" see [Job
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#025.md); [Job
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015.md); [Job
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#005.md); [Job
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#012.md); [Pro
9:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#007.md); [Pro
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#012.md); [Pro
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#025.md). It is evidently used in that
sense here - a Hiphil participle מוכיח môkiyach - and refers, not to any
man in general who reproves God, but to Job in particular, as having
expressed a wish to carry his cause before him, and to argue it there.

Let him answer it - Or rather, "Let him answer him." That is, Is he now
ready to answer? There is now an opportunity for him to carry his cause,
as he wished, directly before God. Is he ready to embrace the
opportunity, and to answer now what the Almighty has said? This does not
mean, then, as the common version would seem to imply, that the man who
reproves God must be held responsible for it, but that Job, who had
expressed the wish to carry his cause before God, had now an opportunity
to do so. That this is the meaning, is apparent from the next verses,
where Job says that he was confounded, and had nothing to say.

[Job 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 40:4</span></span>

Behold, I am vile: what shall I answer thee? - "Instead of being able to
argue my cause, and to vindicate myself as I had expected, I now see
that I am guilty, and I have nothing to say." He had argued boldly with
his friends. He had, before them, maintained his innocence of the
charges which they brought against him, and had supposed that he would
be able to maintain the same argument before God. But when the
opportunity was given, he felt that he was a poor, weak man; a guilty
and miserable offender. It is a very different thing to maintain our
cause before God, from what it is to maintain it before people; and
though we may attempt to vindicate our own righteousness when we argue
with our fellow-creatures, yet when we come to maintain it before God we
shall be dumb. On earth, people vindicate themselves; what will they do
when they come to stand before God in the judgment?

I will lay mine hand upon my mouth - An expression of silence. Catlin,
in his account of the Mandan Indians, says that this is a common custom
with them when anything wonderful occurs. Some of them laid their hands
on their mouths and remained in this posture by the hour, as an
expression of astonishment at the wonders produced by the brush in the
art of painting; compare [Job 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#005.md),
note; [Job 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#009.md), note.

[Job 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 40:5</span></span>

Once have I spoken - That is, in vindicating myself. He had once spoken
of God in an irreverent and improper manner, and he now saw it.

But I will not answer - I will not now answer, as I had expressed the
wish to do. Job now saw that he had spoken in an improper manner, and he
says that he would not repeat what he had said.

Yea, twice - He had not only offended once, as if in a thoughtless and
hasty manner, but he had repeated it, showing deliberation, and thus
aggravating his guilt. When a man is brought to a willingness to confess
that he has done wrong once, he will be very likely to see that he has
been guilty of more than one offence. One sin will draw on the
remembrance of another; and the gate once open, a flood of sins will
rush to the recollection. It is not common that a man can so isolate a
sin as to repent of that alone, or so look at one offence against God as
not to feel that he has been often guilty of the same crimes.

But I will proceed no further - Job felt doubtless that if he should
allow himself to speak again, or to attempt now to vindicate himself, he
would be in danger of committing the same error again. He now saw that
God was right; that he had himself repeatedly indulged in an improper
spirit, and that all that became him was a penitent confession in the
fewest words possible. We may learn here:

\(1\) That a view of God is fitted to produce in us a deep sense of our
own sins. No one can feel himself to be in the presence of God, or
regard the Almighty as speaking to him, without saying, "Lo I am vile?
There is nothing so much fitted to produce a sense of sinfulness and
nothingness as a view of God.

\(2\) The world will be mute at the day of judgment. They who have been
most loud and bold in vindicating themselves will then be silent, and
will confess that they are vile, and the whole world "will become guilty
before God." If the presence and the voice of God produced such an
effect on so good a man as Job, what will it not do on a wicked world?

\(3\) A true penitent is disposed to use but few words; "God be merciful
to me a sinner," or, "lo, I am vile," is about all the language which
the penitent employs. He does not go into long arguments, into
metaphysical distinctions, into apologies and vindications, but uses the
simplest language of confession, and then leaves the soul, and the
cause, in the hands of God.

\(4\) Repentance consists in stopping where we are, and in resolving to
add no more sin. "I have erred," is its language. "I will not add to it,
I will do so no more," is the immediate response of the soul. A
readiness to go into a vindication, or to expose oneself to the danger
of sinning again in the same way, is an evidence that there is no true
repentance. Job, a true penitent, would not allow himself even to speak
again on the subject, lest he should be guilty of the sin which he had
already committed.

\(5\) In repentance we must be willing to retract our errors, and
confess that we were wrong - no matter what favorite opinions we have
had, or how tenaciously and zealously we have defended and held them.
Job had constructed many beautiful and eloquent arguments in defense of
his opinions; he had brought to bear on the subject all the results of
his observation, all his attainments in science, all the adages and
maxims that he had derived from the ancients, and from a long contact
with mankind, but he was now brought to a willingness to confess that
his arguments were not solid, and that the opinions which he had
cherished were erroneous. It is often more difficult to abandon opinions
than vices; and the proud philosopher when he exercises repentance has a
more difficult task than the victim of low and debasing sensuality. His
opinions are his idols. They embody the results of his reading, his
reflections, his conversation, his observation, and they become a part
of himself. Hence, it is, that so many abandoned sinners are converted,
and so few philosophers; that religion spreads often with so much
success among the obscure and the openly wicked, while so few of the
"wise men of the world" are called and saved.

[Job 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 40:6</span></span>

Then answered the Lord unto Job out of the whirlwind - See the notes at
[Job 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#001.md). God here resumes the
argument which had been interrupted in order to give Job an opportunity
to speak and to carry his cause before the Almighty, as he had desired,
see [Job 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#002.md). Since Job had nothing
to say, the argument, which had been suspended, is resumed and
completed.

[Job 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 40:7</span></span>

Gird up thy loins now like a man - An expression taken from the ancient
mode of dress. That was a loose, flowing robe, which was secured by a
girdle when traveling, or when one entered upon anything requiring
energy; see the notes at [Mat 5:38-41](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#038.md).
The meaning here is, "Prepare thyself for the highest effort that can be
made. Put forth all your strength, and explain to me what will now be
said;" compare the notes at [Isa
41:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#021.md).

I will demand of thee - Hebrew "I will ask of thee." That is, I will
submit some questions to you to be answered.

And declare thou unto me - Hebrew "Cause me to know." That is, furnish a
satisfactory answer to these inquiries, so as to show that you
understand the subject. The object is to appeal to the proofs of divine
wisdom, and to show that the whole subject was far above human
comprehension.

[Job 40:8](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 40:8</span></span>

Wilt thou disannul my judgment? - Wilt thou "reverse" the judgment which
I have formed, and show that it should have been different from what it
is? This was implied in what Job had undertaken. He had complained of
the dealings of God, and this was the same as saying that he could show
that those dealings should have been different from what they were. When
a man complains against God, it is always implied that he supposes he
could show why his dealings should be different from what they are, and
that they should be reversed.

Wilt thou condemn me, that thou mayest be righteous? - Or, rather,
probably, "Wilt thou show that I am wrong because thou art superior in
justice?" Job had allowed himself to use language which strongly implied
that God was improperly severe. He had regarded himself as punished far
beyond what he deserved, and as suffering in a manner which justice did
not demand. All this implied that "he" was more righteous in the case
than God, for when a man allows himself to vent such complaints, it
indicates that he esteems himself to be more just than his Maker. God
now calls upon Job to maintain this proposition, since he had advanced
it, and to urge the arguments which would prove that "he" was more
righteous in the case than God. It was proper to demand this. It was a
charge of such a nature that it could not be passed over in silence, and
God asks, therefore, with emphasis, whether Job now supposed that he
could institute such an argument as to show that he was right and his
Maker wrong.

[Job 40:9](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 40:9</span></span>

Hast thou an arm like God? - The arm is the symbol of strength. The
question here is, whether Job would venture to compare his strength with
the omnipotence of God?

Or canst thou thunder with a voice like him? - Thunder is a symbol of
the majesty of the Most High, and is often spoken of as the voice of
God; see [Psa 29:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001.md). The question
here is, whether Job could presume to compare himself with the Almighty,
whose voice was the thunder?

[Job 40:10](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 40:10</span></span>

Deck thyself now with majesty and excellency - That is, such as God has.
Put on everything which you can, which would indicate rank, wealth,
power, and see whether it could all be compared with the majesty of God;
compare [Psa 104:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001.md), "O Lord my God,
thou art very great; thou art clothed with honor and majesty."

[Job 40:11](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 40:11</span></span>

Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath - That is, as God does. Show that the
same effects can be produced by "your" indignation which there is in
his. God appeals here to the effect of his displeasure in prostrating
his foes as one of the evidences of his majesty and glory, and asks Job,
if he would compare himself with him, to imitate him in this, and
produce similar effects.

And behold every one that is proud, and abase him - That is, "look" upon
such an one and bring him low, or humble him by a look. It is implied
here that God could do this, and he appeals to it as a proof of his
power.

[Job 40:12](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 40:12</span></span>

And tread down the wicked in their place - Even in the very place where
they are, crush them to the dust, as God can. It is implied that God was
able to do this, and he appeals to it as a proof of his power.

[Job 40:13](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 40:13</span></span>

Hide them in the dust together; - compare [Isa
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#010.md). The meaning seems to be, that
God had power to prostrate the wicked in the dust of the earth, and he
calls upon Job to show his power by doing the same thing.

And bind their faces in secret - The word "faces" here is probably used
(like the Greek πρίσωπα prisōpa to denote "persons." The phrase" to bind
them," is expressive of having them under control or subjection; and the
phrase "in secret" may refer to some secret or safe place - as a dungeon
or prison. The meaning of the whole is, that God had power to restrain
and control the haughty and the wicked, and he appeals to Job to do the
same.

[Job 40:14](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 40:14</span></span>

Then will I also confess unto thee ... - If you can do all this, it will
be full proof that you can save yourself, and that you do not need the
divine interposition. If he could do all this, then it might be admitted
that he was qualified to pronounce a judgment on the divine counsels and
dealings. He would then show that he had qualifications for conducting
the affairs of the universe.

[Job 40:15](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 40:15</span></span>

Behold now behemoth - Margin, "or, the elephant, as some think." In the
close of the argument, God appeals to two animals as among the chief of
his works, and as illustrating more than any others his power and
majesty - the behemoth and the leviathan. A great variety of opinions
has been entertained in regard to the animal referred to here, though
the "main" inquiry has related to the question whether the "elephant" or
the "hippopotamus" is denoted. Since the time of Bochart, who has gone
into an extended examination of the subject ("Hieroz." P. ii. L. ii. c.
xv.), the common opinion has been that the latter is here referred to.
As a "specimen" of the method of interpreting the Bible which has
prevailed, and as a proof of the slow progress which has been made
toward settling the meaning of a difficult passage, we may refer to some
of the opinions which have been entertained in regard to this animal.
They are chiefly taken from the collection of opinions made by
Schultens, in loc. Among them are the following:

\(1\) That wild animals in general are denoted. This appears to have
been the opinion of the translators of the Septuagint.

\(2\) Some of the rabbis supposed that a huge monster was referred to,
that ate every day "the grass of a thousand mountains."

\(3\) It has been held by some that the wild bull was referred to. This
was the opinion particularly of Sanctius.

\(4\) The common opinion, until the time of Bochart, has been that the
elephant was meant. See the particular authors who have held this
opinion enumerated in Schultens.

\(5\) Bochart maintained, and since his time the opinion has been
generally acquiesced in, that the "riverhorse" of the Nile, or the
hippopotamus, was referred to. This opinion he has defended at length in
the "Hieroz." P. ii. L. v. c. xv.

\(6\) Others have held that some "hieroglyphic monster" was referred to,
or that the whole description was an emblematic representation, though
without any living original. Among those who have held this sentiment,
some have supposed that it is designed to be emblematic of the old
Serpent; others, of the corrupt and fallen nature of man; others, that
the proud, the cruel, and the bloody are denoted; most of the "fathers"
supposed that the devil was here emblematically represented by the
behemoth and the leviathan; and one writer has maintained that Christ
was referred to!

To these opinions may be added the supposition of Dr. Good, that the
behemoth here described is at present a genus altogether extinct, like
the mammoth, and other animals that have been discovered in fossil
remains. This opinion is also entertained by the author of the article
on "Mazology," in the Edinburgh Encyclopaedia, chiefly for the reason
that the description of the "tail" of the behemoth [Job
40:17](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#017.md) does not well accord with the
hippopotamus. There must be admitted to be some plausibility in this
conjecture of Dr. Good, though perhaps I shall be able to show that
there is no necessity for resorting to this supposition. The word
"behemoth" (בהמות behêmôth), used here in the plural number, occurs
often in the singular number, to denote a dumb beast, usually applied to
the larger kind of quadrupeds. It occurs very often in the Scriptures,
and is usually translated "beast," or collectively "cattle."

It usually denotes land animals, in opposition to birds or reptiles. See
the Lexicons, and Taylor's "Hebrew Concordance." It is rendered by Dr.
Nordheimer (Heb. Con.) in this place, "hippopotamus." The plural form is
often used (compare [Deu 32:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#024.md); [Job
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#007.md); [Jer
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#004.md); [Hab
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#017.md); [Psa
50:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#010).md), but in no other instance is it
employed as a proper name. Gesenius supposes that under the form of the
word used here, there lies concealed some Egyptian name for the
hippopotamus, "so modified as to put on the appearance of a Semitic
word. Thus, the Ethiopian "pehemout" denotes "water-ox," by which
epithet ("bomarino") the Italians also designate the hippopotamus." The
translations do not afford much aid in determining the meaning of the
word. The Septuagint renders it, θηρία thēria, "wild beasts;" Jerome
retains the word, "Behemoth;" the Chaldee, בעיריא, "beast;" the Syriac
retains the Hebrew word; Coverdale renders it, "cruelbeast;" Prof. Lee,
"the beasts;" Umbreit, "Nilpferd," "Nile-horse;" and Noyes,
"river-horse." The only method of ascertaining, therefore, what animal
is here intended, is to compare carefully the characteristics here
referred to with the animals now known, and to find in what one these
characteristics exist. We may here safely "presume" on the entire
accuracy of the description, since we have found the previous
descriptions of animals to accord entirely with the habits of those
existing at the present day. The illustration drawn from the passage
before us, in regard to the nature of the animal, consists of two parts:

\(1\) The "place" which the description occupies in the argument. That
it is an "aquatic" animal, seems to follow from the plan and structure
of the argument. In the two discourses of yahweh Job 38-41, the appeal
is made, first, to the phenomena of nature Job 38; then to the beasts of
the earth, among whom the "ostrich" is reckoned Job 39:1-25; then to the
fowls of the air [Job 39:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#026.md); and
then follows the description of the behemoth and the leviathan. It would
seem that an argument of this kind would not be constructed without some
allusion to the principal wonders of the deep; and the fair presumption,
therefore, is, that the reference here is to the principal animals of
the aquatic race. The argument in regard to the nature of the animal
from the "place" which the description occupies, seems to be confirmed
by the fact that the account of the behemoth is immediately followed by
that of the leviathan - beyond all question an aquatic monster. As they
are here grouped together in the argument, it is probable that they
belong to the same class; and if by the leviathan is meant the
"crocodile," then the presumption is that the river-horse, or the
hippopotamus, is here intended. These two animals, as being Egyptian
wonders, are everywhere mentioned together by ancient writers; see
Herodotus, ii. 69-71; Diod. Sic. i. 35; and Pliny, "Hist. Nat." xxviii.
8.

\(2\) The character of the animal may be determined from the "particular
things" specified. Those are the following:

\(a\) It is an amphibious animal, or an animal whose usual resort is the
river, though he is occasionally on land. This is evident, because he is
mentioned as lying under the covert of the reed and the fens; as abiding
in marshy places, or among the willows of the brook, [Job
40:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#021.md), while at other times he is
on the mountains, or among other animals, and feeds on grass like the
ox, [Job 40:15](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#015.md), [Job
40:20](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#020.md). This account would not agree
well with the elephant, whose residence is not among marshes and fens,
but on solid ground.

\(b\) He is not a carnivorous animal. This is apparent, for it is
expressly mentioned that he feeds on grass, and no allusion is made to
his at any time eating flesh, [Job
40:15](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#015.md), [Job
40:20](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#020.md). This part of the description
would agree with the elephant as well as with the hippopotamus.

\(c\) His strength is in his loins, and in the navel of his belly, [Job
40:16](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#016.md). This would agree with the
hippopotamus, whose belly is equally guarded by his thick skin with the
rest of his body, but is not true of the elephant. The strength of the
elephant is in his head and neck, and his weakest part, the part where
he can be most successfully attacked, is his belly. There the skin is
thin and tender, and it is there that the rhinoceros attacks him, and
that he is even annoyed by insects. Pliny, Lib. viii. c. 20; Aelian,
Lib. xvii. c. 44; compare the notes at [Job
40:16](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#016.md).

\(d\) He is distinguished for some unique movement of his tail - some
slow and stately motion, or a certain "inflexibility" of the tail, like
a cedar. This will agree with the account of the hippopotamus; see the
notes at [Job 40:17](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#017.md).

\(e\) He is remarkable for the strength of his bones, [Job
40:18](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#018.md),

\(f\) He is remarkable for the quantity of water which he drinks at a
time, [Job 40:23](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#023.md); and

\(g\) he has the power of forcing his way, chiefly by the strength of
his nose, through snares by which it is attempted to take him, [Job
40:24](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#024.md).

These characteristics agree better with the hippopotamus than with any
other known animal; and at present critics, with few exceptions, agree
in the opinion that this is the animal which is referred to. As
additional reasons for supposing that the "elephant" is not referred to,
we may add:

\(1\) that there is no allusion to the proboscis of the elephant, a part
of the animal that could not have failed to be alluded to if the
description had pertained to him; and

\(2\) that the elephant was wholly unknown in Arabia and Egypt.

The hippopotamus Ἱπποπόταμος hippopotamos or "river horse" belongs to
the mammalia, and is of the order of the "pachydermata," or
thick-skinned animals To this order belong also the elephant, the
tapirus, the rhinoceros, and the swine. "Edin. Ency.," art. "Mazology."
The hippopotamus is found principally on the banks of the Nile, though
it is found also in the other large rivers of Africa, as the Niger, and
the rivers which lie between that and the Cape of Good Hope. It is not
found in any of the rivers which run north into the Mediterranean except
the Nile, and there only at present in that portion which traverses
Upper Egypt; and it is found also in the lakes and fens of Ethiopia. It
is distinguished by a broad head; its lips are very thick, and the
muzzle much inflated; it has four very large projecting curved teeth in
the under jaw, and four also in the upper; the skin is very thick, the
legs short, four toes on each foot inverted with small hoofs, and the
tail is very short.

The appearance of the animal, when on land, is represented as very
uncouth, the body being very large, flat, and round, the head enormously
large in proportion, the feet as disproportionably short, and the
armament of teeth in its mouth truly formidable. The length of a male
has been known to be seventeen feet, the height seven, and the
circumference fifteen; the head three feet and a half, and the mouth
about two feet in width. Mr. Bruce mentions some in the lake Tzana that
were twenty feet in length. The whole animal is covered with short hair,
which is more thickly set on the under than the upper parts. The general
color of the animal is brownish. The skin is exceedingly tough and
strong, and was used by the ancient Egyptians for the manufacture of
shields. They are timid and sluggish on land, and when pursued they
betake themselves to the water, plunge in, and walk on the bottom,
though often compelled to rise to the surface to take in fresh air.

In the day-time they are so much afraid of being discovered, that when
they rise for the purpose of breathing, they only put their noses out of
the water; but in rivers that are unfrequented, by mankind they put out
the whole head. In shallow rivers they make deep holes in the bottom to
conceal their bulk. They are eaten with avidity by the inhabitants of
Africa. The following account of the capture of a hippopotamus serves
greatly to elucidate the description in the book of Job, and to show its
correctness, even in those points which have formerly been regarded as
poetical exaggerations. It is translated from the travels of M. Kuppell,
the German naturalist, who visited Upper Egypt, and the countries still
further up the Nile, and is the latest traveler in those regions
("Reisen in Nubia, Kordofan, etc.," Frankf. 1829, pp. 52ff). "In the
province of Dongola, the fishermen and hippopotamus hunters form a
distinct class or caste; and are called in the Berber language Hauauit
(pronounced "Howowit.") They make use of a small canoe, formed from a
single tree, about ten feet long, and capable of carrying two, and at
most three men.

The harpoon which they use in hunting the hippopotamus has a strong barb
just back of the blade or sharp edge; above this a long and strong cord
is fastened to the iron, and to the other end of this cord a block of
light wood, to serve as a buoy, and aid in tracing out and following the
animal when struck. The iron is then slightly fastened upon a wooden
handle, or lance, about eight feet long. The hunters of the hippopotamus
harpoon their prey either by day or by night; but they prefer the
former, because they can then better parry the ferocious assaults of the
enraged animal. The hunter takes in his right hand the handle of the
harpoon, with a part of the cord; in his left the remainder of the cord,
with the buoy. In this manner he cautiously approaches the creature as
it sleeps by day upon a small island, or he watches at night for those
parts of the shore where he hopes the animal will come up out of the
water, in order to feed in the fields of grain.

When he has gained the desired distance (about seven paces), he throws
the lance with his full strength; and the harpoon, in order to hold,
must penetrate the thick hide and into the flesh. The wounded beast
conmmonly makes for the water, and plunges beneath it in order to
conceal himself; the handle of the harpoon falls off, but the buoy
swims, and indicates the direction which the animal takes. The
harpooning of the hippopotamus is attended with great danger, when the
hunter is perceived by the animal before he has thrown the harpoon. In
such cases the beast sometimes rushes, enraged, upon his assailant, and
crushes him at once between his wide and formidable jaws - an occurrence
that once took place during our residence near Shendi. Sometimes the
most harmless objects excite the rage of this animal; thus; in the
region of Amera, a hippopotamus once craunched in the same way, several
cattle that were fastened to a water-wheel.

So soon as the animal has been successfully struck, the hunters hasten
in their canoe cautiously to approach the buoy, to which they fasten a
long rope; with the other end of this they proceed to a largo boat or
bark, on board of which are their companions. The rope is now drawn in;
the pain thus occasioned by the barb of the harpoon excites the rage of
the animal, and he no sooner perceives the bark, than he rushes upon it;
seizes it, if possible, with his teeth; and sometimes succeeds in
shattering it, or oversetting it. The hunters, in the meantime, are not
idle; they fasten five or six other harpoons in his flesh, and exert all
their strength, by means of the cords of these, to keep him close
alongside of the bark, in order thus to diminish, in some measure, the
effects of his violence. They endeavor, with a long sharp iron, to
divide the "ligamentum lugi," or to beat in the skull - the usual modes
in which the natives kill this animal.

Since the carcass of a fullgrown hippopotamus is too large to be drawn
out of the water without quite a number of men, they commonly cut up the
animal, when killed, in the water, and draw the pieces ashore. In the
whole Turkish province of Dongola, there are only one or two hippopotami
killed annually. In the years 1821-23, inclusive, there were nine
killed, four of which were killed by us. The flesh of the young animal
is very good eating; when full grown, they are usually very fat, and
their carcass is commonly estimated as equal to four or five oxen. The
hide is used only for making whips, which are excellent; and one hide
furnishes from three hundred and fifty to five hundred of them. The
teeth are not used. One of the hippopotami which we killed was a very
old male, and seemed to have reached his utmost growth. He measured,
from the snout to the end of the tail, about fifteen feet, and his
tusks, from the root to the point, along the external curve,
twenty-eight inches.

In order to kill him, we had a battle with him of four hours long, and
that too in the night. Indeed, he came very near destroying our large
bark, and with it, perhaps, all our lives. The moment he saw the hunters
in the small canoe, as they were about to fasten the long rope to the
buoy, in order to draw him in, he threw himself with one rush upon it,
dragged it with him under water, and shattered it to pieces. The two
hunters escaped the extreme danger with great difficulty. Out of
twenty-five musketballs which were fired into the monster's head, at the
distance of five feet, only one penetrated the hide and the bones near
the nose; so that every time he breathed he snorted streams of blood
upon the bark. All the other balls remained sticking in the thickness of
his hide. We had at last to employ a small cannon, the use of which at
so short a distance had not before entered our minds; but it was only
after five of its balls, fired at the distance of a few feet, had
mangled, most shockingly, the head and body of the monster, that he gave
up the ghost.

The darkness of the night augmented the horrors and dangers of the
contest. This gigantic hippopotamus dragged our large bark at will in
every direction of the stream; and it was in a fortunate moment for us
that he yielded, just as he had drawn the bark among a labyrinth of
rocks, which might have been so much the more dangerous, because, from
the great confusion on board, no one had observed them. Hippopotami of
the size of the one above described cannot be killed by the natives, for
want of a cannon. These animals are a real plague to the land, in
consequence of their voraciousness. The inhabitants have no permanent
means of keeping them away from their fields and plantations; all that
they do is to make a noise during the night with a drum, and to keep up
fires in different places. In some parts the hippopotami are so bold
that they will yield up their pastures, or places of feeding, only when
a large number of persons come rushing upon them with sticks and loud
cries."

The method of taking the hippopotamus by the Egyptians was the
following: "It was entangled by a running noose, at the extremity of a
long line wound upon a reel, at the same time that it was struck by the
spear of the chasseur. This weapon consisted of a broad, flat blade,
furnished with a deep tooth or barb at the side, having a strong rope of
considerable length attached to its upper end, and running over the
notched summit of a wooden shaft, which was inserted into the head or
blade, like a common javelin. It was thrown in the same manner, but on
striking, the shaft fell and the iron head alone remained in the body of
the animal, which, on receiving the wound, plunged into deep water, the
rope having been immediately let out. When fatigued by exertion, the
hippopotamus was dragged to the boat, from which it again plunged, and
the same was repeated until it became perfectly exhausted: frequently
receiving additional wounds, and being entangled by other nooses, which
the attendants held in readiness, as it was brought within their reach."
Wilkinson's "Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians," vol. iii.
pp. 70, 71.

Which I made with thee - That is, either "I have made him as well as
you, have formed him to be a fellow-creature with thee," or, "I have
made him near thee " - to wit, in Egypt. The latter Bochart supposes to
be the true interpretation, though the former is the more natural.
According to that, the meaning is, that God was the Creator of both; and
he calls on Job to contemplate the power and greatness of a
fellow-creature, though a brute, as illustrating his own power and
majesty. The annexed engraving - the figures drawn from the living
animal - shows the general appearance of the massive and unwieldy
hippopotamus. The huge head of the animal, from the prominency of its
eyes, the great breadth of its muzzle, and the singular way in which the
jaw is placed in the head, is almost grotesque in its ugliness. When it
opens its jaws its enormously large mouth and tongue, pinkish and
fleshy, and armed with tusks of most formidable character, is
particularly striking. In the engraving hippopotami are represented as
on a river bank asleep, and in the water, only the upper part of the
head appearing above the surface, and an old animal is conveying her
young one on her back down the stream.

He eateth grass as an ox - This is mentioned as a remarkable property of
this animal. The "reasons" why it was regarded as so remarkable may have
been:

\(1\) that it might have been supposed that an animal so huge and
fierce, and armed with such a set of teeth, would be carnivorous, like
the lion or the tiger; and

\(2\) it was remarkable that an animal that commonly lived in the water
should be graminivorous, as if it were wholly a land animal.

The common food of the hippopotamus is "fish." In the water they pursue
their prey with great swiftness and perseverance. They swim with much
force, and are capable of remaining at the bottom of a river for thirty
or forty minutes. On some occasions three or four of them are seen at
the bottom of a river, near some cataract, forming a kind of line, and
seizing upon such fish as are forced down by the violence of the stream.
"Goldsmith." But it often happens that this kind of food is not found in
suffient abundance, and the animal is then forced on land, where it
commits great depredations among plantations of sugar cane and grain.
The fact here adverted to, that the food of the hippopotamus is grass or
herbs, is also mentioned by Diodorus - Κατανέμεται τόν τε σῖτον και τόν
χορτον Katanemetai ton te siton kai ton chorton. The same thing is
mentioned also by Sparrmann, "Travels through South Africa," p. 563,
German Translation.

[Job 40:16](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 40:16</span></span>

Lo now, his strength is in his loins - The inspection of the figure of
the hippopotamus will show the accuracy of this. The strength of the
elephant is in the neck; of the lion in the paw; of the horse and ox in
the shoulders; but the principal power of the river-horse is in the
loins; compare [Nah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001.md). This passage
is one that proves that the elephant cannot be referred to.

And his force is in the navel of his belly - The word which is here
rendered "navel" (שׁריר shârı̂yr) means properly "firm, hard, tough," and
in the plural form, which occurs here, means the "firm," or "tough"
parts of the belly. It is not used to denote the "navel" in any place in
the Bible, and should not have been so rendered here. The reference is
to the muscles and tendons of this part of the body, and perhaps
particularly to the fact that the hippopotamus, by crawling so much on
his belly among the stones of the stream or on land, acquires a special
hardness or strength in those parts of the body. This clearly proves
that the elephant is not intended. In that animal, this is the most
tender part of the body. Pliny and Solinus both remark that the elephant
has a thick, hard skin on the back, but that the skin of the belly is
soft and tender. Pliny says ("Hist. Nat." Lib. viii. c. 20), that the
rhinoceros, when about to attack an elephant, "seeks his belly, as if he
knew that that was the most tender part." So Aelian, "Hist." Lib. xvii.
c. 44; see Bochart, as above.

[Job 40:17](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 40:17</span></span>

He moveth his tail like a cedar - Margin, "setteth up." The Hebrew word
(חפץ châphêts) means "to bend, to curve;" and hence, it commonly denotes
"to be inclined, favorably disposed to desire or please." The obvious
meaning here is, that this animal had some remarkable power of "bending"
or "curving" its tail, and that there was some resemblance in this to
the motion of the cedar-tree when moved by the wind. In "what" this
resemblance consisted, or how this was a proof of its power, it is not
quite easy to determine. Rosenmuller says that the meaning is, that the
tail of the hippopotamus was "smooth, round, thick, and firm," and in
this respect resembled the cedar. The tail is short - being, according
to Abdollatiph (see Ros.), about half a cubit in length. In the lower
part, says he, it is thick, "equalling the extremities of the fingers;"
and the idea here, according to this, is, that this short, thick, and
apparently firm tail, was bent over by the will of the animal as the
wind bends the branches of the cedar.

The point of comparison is not the "length," but the fact of its being
easily bent over or curved at the pleasure of the animal. Why this,
however, should have been mentioned as remarkable, or how the power of
the animal in this respect differs from others, is not very apparent.
Some, who have supposed the elephant to be here referred to, have
understood this of the proboscis. But though "this would be" a
remarkable proof of the power of the animal, the language of the
original will not admit of it. The Hebrew word (זנב zânâb) is used only
to denote the tail. It is "possible" that there may be here an allusion
to the unwieldy nature of every part of the animal, and especially to
the thickness and inflexibility of the skin and what was remarkable was,
that notwithstanding this, this member was entirely at its command.
Still, the reason of the comparison is not very clear. The description
of the movement of the "tail" here given, would agree much better with
some of the extinct orders of animals whose remains have been recently
discovered and arranged by Cuvier, than with that of the hippopotamus.
Particularly, it would agree with the account of the ichthyosaurus (see
Buckland's "Geology, Bridgewater Treatise," vol. i. 133ff), though the
other parts of the animal here described would not accord well with
this.

The sinews of his stones are wrapped together - Good renders this,
"haunches;" Noyes, Prof. Lee, Rosenmuller, and Schultens, "thighs;" and
the Septuagint simply has: "his sinews." The Hebrew word used here (פחד
pachad) means properly "fear, terror," [Exo
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#016.md); [Job
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#011.md); and, according to Gesenius, it
then means, since "fear" is transferred to cowardice and shame, anything
which "causes" shame, and hence, the secret parts. So it is understood
here by our translators; but there does not seem to be any good reason
for this translation, but there is every reason why it should not be
thus rendered. The "object" of the description is to inspire a sense of
the "power" of the animal, or of his capacity to inspire terror or
dread; and hence, the allusion here is to those parts which were fitted
to convey this dread, or this sense of his power - to wit, his strength.
The usual meaning of the word, therefore, should be retained, and the
sense then would be, "the sinews of his terror," that is, of his parts
fitted to inspire terror, "are wrapped together;" are firm, compact,
solid. The allusion then is to his thighs or haunches, as being
formidable in their aspect, and the seat of strength. The sinews or
muscles of these parts seemed to be like a hard-twisted rope; compact,
firm, solid, and such as to defy all attempts to overcome them.

[Job 40:18](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 40:18</span></span>

His bones are as strong pieces of brass - The circumstance here adverted
to was remarkable, because the common residence of the animal was the
water, and the bones of aquatic animals are generally hollow, and much
less firm than those of land animals. It should be observed here, that
the word rendered "brass" in the Scriptures most probably denotes
"copper." Brass is a compound metal, composed of copper and zinc; and
there is no reason to suppose that the art of compounding it was known
at as early a period of the world as the time of Job. The word here
translated "strong pieces" (אפיק 'âphı̂yq) is rendered by Schultens
"alvei - channels," or "beds," as of a rivulet or stream; and by
Rosenmuller, Gesenius, Noyes, and Umbreit, "tubes" - supposed to allude
to the fact that they seemed to be hollow tubes of brass. But the more
common meaning of the word is "strong, mighty," and there is no
impropriety in retaining that sense here; and then the meaning would be,
that his bones were so firm that they seemed to be made of solid metal.

[Job 40:19](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 40:19</span></span>

He is the chief of the ways of God - In size and strength. The word
rendered "chief" is used in a similar sense in [Num
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#020.md), "Amalek was the first of the
nations;" that is, one of the most powerful and mighty of the nations.

He that made him can make his sword approach unto him - According to
this translation, the sense is, that God had power over him,
notwithstanding his great strength and size, and could take his life
when he pleased. Yet this, though it would be a correct sentiment, does
not seem to be that which the connection demands. That would seem to
require some allusion to the strength of the animal; and accordingly,
the translation suggested by Bochart, and adopted substantially by
Rosenmuller, Umbreit, Noyes, Schultens, Prof. Lee, and others, is to be
preferred - "He that made him furnished him with a sword." The allusion
then would be to his strong, sharp teeth, hearing a resemblance to a
sword, and designed either for defense or for the purpose of cutting the
long grass on which it fed when on the land. The propriety of this
interpretation may be seen vindicated at length in Bochart, "Hieroz." P.
ii. Lib. v. c. xv. pp. 766, 762. The ἅρπη harpē, i. e. the sickle or
scythe, was ascribed to the hippopotamus by some of the Greek writers.
Thus, Nicander, "Theriacon," verse 566:

Η ἵππον, τὸν Νεῖλος ύπερ Σάιν αἰθαλοεσσαν

Βόσκει, ἀρούρησιν δὲ κακὴν ἐπιβάλλεται

ἍΡΠΗΝ.

Ee hippon, ton Neilos huper Sain aithaloessan

Boskei, arourēsin de kakēn epiballetai.

Harpēn

On this passage the Scholiast remarks, "The ἅρπη harpē, means a sickle,
and the teeth of the hippopotamus are so called - teaching that this
animal consumes (τρώγει trōgei) the harvest." See Bochart also for other
examples. A slight inspection of the "cut" will show with what propriety
it is said of the Creator of the hippopotamus, that he had armed him
with a sickle, or sword.

[Job 40:20](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 40:20</span></span>

Surely the mountains bring him forth food - That is, though he lies
commonly among the reeds and fens, and is in the water a considerable
portion of his time, yet he also wanders to the mountains, and finds his
food there. But the point of the remark here does not seem to be, that
the mountains brought forth food for him, but that he gathered it "while
all the wild beasts played around him, or sported in his very presence."
It was remarkable that an animal so large and mighty, and armed with
such a set of teeth, should not be carnivorous, and that the wild beasts
on the mountains should continue their sports without danger or alarm in
his very presence. This fact could be accounted for partly because the
"motions" of the hippopotamus were so very slow and clumsy that the wild
beasts had nothing to fear from him, and could easily escape from him if
he were disposed to attack them, and partly from the fact that he seems
to have "preferred" vegetable food. The hippopotamus is seldom
carnivorous, except when driven by extreme hunger, and in no respect is
he formed to be a beast of prey. In regard to "the fact" that the
hippopotamus is sometimes found in mountainous or elevated places, see
Bochart.

[Job 40:21](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 40:21</span></span>

He lieth under the shady trees - Referring to his usually inactive and
lazy life. He is disposed to lie down in the shade, and especially in
the vegetable growth in marshy places on the banks of lakes and rivers,
rather than to dwell in the open field or in the upland forest. This
account agrees well with the habits of the hippopotamus. The word here
and in [Job 40:22](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#022.md) rendered "shady
trees" (צאלים tse'eliym), is by Gesenius, Noyes, Prof. Lee, and
Schultens, translated "lotus," and "wild lotus." The Vulgate, Syriac,
Rosenmuller, Aben-Ezra, and others, render it "shady trees." It occurs
nowhere else in the Scriptures, and it is difficult, therefore, to
determine its meaning. According to Schultens and Gesenius, it is
derived from the obsolete word צאל tsā'al, "to be thin, slender;" and
hence, in Arabic it is applied to the "wild lotus" - a plant that grows
abundantly on the banks of the Nile, and that often serves the wild
beasts of the desert for a place of retreat. It is not very important
whether it be rendered the "lotus," or "shades," though the probable
derivation of the word seems to favor the former.

In the covert of the reed - It is well known that reeds abounded on the
banks of the Nile. These would furnish a convenient and a natural
retreat for the hippopotamus.

And fens - בצה bitstsâh - "marsh, marshy places." This passage proves
that the elephant is not here referred to. He is never found in such
places.

[Job 40:22](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 40:22</span></span>

The shady trees - Probably the "lote-trees;" see the note at [Job
40:21](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#021.md). The same word is used here.

The willow-trees of the brook - Of the "stream," or "rivulet." The
Hebrew word (נחל nachal) means rather "a wady;" a gorge or gulley, which
is swollen with torrents in the winter, but which is frequently dry in
summer; see the notes at [Job 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#015.md).
Willows grew commonly on the banks of rivers. They could not be
cultivated in the desert; [Isa 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#007.md).

[Job 40:23](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 40:23</span></span>

Behold he drinketh up a river - Margin, "oppresseth." The margin
expresses the proper meaning of the Hebrew word, עשׁק ‛âshaq. It usually
means to oppress, to treat with violence and injustice; and to defraud,
or extort. But a very different sense is given to this verse by Bochart,
Gesenius, Noyes, Schultens, Umbreit, Prof. Lee, and Rosenmuller.
According to the interpretation given by them the meaning is, "The
stream overfloweth, and he feareth not; he is secure, even though Jordan
rush forth even to his mouth." The reference then would be, not to the
fact that he was greedy in his mode of drinking, but to the fact that
this huge and fierce animal, that found its food often on the land, and
that reposed under the shade of the lotus and the papyrus, could live in
the water as well as on the land, and was unmoved even though the
impetuous torrent of a swollen river should overwhelm him.

The "names" by which this translation is recommended are a sufficient
guarantee that it is not a departure from the proper meaning of the
original. It is also the most natural and obvious interpretation. It is
impossible to make good sense of the phrase "he oppresseth a river;" nor
does the word used properly admit of the translation "he drinketh up."
The word "river" in this place, therefore (נהר nâhâr), is to be regarded
as in the nominative case to יעשׁק ya‛âshaq, and the meaning is, that
when a swollen and impetuous river rushes along and bears all before it,
and, as it were, "oppresses" everything in its course, he is not
alarmed; he makes no effort to flee; he lies perfectly calm and secure.
What was "remarkable" in this appears to have been, that an animal that
was so much on land, and that was not properly a fish, should be thus
calm and composed when an impetuous torrent rolled over him. The
Septuagint appears to have been aware that this was the true
interpretation, for they render this part of the verse, Ἐάν γέηται
πλνμμύρα, κ.τ.λ. Ean genētai plēmmura, etc. - "Should there come a
flood, he would not regard it." Our common translation seems to have
been adopted from the Vulgate - "Ecceabsorbebit fluvium."

He trusteth that he can draw up Jordan into his mouth - Or, rather, "He
is confident, i. e. unmoved, though Jordan should rush forth to his
mouth." The idea is, that though the whole river Jordan should seem to
pour down upon him as "if" it were about to rush into his mouth, it
would not disturb him. Even such an impetuous torrent would not alarm
him. Being amphibious, he would not dread what would fill a land animal
with alarm. There is no evidence that the hippopotamus was ever found in
the river Jordan, nor is it necessary to suppose this in order to
understand this passage. The mention of the Jordan shows indeed that
this river was known to the writer of this book, and that it was
probably written by someone who resided in the vicinity. In speaking of
this huge foreign animal, it was not unnatural to mention a river that
was familiarly known, and to say that he would not be alarmed should
such a river rush suddenly and impetuously upon him. Even though the
hippopotamus is an inhabitant of the Nile, and was never seen in the
Jordan, it was much more natural to mention this river in this
connection than the Nile. It was better known, and the illustration
would be better understood, and to an inhabitant of that country would
be much more striking. I see no reason, therefore, for the supposition
of Bechart and Rosenmuller, that the Jordan here is put for any large
river. The illustration is just such as one would have used who was well
acquainted with the Jordan - that the river horse would not be alarmed
even though such a river should pour impetuously upon him.

[Job 40:24](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 40:24</span></span>

He taketh it with his eyes - Margin, "Or, will any take him in his
sight, or, bore his nose with a gin!" From this marginal reading it is
evident that our translators were much perplexed with this passage.
Expositors have been also much embarrassed in regard to its meaning, and
have differed much in their exposition. Rosenmuller supposes that this
is to be regarded as a question, and is to be rendered, "Will the hunter
take him while he sees him?" - meaning that he could not be taken
without some snare or guile. The same view also is adopted by Bochart,
who says that the hippopotamus could be taken only by some secret snare
or pitfall. The common mode of taking him, he says, was to excavate a
place near where the river horse usually lay, and to cover it over with
reeds and canes, so that he would fall into it unawares. The meaning
then is, that the hunter could not approach him openly and secure him
while he saw him, but that some secret plan must be adopted to take him.
The meaning then is, "Can he be taken when he sees the hunter?"

His nose pierceth through snares - Or rather, "When taken in snares, can
anyone pierce his nose?" That is, Can the hunter even then pierce his
nose so as to put in a ring or cord, and lead him wherever he pleases?
This was the common method by which a wild animal was secured when taken
(see the notes at [Isa 37:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#029).md), but it
is here said that this could not be done to this huge animal. He could
not be subdued in this manner. He was a wild, untamed and fierce animal,
that defied all the usual methods by which wild beasts were made
captive. In regard to the difficulty of taking this animal, see the
account of the method by which it is now done, in the notes at [Job
40:15](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#015.md). That account shows that there
is a striking accuracy in the description.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 41](job041.md)

</div>
