<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joel Index](joe)  
  [Previous](joe002)  [Next](amo000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joel Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#001)

[Joel 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joe 3:1</span></span>

For, behold - The prophet by the word, "for," shows that he is about to
explain in detail, what he had before spoken of, in sum. By the word,
"behold," he stirs up our minds for something great, which he is to set
before our eyes, and which we should not be prepared to expect or
believe, unless he solemnly told us, "Behold." As the detail, then, of
what goes before, the prophecy contains all times of future judgment on
those who should oppose God, oppress His Church and people, and sin
against Him in them and all times of His blessing upon His own people,
until the Last Day. And this it gives in imagery, partly describing
nearer events of the same sort, as in the punishments of Tyre and Sidon,
such as they endured from the kings of Assyria, from Nebuchadnezzar,
from Alexander; partly using these, His earlier judgments, as
representatives of the like punishments against the like sins unto the
end.

In those days and in that time - The whole period of which the prophet
had been speaking, was the time from which God called His people to
repentance, to the Day of Judgment. The last division of that time was
from the beginning of the Gospel unto that Day. He fixes the occasion of
which he speaks by the words, "when I shall bring again the captivity of
Judah and Jerusalem." This form was used, before there was any general
dispersion of the nation. For all captivity of single members of the
Jewish people had this sore calamity, that it severed them from the
public worship of God, and exposed them to idolatry. So David complains,
"they have driven me out this day from abiding in the inheritance of the
Lord, saying, go serve other gods" [Sa1
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#019). The restoration then of single
members, or of smaller bodies of captives, was, at that time, an
unspeakable mercy. It was the restoration of those shut out from the
worship of God; and so was an image "of the deliverance from the bondage
of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God" [Rom
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021), or of any "return" of those who
had gone astray, "to the Shepherd and Bishop of their souls [Pe1
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#025). The grievous captivity of the
Jews, now, is to Satan, whose servants they made themselves, when they
said, "we have no king but Caesar; His Blood be upon us and upon our
children." Their blessed deliverance will be "from the power of Satan
unto God" [Act 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#018). It is certain
from Paul [Rom 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026), that there shall
be a complete conversion of the Jews, before the end of the world, as
indeed has always been believed. This shall probably be shortly before
the end of the world, and God would here say, "when I shall have brought
to an end the "captivity of Judah and Jerusalem," i. e., of that people
"to whom were the promises" [Rom 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004),
and shall have delivered them from the bondage of sin and from blindness
to light and freedom in Christ, then will I gather all nations to
judgment."

[Joel 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joe 3:2</span></span>

I will gather all nations and bring them down to the valley of
Jehoshaphat - It may be that the imagery is furnished by that great
deliverance which God gave to Jehoshaphat, when "Ammon and Moab and Edom
come against" him, "to cast God's people out of" His "possession," which
"He gave" them "to inherit" [Ch2
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#011), and Jehoshaphat appealed to
God, "O our God, wilt Thou not judge them?" and God said, "the battle is
not yours but God's," and God turned their swords everyone against the
other, "and none escaped. And on the fourth day they assembled
themselves in the valley of Berachah" (blessing); "for there they blesed
the Lord" 2 Chr. 24, 26. So, in the end, He shall destroy antichrist,
not by human aid, but "by the breath of His mouth," and then the end
shall come and lie shall sit on the throne of His glory to judge all
nations. Then shall none escape of those gathered against Judah and
Jerusalem, but shall be judged of their own consciences, as those former
enemies of His people fell by their own swords.

That valley, however, is nowhere called "the valley of Jehoshaphat." It
continued to be "called the valley of Berachah," the writer adds, "to
this day." And it is so called still. Caphar Barucha, "the village of
blessing," was still known in that neighborhood in the time of Jerome ;
it had been known in that of Josephus . Southwest of Bethlehem and east
of Tekoa are still 3 or 4 acres of ruins , bearing the name Bereikut ,
and a valley below them, still bearing silent witness to God's ancient
mercies, in its but slightly disguised name, "the valley of Bereikut"
(Berachah). The only valley called the "valley of Jehoshaphat" , is the
valley of Kedron, lying between Jerusalem and the Mount of Olives,
incircling the city on the east.

There Asa, Hezekiah, and Josiah cast the idols, which they had burned
[Kg1 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#013); [Ch2
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#014); [Kg2
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#006), [Kg2
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#012). The valley was the common
burying-place for the inhabitants of Jerusalem . "There" was the garden
where Jesus oftentimes resorted with His disciples; "there" was His
Agony and Bloody Sweat; there Judas betrayed Him; thence He was dragged
by the rude officers of the high priest. The temple, the token of God's
presence among them, the pledge of His accepting their sacrifices which
could only be offered there, overhung it on the one side. There, under
the rock on which that temple stood, they dragged Jesus, "as a lamb to
the slaughter" [Isa 53:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007). On the other
side, it was overhung by the Mount of "Olives," from where, "He beheld
the city and wept over it," because it "knew" not "in" that its "day,
the things which belong to its peace;" whence, after His precious Death
and Resurrection, Jesus ascended into, heaven.

There the Angels foretold His return, "This heaven shall so come in like
manner as ye have seen Him go into heaven" [Act
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011). It has been a current opinion,
that our Lord should descend to judgment, not only in like manner, and
in the like Form of Man, but in the same place, over this valley of
Jehoshaphat. Certainly, if so it be, it were appropriate, that He should
appear in His Majesty, where, for us, He bore the extremest shame; that
He should judge "there," where for us, He submitted to be judged. "He
sheweth," says Hilary (in Matt. 25), "that the Angels bringing them
together, the assemblage shall be in the place of His Passion; and
meetly will His Coming in glory be looked for there, where He won for us
the glory of eternity by the sufferings of His humility in the Body."
But since the Apostle says, "we shall meet the Lord in the air," then,
not "in" the valley of Jehoshaphat, but "over" it, in the clouds, would
His throne be. : "Uniting, as it were, Mount Calvary and Olivet, the
spot would be well suited to that judgment wherein the saints shall
partake of the glory of the Ascension of Christ and the fruit of His
Blood and Passion, and Christ shall take deserved vengeance of His
persecutors and of all who would not be cleansed by His Blood."

God saith, "I will gather all nations," of the gathering together of the
nations against Him under antichrist, because He overrules all things,
and while they, in "their" purpose, are gathering themselves against His
people and elect, He, in His purpose secret to them, is gathering them
to sudden destruction and judgment, "and will bring them down;" for
their pride shall be brought down, and themselves laid low. Even Jewish
writers have seen a mystery in the word, and said, that it hinteth "the
depth of God's judgments," that God "would descend with them into the
depth of judgment" , "a most exact judgment even the most hidden
things."

His very presence there would say to the wicked , "In this place did I
endure grief for you; here, at Gethsemane, I poured out for you that
sweat of water and Blood; here was I betrayed and taken, bound as a
robber, dragged over Cedron into the city; hard by this valley, in the
house of Caiaphas and then of Pilate, I was for you judged and condemned
to death, crowned with thorns, buffeted, mocked and spat upon; here, led
through the whole city, bearing the Cross, I was at length crucified for
you on Mount Calvary; here, stripped, suspended between heaven and
earth, with hands, feet, and My whole frame distended, I offered Myself
for you as a Sacrifice to God the Father. Behold the Hands which ye
pierced; the Feet which ye perforated; the Sacred prints which ye anew
imprinted on My Body. Ye have despised My toils, griefs, sufferings; ye
have counted the Blood of My covenant an unholy thing; ye have chosen to
follow your own concupiscences rather than Me, My doctrine and law; ye
have preferred momentary pleasures, riches, honors, to the eternal
salvation which I promised; ye have despised Me, threatening the fires
of hell.

Now ye see whom ye have despised; now ye see that My threats and
promises were not vain, but true; now ye see that vain and fallacious
were your loves, riches, and dignities; now ye see that ye were fools
and senseless in the love of them; but too late. "Depart, ye cursed,
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels." But ye
who believed, hoped, loved, worshiped Me, your Redeemer, who obeyed My
whole law; who lived a Christian life worthy of Me; who lived soberly,
godly and righteously in this world, looking for the blessed hope and
this My glorious Coming, "Come ye blessed of My Father, inherit the
kingdom of heaven prepared for you from the foundation of the World -
And these shall go into everlasting fire; but the righteous into life
eternal." Blessed he whoso continually thinketh or foreseeth, provideth
for these things."

And will plead with them there - Woe to him, against whom God pleadeth!
He saith not, "judgeth" but "pleadeth," making Himself a party, the
Accuser as well as the Judge , "Solemn is it indeed when Almighty God
saith, "I will plead. He that hath ears to hear let him hear." For
terrible is it. Wherefore also that "Day of the Lord" is called "great
and terrible." For what more terrible than, at such a time, the pleading
of God with man? For He says, "I will plead," as though He had never yet
pleaded with man, great and terrible as have been His judgments since
that first destruction of the world by water. Past are those judgments
on Sodom and Gomorrah, on Pharaoh and his hosts, on the whole people in
the wilderness from twenty years old and upward, the mighty oppressions
of the enemies into whose hands He gave them in the land of promise;
past were the four Empires; but now, in the time of antichrist, "there
shall be tribulation, such as there had not been from the beginning of
the world." But all these are little, compared with that great and
terrible Day; and so He says, "I will plead," as though all before had
not been, to "plead.""

God maketh Himself in such wise a party, as not to condemn those
unconvicted; yet the "pleading" has a separate awfulness of its own. God
impleads, so as to allow Himself to be impleaded and answered; but there
is no answer. He will set forth what He had done, and how we have
requited Him. And we are without excuse. Our memories witness against
us; our knowledge acknowledges His justice; our conscience convicts us;
our reason condemns us; all unite in pronouncing ourselves ungrateful,
and God holy and just. For a sinner to see himself is to condemn
himself; and in the Day of Judgment, God will bring before each sinner
his whole self.

For My people - o: "God's people are the one true Israel, "princes with
God," the whole multitude of the elect, foreordained to eternal life."
Of these, the former people of Israel, once chosen of God, was a type.
As Paul says, "They are not all Israel which are of Israel" [Rom
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006); and again, "As many as walk
according to this rule" of the Apostle's teaching, "peace be on them and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God" [Gal
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016), i. e., not among the Galatians
only, but in the whole Church throughout the world. Since the whole
people and Church of God is one, He lays down one law, which shall be
fulfilled to the end; that those who, for their own ends, even although
therein the instruments of God, shall in any way injure the people of
God, shall be themselves punished by God. God makes Himself one with His
people. "He that toucheth you, toucheth the apple of My eye" [Zac
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008). So our Lord said, "Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou Me?" [Act 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004) and
in the Day of Judgment He will say, "I was an hungered and ye gave me no
meat. Forasmuch as ye did it not unto one of the least of these My
brethern, ye did it not to Me" [Mat
25:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034). : "By calling them "My
heritage," He shows that He will not on any terms part with them or
suffer them to be lost, but will vindicate them to Himself forever."

Whom they have scattered among the nations - Such was the offence of the
Assyrians and Babylonians, the first ""army," which God sent against His
people. And for it, Nineveh and Babylon perished. : "Yet he does not
speak of that ancient people, or of its enemies only, but of all the
elect both in that people and in the Church of the Gentiles, and of all
persecutors of the elect. For that people were a figure of the Church,
and its enemies were a type of those who persecute the saints." The
dispersion of God's former people by the pagan was renewed in those who
persecuted Christ's disciples from "city to city," banished them, and
confiscated their goods. Banishment to mines or islands were the
slightest punishments of the early Christians .

[Joel 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joe 3:3</span></span>

And they have cast lots - They treated God's people as of no account,
and delighted in showing their contempt toward them. They chose no one
above another, as though all alike were worthless. "They cast lots," it
is said elsewhere, "upon their honorable men" [Nah
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#010), as a special indignity, above
captivity or slavery. A "girl" they sold for an evening's revelry, and a
"boy" they exchanged for a night's debauch.

[Joel 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joe 3:4</span></span>

Yea, and what have ye to do with Me? - Literally, "and also, what are ye
to Me?" The words, "And also," show that this is something additional to
the deeds of those before spoken of. Those, instanced before, were great
oppressors, such as dispersed the former people of God and "divided
their land." In addition to these, God condemns here another class,
those who, without having power to destroy, harass and vex His heritage.
The words, "what are ye to Me?" are like that other phrase, "what is
there to thee and me?" ([Jos 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#024),
etc; [Mat 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029), ...), i. e., what have
we in common? These words, "what are ye to Me?" also declare, that those
nations had no part in God. God accounts them as aliens, "what are ye to
Me?" Nothing. But the words convey, besides, that they would,
unprovoked, have to do with God, harassing His people without cause.
They obtruded themselves, as it were, upon God and His judgments; they
challenged God; they thrust themselves in, to their destruction, where
they had no great temptation to meddle, noticing, but inbred malice, to
impel them.

This was, especially, the character of the relations of Tyre and Zidon
and Philistia with Israel. They were allotted to Israel by Joshua, but
were not assailed . On the contrary, "the Zidonians" are counted among
those who "oppressed" Israel, and "out of" whose "hand" God "delivered"
him, when he "cried" to God [Jdg
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#012). The Philistines were the
unwearied assailants of Israel in the days of the Judges, and Saul, and
David [Jdg 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001); 1 Sam. 4; 13; 17;
[Sa1 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#001); 1 Sam. 30; [Sa1
31:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#001); during 40 years Israel was
given into the hands of the Philistines, until God delivered them by
Samuel at Mizpeh. When David was king of all Israel, the Philistines
still acted on the offensive, and lost Gath and her towns to David in an
offensive war [Sa2 5:17-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017); [Sa2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#001); [Ch1
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#001); [Sa2
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#018); [Sa2
13:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#009). To Jehoshaphat some of them
voluntarily paid tribute [Ch2 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#011);
but in the reign of Jehoram his son, they, with some Arabians, marauded
in Judah, plundering the king's house and slaying all his sons, save the
youngest [Ch2 21:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#016); [Ch2
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#001). This is the last event before
the time of Joel. They stand among the most inveterate and unprovoked
enemies of God's people, and probably as enemies of God also hating the
claim of Judah that their God was the One God.

Will ye render Me a recompense? - People never want pleas for
themselves. The Philistines, although the aggressors, had been signally
defeated by David. People forget their own wrong-doings and remember
their sufferings. It may be then, that the Philistines thought that they
had been aggrieved when their assaults were defeated, and looked upon
their own fresh aggressions as a requital. If moreover, as is probable,
they heard that the signal victories won over them were ascribed by
Israel to God, and themselves also suspected, that these "mighty Gods"
[Sa1 4:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#007) were the cause of their
defeat, they doubtless turned their hatred against God. People, when
they submit not to God chastening them, hate Him. This belief that they
were retaliating against God, (not, of course, knowing Him as God,)
fully corresponds with the strong words, "will ye render Me "a
recompense?" Julian's dying blasphemy, "Galilean, thou hast conquered,"
corresponds with the efforts of his life against the gospel, and implies
a secret consciousness that He whose religion he was straining to
overthrow "might" be, What he denied Him to be, God. The phrase
"swiftly," literally "lightly, and speedily, denotes" the union of
easiness with speed. The recompense is returned "upon" their head,
coming down upon them from God.

[Joel 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joe 3:5</span></span>

Ye have taken My silver and My gold - Not the silver and gold of the
temple, (as some have thought.) At least, up to the prophet's time, they
had not done this. For the inroad of the Philistines in the reign of
Jehoram was, apparently, a mere marauding expedition, in which they
killed and plundered, but are not said to have besieged or taken any
city, much less Jerusalem. God calls "the silver and gold" which He,
through His Providence, had bestowed on Judah, "My" gold and silver; as
He said by Hosea [Hos 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#008).

"She knew not that I multiplied her silver and gold, whereof she made
Baal;" and by Haggai, "The silver is Mine, and the gold is Mine, saith
the Lord of Hosts" [Hag 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#008). For they
were His people, and what they had, they held of Him; and the
Philistines too so accounted it, and dedicated a part of it to their
idols, as they had the ark formerly, accounting the victory over God's
people to be the triumph of their idols over God.

[Joel 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joe 3:6</span></span>

The children also - Literally, "And the sons of Judah and the sons of
Jerusalem have ye sold to the sons of the Greeks." This sin of the
Tyrians was probably old and inveterate. The Tyrians, as they were the
great carriers of the world's traffic, so they were slave-dealers, and,
in the earliest times, men-stealers. The Greek ante-historic tradition
exhibits them, as trading and selling women, from both Greece and Egypt
. As their trade became more fixed, they themselves stole no more, but,
like Christian nations, sold those whom others stole or made captive.
Ezekiel speaks of their trade in "the souls of men" [Eze
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#013) with "Greece" on the one side,
and "Tubal and Mesech" near the Black Sea on the other. The beautiful
youth of Greece of both sexes were sold even into Persia .

In regard to the Moschi and Tibareni, it remains uncertain, whether they
sold those whom they took in war (and, like the tribes of Africa in
modern times, warred the more, because they had a market for their
prisoners,) or whether, like the modern Cireassians, they sold their
daughters. Ezekiel however, says "men," so that he cannot mean,
exclusively, women. From the times of the Judges, Israel was exposed in
part both to the violence and fraud of Tyre and Sidon. The tribe of
Asher seems to have lived in the open country among fortified towns of
the Zidonians. For whereas of Benjamin, Manasseh, Ephraim, Zabulon, it
is said that the old inhabitants of the land dwelt among them [Jdg
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#021), [Jdg
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#027), [Jdg
1:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#029), of Asher it is said, that
they "dwelt among the Canaanites," the "inhabitants of the land" [Jdg
1:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#031), as though these were the more
numerous. And not only so, but since they did "not drive out the
inhabitants" of seven cities, "Accho, Zidon, Ahlab, Achzib, Helbah,
Aphek, Rehob," they must have been liable to incursions from them.

The Zidonians were among those who "oppressed Israel" ([Jdg
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#030); see [Jdg
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#003), [Jdg
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#007), [Jdg
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#013), [Jdg
4:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#015)). Sisera's army came from
their territory, (for Jabin was king of Hazor,) and Deborah speaks of "a
damsel or two," as the expected prey of each man in the whole multitude
of his host. An old proverb, mentioned 427 b.c., implies that the
Phoenicians sent circumcised slaves into the fields to reap their
harvest . But there were no other circumcised there besides Israel.

But the Phoenician slave-trade was also probably, even in the time of
the Judges, exercised against Israel. In Joel and Amos, the Philistines
and Tyrians appear as combined in the traffic. In Amos, the Philistines
are the robbers of men; the Phoenicians are the receivers and the
sellers [Amo 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#006), [Amo
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#009). Pagan nations retain for
centuries the same inherited character, the same natural nobleness, or,
still more, the same natural vices. The Phoenicians, at the date of the
Judges, are known as dishonest traders, and that, in slaves. The
Philistines were then also inveterate oppressors. On one occasion "the
captivity of the land" coincided with the great victory of the
Philistines, when Eli died and the ark of God was taken. For these two
dates are given in the same place as the close of the idolatry of
Micah's graven image. It endured "unto the captivity of the land" [Jdg
18:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#030) and, "and all the time that
the house of God was at Shiloh," from where the ark was removed, never
to return, in that battle when it was taken.

But "the captivity of the land" is not merely a subdual, whereby the
inhabitants would remain tributary or even enslaved, yet still remain. A
captivity implies a removal of the inhabitants; and such a removal could
not have been the direct act of the Philistines. For dwelling themselves
in the land only, they had no means of removing the inhabitants from it,
except by selling them; and the only nation, who could export them in
such numbers as would be expressed by the words "a captivity of the
land," were the Zidonians. Probably such acts were expressly prohibited
"by the brotherly covenant" (see the note at [Amo
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#009)) or treaty between Solomon and
Hiram King of Tyre. For Amos says that Tyre forgot that treaty, when she
sold wholesale the captive Israelites whom the Philistines had carried
off. Soon after Joel, Obadiah speaks of a captivity at "Sepharad," or
"Sardis" (see the note at [Oba 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#020)),
the capital of the Lydian empire.

The Tyrian merchants were "the" connecting link between Palestine and
the coasts of Asia Minor. The Israelites must have been sold there as
slaves, and that by the Phoenicians. In yet later times the Tyrian
merchants followed, like vultures, on the rear of armies to make a prey
of the living, as the vultures of the dead. They hung on the march of
Alexander as far as India . In the wars of the Maccabees, at Nicanor's
proclamation, a thousand (2 Macc. 8:34) merchants gathered to the camp
of Gorgias "with silver and gold, very much, to buy the children of
Israel as slaves" (1 Macc. 3:41), and with chains , wherewith to secure
them. They assembled in the rear of the Roman armies , "seeking wealth
amid the clash of arms, and slaughter, and fleeing poverty through
peril." Reckless of human life, the slave-merchants commonly, in their
wholesale purchase of captives, abandoned the children as difficult of
transport, whence the Spartan king was praised for providing for them .

The temptation to Tyrian covetousness was aggravated by the ease with
which they could possess themselves of the Jews, the facility of
transport, and, as it seems, their value. It is mentioned as the
inducement to slave-piracy among the Cilicians. "The export of the
slaves especially invited to misdeeds, being most gainful, for they were
easily taken, and the market was not so very far off and was most
wealthy .

The Jewish slaves appear also to have been valued, until those times
after the taking of Jerusalem, when they had become demoralized, and
there was a plethora of them, as God had predicted . The post occupied
by the "little maid" who "waited on Naaman's wife" [Kg2
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#002), was that of a favorite slave, as
Greek tradition represented Grecian maidens to have been an object of
coveting to the wife of the Persian Monarch . The "damsel or two" for
the wives of each man in Jabin's host appear as a valuable part of the
spoil. The wholesale price at which Nicanor set the Jews his expected
prisoners, and at which he hoped to sell some 180,000 , shows the extent
of the then traffic and their relative value. 2 British pounds. 14
shillings, 9d. as the average price of each of 90 slaves in Judea,
implies a retail-price at the place of sale, above the then ordinary
price of man.

This wholesale price for what was expected to be a mixed multitude of
nearly 200,000, (for "Nicanor undertook to make so much money of the
captive Jews as should defray the tribute of 2000 talents which the king
was to pay to the Romans" (2 Macc. 8:10)), was nearly 5 times as much as
that at which Carthaginian soldiers were sold at the close of the first
Punic war . It was two-thirds of the retail price of a good slave at
Athens , or of that at which, about 340 b.c., the law of Greece
prescribed that captives should be redeemed ; or of that, (which was
nearly the same) at which the Mosaic law commanded compensation to be
made for a slave accidentally killed [Exo
21:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#030). The facility of transport
increased the value. For, although Pontus supplied both the best and the
most of the Roman slaves , yet in the war with Mithridates, amid a great
abundance of all things, slaves were sold at 3 shillings 3d. .

The special favors also shown to the Jewish captives at Rome and
Alexandria show the estimation in which they were held. At Rome, in the
reign of Augustus , "the large section of Rome beyond the Tiber was
possessed and inhabited by Jews, most of them Roman citizens, having
been brought as captives into Italy and made freedmen by their owners."
On whatever ground Ptolemy Philadelphus redeemed 100,000 Jews whom his
father had taken and sold , the fact can hardly be without foundation,
or his enrolling them in his armies, or his employing them in public
offices or about his own person.

Joel lived before the historic times of Greece. But there are early
traces of slavetrade carried on by Greeks . According to Theopompus, the
Chians, first among the Greeks, acquired barbarian slaves in the way of
trade . The Ionian migration had tilled the islands and part of the
coasts of Asia Minor with Greek traders about two centuries before Joel,
1069 b.c. . Greeks inhabited both the coasts and islands between Tyre
and Sardis, where we know them to have been carried. Cyprus and Crete,
both inhabited by Greeks and both in near contact with Phoenicia, were
close at hand.

The demand for slaves must have been enormous. For wives were but seldom
allowed them; and Athens, Aegina, Corinth alone had in the days of their
prosperity 1,330,000 slaves . At the great slave-mart at Delos, 10,000
were brought, sold, removed in a single day .

That ye might remove them far from their border - The Philistines hoped
thus to weaken the Jews, by selling their fighting men afar, from where
they could no more return. There was doubtless also in this removal an
anti-religious malice, in that the Jews clung to their land, as ""the
Lord's land," the land given by Him to their fathers; so that they, at
once, weakened their rivals, aggravated and enjoyed their distress, and
seemed again to triumph over God. Tyre and Sidon took no active share in
making the Jews prisoners, yet, partaking in the profit and aiding in
the disposal of the captives, they became, according to that true
proverb "the receiver is as bad as the thief," equally guilty of the
sin, in the sight of God.

[Joel 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joe 3:7</span></span>

Behold I will raise them - If this promise relates to the same
individuals who had been sold, it must have been fulfilled silently; as
indeed the return of captives to their own land, unless brought about by
some historical event, belongs not to history, but to private life. The
prophet, however, is probably predicting God's dealings with the
nations, not with those individuals. The enslaving of these Hebrews in
the time of Joram was but one instance out of a whole system of covetous
misdeeds. The Philistines carried away captives from them again in the
time of Ahaz [Ch2 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#018), and yet again
subsequently [Eze 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#027), [Eze
16:57](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#057); and still more at the capture
of Jerusalem [Eze 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#015).

[Joel 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joe 3:8</span></span>

I will sell your sons - God Himself would reverse the injustice of
people. The sons of Zion should be restored, the sons of the Phoenicians
and of the Philistines sold into distant captivity. Tyre was taken by
Nebuchadnezzar, and then by Alexander, who sold "more than 13,000" of
the inhabitants into slavery ; Sidon was taken and destroyed by
Artaxerxes Ochus, and it is said, above 40,000 of its inhabitants
perished in the flames . The like befell the Philistines (see the notes
at [Zep 2:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#004)). The Sabaeans are
probably instanced, as being the remotest nation in the opposite
direction, a nation, probably, the partner of Tyre's traffic in people,
as well as in their other merchandise, and who (as is the way of
unregenerate nature) would as soon trade in Tyrians, as with Tyrians.
The Sabaeans were like the Phoenicians, a wealthy merchant people, and,
of old, united with them in the trade of the world, the Sabaeans sending
forth their fleets across the Indian Ocean, as the Tyrians along the
Mediterranean. Three fathers of distinct races bore the name Sheba; one,
a descendant of Ham, the other two, descended from Shem. The Hamite
Sheba was the son of Raamah, the son of Cush [Gen
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#007), and doubtless dwelt of old in
the country on the Persian gulf called by the name Raamah . Traces of
the name Sheba occur there, and some even after our era . The Shemite
Sabaeans, were, some descendants of Sheba, the tenth son of Joktan [Gen
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#028); the others from Sheba, the son
of Abraham and Keturah [Gen 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#003). The
Sabaeans, descended from Joktan, dwelt in the southwest extremity of
Arabia, extending from the Red Sea to the Sea of Babel-mandeb. The
country is still called "ard-es-Seba" , "land of Saba;" and Saba is
often mentioned by Arabic writers .

To the Greeks and Latins they were known by the name of one division of
the race (Himyar) Homeritae. Their descendants still speak an Arabic,
acknowledged by the learned Arabs to be a distinct language from that
which, through Muhammed, prevailed and was diffused ; a "species" of
Arabic which they attribute "to the times of (the prophet) Hud (perhaps
Eber) and those before him."

It belonged to them as descendants of Joktan. Sabaeans are mentioned,
distinct from both of these, as "dwelling in Arabia Felix, next beyond
Syria, which they frequently invaded, before it belonged to the Romans."
These Sabaeans probably are those spoken of as marauders by Job ; and
may have been descendants of Keturah. Those best known to the Greeks and
Romans were, naturally, those in the south western corner of Arabia. The
account of their riches and luxuries is detailed, and, although from
different authorities consistent; else, almost fabulous.

One metropolis is said to have had 65 temples , private individuals had
more than kingly magnificence . Arabic historians expanded into fable
the extent and prerogatives of their Paradise lands, before the breaking
of the artificial dike, made for the irrigation of their country . They
traded with India, availing themselves doubtless of the Monsoon, and
perhaps brought thence their gold, if not also the best and most costly
frankincense . The Sheba of the prophet appears to have been the wealthy
Sheba near the Red Sea. Indeed, in absence of evidence to the contrary,
it is natural to understand the name of those best known.

Solomon unites it with Seba [Psa
72:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#010), (the Aethiopian Sabae.) The
known frankincense-districts are on the southwest corner of Arabia . The
tree has diminished, perhaps has degenerated through the neglect
consequent on Muslim oppression, diminished consumption, change of the
line of commerce; but it still survives in those districts ; a relic of
what is passed away. Ezekiel indeed unites "the merchants of Sheba and
Raamah" [Eze 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#022), as trading with
Tyre. "The merchants of Sheba and Raamah, they were thy merchants; with
the chief of all spices and with all precious stones and gold they
occupied in thy fairs." It may be that he joins them together as kindred
tribes yet it is as probable that he unites the two great channels of
merchandise, east and west, Raamah on the Persian Gulf, and Sheba near
the Red Sea. Having just mentioned the produce of Northern Arabia as
poured into Tyre, he would, in this case, enumerate north, east, and
west of Arabia as combined to enrich her.

Agatharcides unites the Sabaeans of southwest Arabia with the
Gerrhaeans, who were certainly on the Persian Gulf . "No people," he
says , "is apparently richer than the Sabaeans and Gerrhaeans, who
dispense forth everything worth speaking of from Asia and Europe. These
made the Syria of Ptolemy full of gold. These supplied the industry of
the Phoenicians with profitable imports, not to mention countless other
proofs of wealth." Their caravans went to Elymais, Carmania; Charrae was
their emporium; they returned to Gabala and Phoenicia . Wealth is the
parent of luxury and effeminacy. At the time of our Lord's Coming, the
softness and effeminacy of the Sabaeans became proverbial. The "soft
Sabaeans" is their characteristic in the Roman poets . Commerce,
navigation, goldmines, being then carried on by means of slaves, and
wealth and luxury at that time always demanding domestic slaves, the
Sabaeans had need of slaves for both. They too had distant colonies ,
where the Tyrians could be transported, as far from Phoenicia, as the
shores of the Aegean are from Palestine. The great law of divine
justice, "as I have done, so God hath requited me" [Jdg
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#007), was again fulfilled. It is a
sacred proverb of God's overruling Providence, written in the history of
the world and in people's consciences.

[Joel 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joe 3:9</span></span>

Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles - God having before said that He
would "gather all nations," now, by a solemn irony, bids them prepare,
if, by any means, they can fight against Him. So in Isaiah; "Associate
yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear,
all ye of far countries; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in
pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; take counsel
together, and it shall come to nought; speak the word, and it shall not
stand, for God is with us" ([Isa
8:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#009); see also Ezek. 38:7-23).

Prepare - Literally, "hallow, war." To "hallow war" was to make it holy,
either in appearance or in truth, as the prophet bade them, "sanctify a
fast," i. e., keep it holily. So God calls the Medes, whom He employed
against Babylon, "My sanctified ones" Isa. 13, and bids, "sanctify the
nations against her" [Jer 51:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#027); and
the enemies of Judah encourage themselves, "sanctify ye war against her"
[Jer 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#004); and Micah says, that
whosover bribed not the false prophets, "they sanctify war against him"
[Mic 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#005), i. e., proclaim war against
him in the Name of God. The enemies of God, of His people, of His truth,
declare war against all, in the Name of God. The Jews would have stoned
our Lord for blasphemy, and, at the last, they condemned Him as guilty
of it. "He hath spoken blasphemy. What further need have we of
witttesses? behold, now ye have heard His blasphemy" [Mat
26:65](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#065). And He foretold to His
disciples, "Whosoever killeth you, will think he doeth God service" [Joh
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#002).

Stephen was persecuted for speaking "blasphemous words against Moses and
against God, this holy place and the law" [Act
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#011), [Act
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#013). Paul was persecuted for
"persuading people to worship God contrary to the law and polluting this
holy place" [Act 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#013); [Act
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#028); [Act
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#006). Antichrist shall set himself up
as God, "so that he, as God, sitteth in the temple of God shewing
himself that he is God" [Th2 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004).
Heretics and unbelievers declaim against the Gospel, as though it, and
not themselves, were opposed to the holiness and Majesty and love of
God. The Gnostics of old spake against the Creator in the Name of God.
Arians affected reverence for the glory of God , being, on their own
mis-belief, idolaters or polytheists . The Apollinarians charged the
Church with ascribing to our Lord a sinful soul, as though the soul must
needs be such , find themselves held the Godhead to have been united to
a soulless, and so a brute, nature.

Manichaeans accused her of making God the author of evil, and
themselves, as do Pantheists now, invented a god who sinned . Novatians
and Donatists accused the Church of laxity. Pelagians charged her with
denying the perfectibility of man's nature, themselves denying the grace
whereby it is perfected. Muhammed arrayed the truth of the Unity of God
against His Being in Three Persons, and fought against the truth as
idolatry. Some now array "Theism," i. e., truths as to God which they
have stolen from Holy Scripture, against the belief in God as He has
revealed Himself. Indeed, no imposture ever long held its ground against
truth, unless it masked itself under some truth of God which it
perverted, and so "hallowed" its "war" against God in the Name of God.

Wake up the mighty men - Arouse them, as if their former state had been
a state of sleep; arouse all their dormant powers, all within them, that
they may put forth all their strength, if so be they may prevail against
God.

Let all the men of war draw near - , as if to contend, and close, as it
were, with God and His people (see [Sa1
17:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#041). [Sa2
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#013)), as, on the other hand, God
says, "I will come near to you to judgment" ([Mal
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#005); see [Isa
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001); [Isa
50:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#008)). "Let them come up" into His
very presence. Even while calling them to fulfill this their vain
purpose of striving with God, the prophet keeps in mind, into whose
presence they are summoned, and so calls them to "come up," as to a
place of dignity.

[Joel 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joe 3:10</span></span>

Beat your plowshares into swords - Peace had been already promised, as a
blessing of the gospel. "In His days," foretold Solomon, "shall the
righteous flourish, and abundance of peace, so long as the moon
endureth" [Psa 72:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#007). And another, "He
maketh thy borders peace" [Psa 147:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#014).
Peace within with God flows forth in peace with man. "Righteousness and
peace kissed each other" [Psa 85:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#010).
Where there is not rest in God, all is unrest. And so, all which was
needful for life, the means of subsistence, care of health, were to be
forgotten for war.

Let the weak say, I am strong - It is one last gathering of the powers
of the world against their Maker; the closing scene of man's rebellion
against God. It is their one universal gathering. None, however
seemingly unfit, was to be spared from this conflict; no one was to
remain behind. The farmer was to forge for war the instruments of his
peaceful toil; the sick was to forget his weakness and to put on a
strength which he had not, and that to the uttermost. But as weakness
is, in and through God, strength, so all strength out of God is
weakness. Man may say, I am strong; but, against God, he remains weak
as, it is said, that weak man [Psa
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#018)) from the earth may no more
oppress.

[Joel 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joe 3:11</span></span>

Once more all the enemies of God are summoned together. "Assemble
yourselves," (Others in the same sense render, "Haste ye,) and come, all
ye pagan, round about," literally "from round about," i. e., from every
side, so as to compass and hem in the people of God, and then, when the
net had been, as it were, drawn closer and closer round them, and no way
of escape is left, the prophet prays God to send His aid; "thither cause
Thy mighty ones to come down, O Lord." Against "the mighty ones" of the
earth, or "the weak" who "say" they are "mighty," (the same word is used
throughout,) there "come down the mighty ones of God." The "mighty ones
of God," whom He is prayed to "cause to come down," i. e., from heaven,
can be no other than the mighty angels, of whom it is said, they "are
mighty in strength" [Psa 103:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#020) (still
the same word,) to whom God gives "charge over" [Psa
91:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#011). His own, "to keep" them "in
all" their "ways," and one of whom, in this place, killed "one hundred
and fourscore and five thousand" [Kg2
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035) of the Assyrians. So our Lord
saith, "The Son of man shall send forth His Angels, and they shall
gather out of His kingdom all things that offend, and them that do
iniquity" [Mat 13:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#041).

[Joel 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joe 3:12</span></span>

Let the pagan be awakened - This emphatic repetition of the word,
"awaken," seems intended to hint at the great awakening, to Judgment ,
when they "who sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, being
awakened" from the sleep of death. Another word is used of "awakening" .
On the destruction of antichrist it is thought that the general Judgment
will follow, and "all who are in the graves shall hear the voice of the
Son of Man and shall come forth" [Joh
5:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#027) : They are bidden to "come up"
into the valley of Jehoshaphat , "for to come into the presence of the
most High God, may well be called "a coming up." For there will I sit to
judge all the pagan round about," (again literally "from round about,)
from every side," all nations from all the four quarters of the world.
The words are the same as before. There "all nations from every side"
were summoned to come, as they thought, to destroy God's people and
heritage. Here the real end is assigned, for which they were brought
together, for God would sit to judge them. In their own blind will and
passion they came to destroy; in God's secret overruling Providence,
they were dragged along by their passions - to be judged and to be
destroyed. So our Lord says, "When the Son of Man shall come in His
Glory, and all the Holy Angels with Him, then shall He sit on the throne
of His Glory and before Him shall be gathered all nations" [Mat
25:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031). Our Lord, in that He uses
words of Joel, seems to intend to direct our minds to the prophet's
meaning. What follows are nearly His own words;

[Joel 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joe 3:13</span></span>

Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe - So Jesus saith, "let
both grow together until the harvest, and in the time of the harvest I
will say to the reapers, Gather ye together the tares and bind them in
bundles to burn them;" and this He explains, "The harvest is the end of
the world; and the reapers are the Angels" [Mat
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#030), [Mat
13:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#039). He then who saith, "put ye in
the sickle, for the harvest is ripe," is the Son of Man, who, before He
became the Son of Man, was, as He is now, the Son of God, and spake this
and the other things by the Prohets; they to whom He speaketh are His
reapers, the Angels; and the ripeness of the harvest is the maturity of
all things here, good and evil, to be brought to their last end.

In itself, the harvest, as well as the vintage, might describe the end
of this world, as to both the good and the bad, in that the wheat is
severed from the chaff and the tares, and the treading of the winepress
separates the wine which is stored up from the husks which are cast
away. Yet nothing is said, here of storing up aught, either the wheat or
the wine, but only of the ripeness of the harvest, and that "the fats
overflow, because their wickedness is great." The harvest is sometimes,
although more rarely, used of destruction [Isa
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#005); [Jer
51:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#033); the treading of the winepress
is always used as an image of God's anger [Lam
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#015); [Isa
63:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#003); [Rev
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#015); the vintage of destruction [Isa
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#006); [Jdg
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#002); [Mic
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001); the plucking off the grapes, of
the rending away of single lives or souls [Psa
80:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#012). It seems probable then, that
the ripeness of the harvests and the fullness of the vats are alike used
of the ripeness for destruction, that "they were ripe in their sins, fit
for a harvest, and as full of wickedness as ripe grapes, which fill and
overflow the vats, through the abundance of the juice with which they
swell." Their ripeness in iniquity calls, as it were, for the sickle of
the reaper, the trampling of the presser.

For great is their wickedness - The whole world is flooded and
overflowed by it, so that it can no longer contain it, but, as it were,
cries to God to end it. The long suffering of God no longer availed, but
would rather increase their wickedness and their damnation. So also, in
that first Judgment of the whole world by water, when "all flesh had
corrupted his way upon the earth, God said, the end of all flesh is
before Me" [Gen 6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#012); and when the
hundred and twenty years of the preaching of Noah were ended without
fruit, "the flood came." So Sodom was "then" destroyed, when not ten
righteous could be found in it; and the seven nations of Canaan were
spared above four hundred years, because the "iniquity of the Amorites
was not yet full" [Gen 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016); and our
Lord says, "fill ye up the measure of your fathers - that upon you may
come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth" [Mat
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#032), [Mat
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035). So , "God condemneth each of
the damned, when he hath filled up the measure of his iniquity."

[Joel 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joe 3:14</span></span>

The prophet continues, as in amazement at the great throng assembling
upon one another, "multitudes, multitudes, in the valley of decision,"
as though, whichever way he looked, there were yet more of these
"tumultuous masses," so that there was nothing beside them. It was one
living, surging, boiling, sea: throngs upon throngs, mere throngs! . The
word rendered "multitudes" suggests, besides, the thought of the hum and
din of these masses thronging onward, blindly, to their own destruction.
They all "tumultuously rage together, and imagine a vain thing, against
the Lord and against His Christ" [Psa
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001); but the place where they are
gathered, (although they know it not,) is the "valley of decision," i.
e., of "sharp, severe judgment." The valley is the same as that before
called "the valley of Jehoshaphat;" but whereas that name only signifies
"God judgeth," this further name denotes the strictness of God's
judgment. The word signifies "cut," then "decided;" then is used of
severe punishment, or destruction decided and decreed , by God.

For the Day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision - Their
gathering against God shall be a token of His coming to judge them. They
come to fulfill their own ends; but His shall be fulfilled on them. They
are left to bring about their own doom; and being abandoned by Him, rush
on the more blindly because it is at hand. When their last sin is
committed, their last defiance of God spoken or acted against Him, it is
come. At all times, indeed, "the Lord is at hand" [Phi
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005). It may be, that we are told, that
the whole future revealed to us "must shortly come to pass" [Rev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001), in order to show that all time is
a mere nothing, a moment, a dream, when it is gone. Yet here it is said,
relatively, not to us, but to the things foretold, that it "is near" to
come.

[Joel 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joe 3:15</span></span>

The sun and the moon shall be darkened - This may be, either that they
shall be outshone by the brightness of the glory of Christ, or that they
themselves shall undergo a change, whereof the darkness at the
Crucifixion was an image. An ancient writer says ; "As in the
dispensation of the Cross the sun failing, there was darkness over all
the earth, so when the 'sign of the Son of man' appeareth in heaven in
the Day of Judgment, the light of the sun and moon and stars shall fail,
consumed, as it were by the great might of that sign." And as the
failure of the light of the sun at our Lord's Passion betokened the
shame of nature at the great sin of man, so, at the Day of Judgment, it
sets before us the awfulness of God's judgments, as though "it dared not
behold the severity of Him who judgeth and returneth every man's work
upon his own head;" as though "every creature, in the sufferings of
others, feared the judgment on itself."

[Joel 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joe 3:16</span></span>

The Lord shall roar out of Zion - As in the destruction of Sennacherib,
when he was now close upon his prey, and "shook his hand against the
mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem, the Lord of hosts
lopped the bough with terror, and the high ones of stature were hewn
down, and the haughty were humbled [Isa
10:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#032), so at the end. It is
foretold of antichrist, that his destruction shall be sudden, "Then
shall that Wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the
spirit of His mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of His
Coming" [Th2 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008). And Isaiah saith of
our Lord, "He shall smite the earth with the rod of His mouth, and with
the breath of His lips shall He slay the wicked" [Isa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004). When the multitudes of God's
enemies were thronged together, then would He speak with His Voice of
terror. The terrible voice of God's warnings is compared to the roaring
of a lion. "The lion hath roared, who will not fear? the Lord hath
spoken, who can but prophesy?" [Amo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#008). Much more, when those words of
awe are fulfilled. Our Lord then, "The Lion of the tribe of Judah" [Rev
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#005). Who is here entitled by the
incommunicable Name of God, I am, shall utter His awful Voice, as it is
said; "The Lord Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the
voice of the Archangel and with the Trump of God" [Th1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016); and He Himself says, "The hour
is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear His voice
and shall come forth, they that have done good unto the Resurrection of
life, and they that have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation"
[Joh 5:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028).

And shall utter His voice from Jerusalem - that is, either from His
Throne aloft "in the air" above the holy city, or from the heavenly
Jerusalem, out of the midst of the tens of thousands of His holy angels
[Mat 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#027); [Mat
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031); [Mar
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#038); [Th2
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007), and saints [Zac
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#005); [Jde
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014), who shall "come with Him." So
terrible shall that voice be, that "the heavens and the earth shall
shake," as it is said, "the heavens shall pass away with a great noise,
and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the
works that are therein shall be burned up" [Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010); and "heaven shall open for the
coming of the saints," and 'hell shall be moved at the coming' [Isa
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#009) of the evil. : "Nor shall it be a
slight shaking of the earth at His Coming, but such that all the dead
shall be roused, as it were from their sleep, yea, the very elect shall
fear and tremble, but, even in their fear and trembling, shall retain a
strong hope. This is what he saith immediately, 'The Lord will be the
hope (or place of refuge)' of His 'people, and the strength (or
stronghold) of the children of Israel,' i. e., of the true Israel, the
whole people of the elect of God. All these He will then by that His
Majesty at once wonderfully terrify and strengthen, because they ever
hoped in God, not in themselves, and ever trusted in the strength of the
Lord, never presumed on their own. Whereas contrariwise the false
Israelites hope in themselves, while, 'going about to establish their
own righteousness, they submitted themselves not to the righteousness of
God.' [Rom 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003). The true Israel shall
trust much more than ever before; yet none can trust then, who in life,
had not trusted in Him Alone.

[Joel 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joe 3:17</span></span>

God Himself wondrously joins on His own words to those of the prophet,
and speaks to His own people; "so (literally, and) ye shall know," by
experience, by sight, face to face, what ye now believe, "that I am the
Lord your God, dwelling in Zion, My holy mountain." So He saith in the
second Psalm, "Then shall he speak unto them" [Psa
2:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#005) (the enemies of His Christ) "in
His wrath, and vex them in His sore displeasure; And I have set My king
on My holy hill of Zion;" and, "Behold the tabernacle of God is with
men, and He will dwell with them, and they shall be His people, and God
Himself shall be with them, their God" [Rev
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#003), dwelling with them and in them,
by an unvarying, blissful, hallowing presence, never withdrawn, never
hidden, never shadowed, but ever shining upon them. "Your God," your
own, as much as if possessed by none besides, filling all with gladness,
yet fully possessed by each, as though there were none besides, so that
each may say, "Thou art my Portion, O Lord" [Psa
119:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#057); [Lam
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#024); my "Lord, and my God" [Joh
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028), as He saith, "I am thy
exceeding great Reward" [Gen 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001).

And Jerusalem shall be holy - Literally, "holiness" as John saith, "He
carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high mountain, and shewed
me that great city, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from
God, having the glory of God" [Rev
21:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#010).

And there shall no stranger pass through her anymore - "Without," says
John, "are dogs and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and
idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie" [Rev
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#015). None alien from her shall pass
through her, so as to have dominion over her, defile or oppress her.

This special promise is often repeated. "It shall be called the way of
holiness, the unclean shall not pass over it" [Isa
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#008). "Henceforth there shall no more
come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean" [Isa
52:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001). "The wicked shall no more pass
through thee" [Nah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#015). "In that day
there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord of hosts"
. "And there shall in no wise enter into it anything that defileth" [Rev
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027). These promises are, in their
degree and in the image and beginning, made good to the Church here, to
be fully fulfilled when it shall be "a glorious Church, not having spot
or wrinkle or any such thing, but holy and without blemish" [Eph
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027). Here they do not pass through
her, so as to overcome; "the gates of hell shall not prevail against
her." However near, as hypocrites, they come to her, they feel in
themselves that they "are not of her" [Jo1
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019). There they shall be severed from
her forever. : "Heretics came, armed with fantastic reasons and
deceitful arguments; but they could not pass through her, repelled by
the truth of the word, overcome by reason, cast down by the testimonies
of Scripture and by the glow of faith." They fell backward to the ground
before her. They "go out from her, because they are not of her" [Jo1
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019). They who are not of her can
mingle with her, touch her sacraments, but their power and virtue they
partake not. They are inwardly repelled.

[Joel 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joe 3:18</span></span>

And it shall come to pass in that Day - After the destruction of
antichrist, there will, it seems, still be a period of probation, in
which the grace of God will abound and extend more and more widely. The
prophet Zechariah, who continues on the image, of the "living waters
going out from Jerusalem" [Zac 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#008),
places this gift after God had gathered all nations against Jerusalem,
and had visibly and miraculously overthrown them [Zac
14:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#002). But in that the blessings
which he speaks of, are regenerating, they belong to time; the fullness
of the blessing is completed only in eternity; the dawn is on earth, the
everlasting brightness is in heaven. But though the prophecy belongs
eminently to one time, the imagery describes the fulness of spiritual
blessings which God at all times diffuses in and through the Church; and
these blessings, he says, shall continue on in her for ever; her enemies
shall be cut off for ever. It may be, that Joel would mark a fresh
beginning and summary by his words, "It shall be in that Day." The
prophets do often begin, again and again, their descriptions. Union with
God, which is their theme, is one. Every gift of God to His elect,
except the beatific vision, is begun in time, union with Himself,
indwelling, His Spirit flowing forth from Him into His creatures, His
love, knowledge of Him, although here through a glass darkly.

The promise cannot relate to exuberance of temporal blessings, even as
tokens of God's favor. For he says, "a fountain shall come forth of the
house of the Lord, and shall water the valley of Shittim." But "the
valley of Shittim" is on the other side Jordan, beyond the Dead Sea, so
that by nature the waters could not flow there. The valley of Shittim or
acacia trees is a dry valley, for in such the Easten Acacia, i. e., the
sant or sandal wood grows. "It is," says Jerome (on [Isa
12:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001) :19), "a tree which grows in
the desert, like a white thorn in color and leaves, not in size. For
they are of such size, that very large planks , are cut out of them. The
wood is very strong, and of incredible lightness and beauty. They do not
grow in cultivated places, or in the Roman soil, save only in the desert
of Arabia." It does not decay ; and when old becomes like ebony . Of it
the ark of God was made, its staves, the table of showbread, the
tabernacle and its pillars, the altar for burnt-offerings, and of
incense [Exo 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#005), [Exo
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#010), [Exo
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#013), [Exo
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#023), [Exo
25:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#028); [Exo
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#015), [Exo
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#026), [Exo
26:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#032), [Exo
26:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#037); [Exo
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#001), [Exo
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#006); [Exo
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#001); [Exo
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#007), [Exo
35:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#024); [Exo
36:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo036.htm#020), [Exo
36:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo036.htm#031), [Exo
36:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo036.htm#036); [Exo
37:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#001), [Exo
37:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#004), [Exo
37:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#010), [Exo
37:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#015), [Exo
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#025), [Exo
37:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#028); [Exo
38:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#001), [Exo
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#006); [Deu
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#003). The valley is about six miles
from Livias , seven and a half beyond the Dead Sea . It was the last
station of Israel, before entering the land of promise [Num
33:49](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#049), from where Joshua sent out the
spies [Jos 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001); where God turned the
curse of Balaam into a blessling Num. 23; 24; [Mic
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#005); and he prophesied of the Star
which should arise out of Israel, even Christ [Num
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017); where Israel sinned in Baal
Peor, and Phineas turned aside His displeasure [Num
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001), [Num
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#007), [Num
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#011).

The existence of a large supply of water under the temple is beyond all
question. While the temple was still standing, mention is made up of "a
fountain of ever-flowing water under the temple," as well as pools and
cisterns for preserving rain-water. One evidently well acquainted with
the localities says , "The pavement has slopes at befitting places, for
the sake of a flush of water which takes place in order to cleanse away
the blood from the victims. For on festivals many myriads of animals are
sacrificed. But of water there is an unfailing supply, a copious and
natural fountain within gushing over, and there being moreover wonderful
underground-receptacles in a circuit of five furlongs, in the
substructure of the temple, and each of these having numerous pipes, the
several streams inter-communicating, and all these closed up below and
on the sides - There are also many mouths toward the base, invisible to
all except those to whom the service of the temple belongs. So that the
manifold blood of the sacrifices being brought together are cleansed by
the gush (of water down) the slope."

This same writer relates that, more than half a mile from the city, he
was told to stoop down and heard the sound of gushing waters
underground. The natural fountain, then, beneath the temple was
doubtless augmented by waters brought from a distance, as required for
the "divers washings" both of the priests and other things, and to carry
off the blood of the victims. Pools near the temple are mentioned by
writers of the third and fourth century ; and Omar, on the surrender of
Jerusalem, 634 a.d., was guided to the site of the ancient temple
(whereon he built his Mosk) by the stream of water which issued through
a water-channel from it . Whencesoever this water was derived, whether
from a perennial spring beneath the temple itself, or whether brought
there from some unfailing source without, it afforded Jerusalem an
abundant supply of water.

Much as Jerusalem suffered in sieges by famine, and its besiegers by
thirst, thirst was never any part of the sufferings of those within .
The superfluous water was and still is carried off underground, to what
is now "the fountain of the Virgin" , and thence again, through the
rock, to the pool of Siloam . Thence it carried fertility to the gardens
of Siloam, in Joel's time doubtless "the king's gardens" , still "a
verdant spot, refreshing to the eye in the heat of summer, while all
around is parched and dun." The blood of the victims flowed into the
same brook Kidron, and was a known source of fertility, before the land
was given to desolation. The waters of Kidron, as well as all the waters
of Palestine, must have been more abundant formerly.

Isaiah speaks of it as "flowing softly" [Isa
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#006); Josephus , of the "abundant
fountain;" an official report , of the "fountain gushing forth with
abundance of water." Still its fertilizing powers formed but one little
oasis, where all around was arid. It fertilized those gardens live miles
from the city, but the mid-space was waterless , thirsty, mournful .
Lower down, the rivulet threaded its way to the Dead Sea, through a
narrow ravine which became more and more wild, where Saba planted his
monastery. "A howling wilderness, stern desolation. stupendous
perpendicular cliffs, terrific chasms, oppressive solitude" are the
terms by which one endeavors to characterize "the heart of this stern
desert of Judaea" .

Such continues to be its character, in the remaining half of its course,
until it is lost in the Dead Sea, and is transmuted into its saltness.
Its valley bears the name of desolation, Wady en Nar , "valley of fire."
No human path lies along it. The Kidron flows along "a deep and almost
impenetrable ravine" [Psa 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004), "in a
narrow channel between perpendicular walls of rock, as if worn away by
the rushing waters between those desolate chalky hills." That little
oasis of verdure was fit emblem of the Jewish people, itself bedewed by
the stream which issued from the Temple of God, but, like Gideon's
fleece, leaving all around dry. It made no sensible impression out of,
or beyond itself. Hereafter, "the stream", the Siloah, whose
"streamlets," i. e., the artificial fertilizing divisions, "made glad
the city of God" [Eze 47:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001), should
make the wildest, driest spots of our mortality "like the garden of the
Lord." Desolation should become bright and happy; the parched earth
should shoot up fresh with life; what was by nature barren and
unfruitful should bring forth good fruit; places heretofore stained by
sin should be purified; nature should be renewed by grace; and that,
beyond the borders of the promised land, in that world which they had
left, when Joshua brought them in there.

This, which it needs many words to explain, was vivid to those to whom
Joel spoke. They had that spot of emerald green before their eyes, over
which the stream which they then knew to issue from the temple trickled
in transparent brightness, conducted by those channels formed by man's
diligence. The eyes of the citizens of Jerusalem must have rested with
pleasure on it amid the parched surface around. Fresher than the
gladliest freshness of nature, brighter than its most kindled glow, is
the renewing freshness of grace; and this, issuing from mount Zion, was
to be the portion not of Judea only, but of the world.

The vision of Ezekiel [Eze 47:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001),
which is a comment on the prophecy of Joel, clearly belongs primarily to
this life. For in this life only is there need for healing; in this life
only is there a desert land to be made fruitful; death to be changed
into life; death and life, the healed and unhealed, side by side; life,
where the stream of God's grace reacheth, and death and barrenness,
where it reacheth not. The fishers who spread their nests amid "the
fish, exceeding many," are an emblem which waited for and received its
explanation from the parables of our Lord.

In the Revelation, above all, the peace, glory, holiness, vision of God,
can only be fulfilled in the sight of God. Yet here too the increase of
the Church, and the healing of the nations [Rev
21:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#024); [Rev
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#021), belong to time and to a state
of probation, not of full fruition.

But then neither can those other symbols relate to earthly things.

The mountains shall drop down new wine - Literally, "trodden" out. What
is ordinarily obtained by toil, shall be poured forth spontaneously.
"And the hills shall flow with milk," literally, "flow milk," as though
they themselves, of their own accord, gushed forth into the good gifts
which they yield. "Wine" ever new, and ever renewing, sweet and
gladdening the heart; "milk," the emblem of the spiritual food of
childlike souls, of purest knowledge, holy devotion, angelic purity,
heavenly pleasure. And these shall never cease. These gifts are spoken
of, as the spontaneous, perpetual flow of the mountains and hills; and
as the fountain gushes forth from the hill or mountain-side in one
ceaseless flow, day and night, streaming out from the hidden recesses to
which the waters are supplied by God from His treasure-house of the
rain, so day and night, in sorrow or in joy, in prosperity or adversity,
God pours out, in the Church and in the souls of His elect, the riches
of His grace. "All the rivers," literally "channels, of Judah shall flow
with water." Every "channel," however narrow and easily drying up, shall
"flow with water," gushing forth unto everlasting life; the love of God
shall stream through every heart; each shall he full according to its
capacity and none the less full, because a larger tide pours through
others. How much more , "in those everlasting hills of heaven, "the
heavenly Jerusalem," resting on the eternity and Godhead of the Holy
Trinity, shall that long promise be fulfilled of the land flowing with
milk and honey, where God, through the beatific vision of Himself, shall
pour into the blessed "the torrent of pleasure," the unutterable
sweetness of joy and gladness unspeakable in Himself; and "all the
rivers of Judah," i. e., all the powers, capacities, senses, speech of
the saints who "confess" God, shall flow with a perennial stream of joy,
thanksgiving, and jubilee, as of all pleasure and bliss."

[Joel 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joe 3:19</span></span>

Egypt shall be a desolation - "Egypt" and "Edom" represent each a
different class of enemies of the people of God, and both together
exhibit the lot of all. Egypt was the powerful oppressor, who kept
Israel long time in hard bondage, and tried, by the murder of their male
children, to extirpate them. Edom was, by birth, the nearest allied to
them, but had, from the time of their approach to the promised land,
been hostile to them, and showed a malicious joy in all their calamities
([Oba 1:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010); [Eze
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#012); [Eze
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#015); [Eze
36:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#005); [Lam
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#022); [Psa
137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007); see the note at [Amo
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#011)). "Their land," in which Egypt
and Edom shed the "innocent blood of the children of Judah," may either
be Edom, Egypt, or Judaea. If the land was Judaea, the sin is aggravated
by its being God's land, the possession of which they were disputing
with God. If it was Egypt and Edom, then it was probably the blood of
those who took refuge there, or, as to Edom, of prisoners delivered up
to them (see the note at [Amo 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#009)).

This is the first prophecy of the humiliation of Egypt. Hosea had
threatened, that Egypt should be the grave of those of Israel who should
flee there [Hos 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#006). He speaks of it
as the vain trust, and a real evil to Israel [Hos
7:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#011), [Hos
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#016); [Hos
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#013); [Hos
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#003); [Hos
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#005); of its own future he says
nothing. Brief as Joel's words are, they express distinctly an abiding
condition of Egypt. They are expanded by Ezekiel [Eze
29:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#009), [Eze
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#015); particular chastisements are
foretold by Isaiah Isa. 19; [Isa
20:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001), Jeremiah Jer. 46, Ezekiel
Ezek. 29-32, Zechariah [Zac 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#011). But
the three words of Joel , "Egypt shall become desolation," are more
comprehensive than any prophecy, except those by Ezekiel. They foretell
that abiding condition, not only by the force of the words, but by the
contrast with an abiding condition of bliss. The words say, not only "it
shall be desolated," as by a passing scourge sweeping over it, but "it
shall itself 'pass over into' that state;" it shall become what it had
not been ; and this, in contrast with the abiding condition of God's
people. The contrast is like that of the Psalmist, "He turneth a
fruitful land into barrenness for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein. He turneth the wilderness into a standing water, and dry ground
into water-springs" [Psa 107:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#033).
Judah should overflow with blessing, and the streams of God's grace
should pass beyond its bounds, and carry fruitfulness to what now was
dry and barren. But what should reject His grace should be itself
rejected.

Yet when Joel thus threatened Egypt, there were no human symptoms of its
decay; the instruments of its successive overthrows were as yet wild
hordes, (as the Chaldees, Persians, and Macedonians,) to be consolidated
thereafter into powerful empires, or (as Rome) had not the beginnings of
being. : "The continuous monumental history of Egypt" went back seven
centuries before this, to about 1520 b.c. They had had a line of
conquerors among their kings, who subdued much of Asia, and disputed
with Assyria the country which lay between there . Even after the time
of Joel, they had great conquerors, as Tirhaka; Psammetichus won Ashdod
back from Assyria , Neco was probably successful against it, as well as
against Syria and king Josiah, for he took Cadytis on his return from
his expedition against Carchemish [Kg2
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#029); Pharaoh Hophra, or Apries,
until he fell by his pride [Eze 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#003),
renewed for a time the prosperity of Psammetichus ; the reign of Amasis,
even after Nebuchadnezzars conquest, was said to be "the most prosperous
time which Egypt ever saw" ; it was still a period of foreign conquest ,
and its cities could be magnified into 20,000.

The Persian invasion was drawn upon it by an alliance with Lydia, where
Amasis sent 120,000 men ; its, at times, successful struggles against
the gigantic armies of its Persian conquerors betoken great inherent
strength; yet it sank for ever, a perpetual desolation. "Rent,
twenty-three centuries ago, from her natural proprietors," says an
unbelieving writer , "she has seen Persians, Macedonians, Romans,
Greeks, Arabs, Georgians, and at length, the race of Tartars,
distinguished by the name of Ottoman Turks, establish themselves in her
bosom." "The system of oppression is methodical;" "an universal air of
misery is manifest in all which the traveler meets." : "Mud-walled
cottages are now the only habitations, where the ruins of temples and
palaces abound. The desert covers many extensive regions, which once
raised Egypt among the chief of the kingdoms." The desolation of Egypt
is the stranger, because exceeding misrule alone could have effected it.

Egypt in its largest dimensions, has been calculated to contain 123,527
square miless or 79,057,339 acres, and to be three fourths of the size
of France Memoire sur le lae de Moeris. (1843). The mountains which hem
in Upper Egypt, diverge at Cairo, parting, the one range, due east, the
other northwest. The mountains on the west sink into the plains; those
on the east retain their height as far as Suez. About 10 miles below
Cairo, the Nile parted, enclosing within the outside of its seven
branches, that triangle of wondrous fertility, the Delta. A network of
canals, formed by the stupendous industry of the ancient Egyptians,
enclosed this triangle in another yet larger, whose base, along the
coast, was 235 miles, in direct distance about 181. East of the
eastern-most branch of the Nile, lay the "land of Goshen," formerly, at
least for cattle, "the good of the land" [Gen
47:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#006), [Gen
47:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#011), a part, at least, of the
present esh-Sharkiyyeh, second in size of the provinces of Egypt, but
which, 1375 a.d., yielded the highest revenue of the state .

On the western side of the Nile, and about a degree south of the apex of
the Delta, a stupendous work, the artificial lake of Moeris , enclosing
within masonry 64 34 square miles of water, received the superfluous
waters of the river, and thus at once prevented the injury incidental on
any too great rise of the Nile, and supplied water during six months for
the irrigation of 1724 square miles, or 1,103, 375, acres .

The Nile which, when it overflowed, spread like a sea over Egypt ,
encircling its cities like islands, carried with it a fertilizing power,
attested by all, but which, unless so attested, would seem fabulous.
Beneath a glowing heat, greater than its latitude will account for, the
earth, supplied with continual moisture and an ever renewed alluvial
deposit which supersedes all need of "dressing" the soil, yields, within
the year, three harvests of varied produce . This system of canalising
Egypt must have been of very early antiquity. That giant conception of
the water system of lake Moeris is supposed to have been the work of
Ammenemhes, perhaps about 1673, b.c. . But such a giant plan presupposes
the existence of an artificial system of irrigation which it expanded.
In the time of Moses, we hear incidentally of "the streams" of Egypt,
"the canals" (that is, those used for irrigation), and "the ponds" [Exo
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#019); [Exo
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#001), the receptacles of the water
which was left when the Nile retired.

Besides these, an artificial mode of irrigation "by the foot" Deut.
11:40 is mentioned, now no longer distinctly known, but used, like the
present plans of the water-wheel and the lever , to irrigate the lands
for the later harvests. This system of irrigation had, in the time of
Joel, lasted probably for above 1000 years. The Egyptians ascribed the
first turning of the Nile to their first king, Menes , of fabulous
antiquity. But while it lasted in any degree, Egypt could not become
barren except by miracle. Even now it recovers, whenever water is
applied. "Wherever there is water, there is fertility." : "The
productive powers of the soil of Egypt are incalculable. Wherever water
is scattered, there springs up a rapid and beautiful vegetation. The
seed is sown and watered, and scarcely any other care is requisite for
the ordinary fruits of the earth. Even in spots adjacent to the desert
and which seem to be taken possession of by the sands, irrigation brings
rapidly forth a variety of green herbs and plants." For its first crop,
there needed but to cast the seed, and have it trodden in by cattle .

Nothing then could desolate Egypt, except man's abiding negligence or
oppression. No passing storm or inroad could annihilate a fertility,
which poured in upon it in everrenewing richness. For 1000 years, the
Nile had brought to Egypt unabated richness. The Nile overflows still,
but in vain amid depopulation, and grinding, uniform, oppression. Not
the country is exhausted, but man.

"If" says Mengin , "it is true that there is no country richer than
Egypt in its territorial productions, still there is perhaps no one
whose inhabitants are more miserable. It is owing solely to the
fertility of its soil and the sobriety of its cultivators, that it
retains the population which it still has." The marked diminution of the
population had begun before the Birth of our Lord. "Of old," says
Diodorus , "it far exceeded in denseness of population all the known
countries in the world, and in our days too it seems to be inferior to
no other. For in ancient times it had more than 18,000 considerable
villages and towns, as you may see registered in the sacred lists. In
the time of Ptolemy Lagus more than 30,000 were counted, a number which
has continued until now. But the whole people are said of old to have
been about seven million, and in our days not less than three" .

A modern estimate supposes that Egypt, if cultivated to the utmost,
would, in plentiful years, support eight million . It is difficult to
calculate a population where different ranks wish to conceal it. It has
been guessed however, that two centuries ago, it was four million; that,
at the beginning of this century, it was two million and a half; and
that, in 1845, it was 1,800,000 . The great diminution then had begun
1900 years ago. Temporary causes, plague, smallpox; conscription, have,
in this last century, again halved the population; but down to that
time, it had sunk to no lower level than it had already reached at least
18 centuries before. The land still, for its fruitfulness, continues to
supply more than its inhabitants consume; it yields over and above
cotton , for strangers to employ.

Yet its brilliant patches of vegetation are but indications how great
the powers implanted in it. In vain "the rising Nile overflows (as it is
thought) a larger proportion of the soil" than heretofore; in vain has
the rich alluvial deposit encroached upon the gradual slope of the
desert; in vain, in Upper Egypt has a third been added since about the
time of the Exodus. Egypt is stricken. Canals and even arms of the Nile,
were allowed to choke up. Of the seven branches of the Nile, two only,
at first artificial, remain. : "The others have either entirely
disappeared or are dry in summer." The great eastern arm, the Pelusian,
is nearly effaced "buried almost wholly beneath the sands of the
desert." : "The land at the mouth of the canal which represents it, is a
sand waste or a marsh." : "There is now no trace of vegetation in the
whole Pelusian plain. Only one slight isolated rise has some thickets on
it, and some shafts of columns lie on the sand." : "In the midst of a
plain the most fertile, they want the barest necessaries of life."

The sand of the desert, which was checked by the river and by the reeds
on its banks, has swept over lands no longer fertilized. : "The sea has
not been less destructive. It has broken down the dykes wherewith man's
labor held it in, and has carried barrenness over the productive lands
which it converted into lakes and marshes." A glance at the map of Egypt
will show how widely the sea has burst in, where land once was. On the
east, the salt lake Menzaleh, (itself from west-northwest to southeast
about 50 miles long, and above 10 miles from north to south) absorbs two
more of the ancient arms of the Nile, the Tanitic and the Mendesian .
The Tanitic branch is marked by a deeper channel below the shallow
waters of the lake . The lake of Burlos "occupies from east to west more
than half the basis of the Delta." Further westward are a succession of
lakes, Edkou, Madyeh (above 12 12 miles) Mareotis (37 12 miles). : "The
ancient Delta has lost more than half its surface, of which one-filth is
covered with the waters of the lakes Mareotis, Madyeh, Edkou, Bourlos,
and Menzaleh, sad effects of the carelessness of the rulers or rather
spoilers of this unhappy country." Even when the lake Mareotis was,
before the English invasion in 1801, allowed nearly to dry up, it was
but an unhealthy lagoon; and the Mareotic district, once famous for its
wine and its olives and papyrus , had become a desert. So far from being
a source of fertility, these lakes from time to time, at the low Nile,
inundate the country with salt water, and are "surrounded by low and
barren plains" .

The ancient populousness and capabilities of the western province are
attested by its ruins. : "The ruins which the French found everywhere in
the military reconnaissances of this part of Egypt attest the truth of
the historical accounts of the ancient population of the Province, now
deserted" ; "so deserted, that you can scarce tell the numbers of ruined
cities frequented only by wandering Arabs."

According to a calculation lower than others, 13 of the land formerly
tilled in Egypt has been thrown out of cultivation, i. e., not less than
1,763,895 acres or 2755.710 square miles . And this is not of yesterday.
Toward the end of the 14th century, the extent of the land taxed was
3,034,179 feddans , i. e., 4,377,836.56 acres or 6840.13 square miles.
The list of lands taxed by the Egyptian government in 1824 yields but a
sum of 1,956, 40 feddans , or 2,822,171 acres or 4409 square miles. Yet
even this does not represent the land actually cultivated. Some even of
the taxed land is left wholly, some partially, uncultivated .

In an official report , 2,000,000 feddans are stated to be cultivated,
when the overflow of the Nile is the most favorable, i. e., 47 only of
the estimated cultivable amount. The French, who surveyed Egypt
minutely, with a view to future improvement, calculated that above
1,000,000 feddans (1,012,887) might be proximately restored by the
restoration of the system of irrigation, and nearly 1,000,000 more
(942,810) by the drainage of its lakes, ponds and marshes, i. e., nearly
as much again as is actually cultivated. One of the French surveyors
sums up his account of the present state of Egypt ; "without canals and
their dykes, Egypt, ceasing to be vivified throughout, is only a corpse
which the mass of the waters of its river inundates to superfluity, and
destroys through fullness. Instead of those ancient cultivated and
fertile plains, one only finds, here and there, canals filled up or cut
in two, whose numerous ramifications, crossing each other in every
direction, exhibit only some scarcely distinguishable traces of a system
of irrigation; instead of those villages and populous cities, one sees
only masses of bare and arid ruins, remnants of ancient habitations
reduced to ashes; lastly, one finds only lagoons, miry and pestilential,
or sterile sands which extend themselves, and unceasingly invade a land
which the industry of man had gained from the desert and the sea."

Yet this is wholly unnatural. In the prophet's time, it was contrary to
all experience. Egypt is alike prolific in its people and in the
productions of the earth. The Egyptian race is still accounted very
prolific . So general is this, that the ancients thought that the waters
of tim Nile must have some power of fecundity . Yet with these powers
implanted in nature unimpaired, the population is diminished, the land
half-desert. No one doubts that man's abiding misgovernment is the cause
of Egypt's desolation. Under their native princes, they were happy and
prosperous . Alexander, some of the Ptolemies, the Romans, saw, at
least, the value of Egypt. The great conception of its Greek conqueror,
Alexandria, has been a source of prosperity to strangers for above 2000
years. Prosperity has hovered around Egypt. Minds, the most different,
are at one in thinking that, with a good government, internal prosperity
and its farfamed richness of production might at once be restored.
Conquerors of varied nations, Persians, Macedonians, Romans, Greeks,
Arabs, Georgians, Tartars, or Turks have tried their hands upon Egypt.
Strange that selfishness or powerlessness for good should have rested
upon all; strange that no one should have developed its inherent powers!
Strange contrast. One long prosperity, and one long adversity. One
scarcely broken day, and one troubled night. And that doom foretold in
the mid-day of its prosperity, by those three words, "Egypt shall be a
desolation."

Edom shall be a desolate wilderness - Edom, long unknown, its ancient
capital, its rock-dwellings, have been, within these last forty years,
anew revealed. The desolation has been so described to us, that we have
seen it, as it were, with our own eyes. The land is almost the more
hopelessly desolate, because it was once, artificially, highly
cultivated. Once it had the "fatness of the earth and the dew of heaven
from above" [Gen 27:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#039) : it had [Num
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#017) "cornfields" and "vineyards" in
abundance, and "wells" of water; its vegetation, its trees, and its
vineyards, attracted the dew by which they were supported. "Petra," says
Strabo, (xvi. 4, 21), "lies in a spot precipitous and abrupt without,
but within possessed of abundant fountains for watering and
horticulture." The terrace-cultivation, through which each shower which
falls is stored to the uttermost, clothing with fertility the
mountain-sides, leaves those steep sides the more bare, when disused.
"We saw," says a traveler , "many ruined terraces, the evidences and
remains of a flourishing agriculture, which, in the prosperous days of
Edom and Petra, clothed many of these now sterile mountains with
fertility and beauty. Fields of wheat and some agricultural villages
still exist in the eastern portion of Edom; but, with very slight
exceptions, the country is blighted with cheerless desolations and
hopeless sterility. The hill-sides and mountains, once covered with
earth and clothed with vineyards, are now bare rocks. The soil no longer
supported by terraces and sheltered by trees, has been swept away by the
rains. The various contrivances for irrigation, which even now might
restore fertility to many considerable tracts, have all disappeared.
Sand from the desert, and the debris of the soft rock of the mountains,
cover the valleys which formerly smiled with plenty."

Now "the springs have been dried up to such an extent, as to render the
renewal of the general fertility of Edom (well nigh) impossible. In
places along the course of the stream, reeds and shrubs grow
luxuriantly, oleanders and wild figs abound, and give proof that a
little cultivation would again cover the rock, and fill the cliffs with
the numberless gardens which once adorned them. The traces of former
fertility are innumerable; every spot capable of sustaining vegetable
life was carefully watered and cultivated. There are numerous grooves in
the rocks to carry rainwater to the little clefts in which even now figs
are found. Every spot capable of being so protected has been walled up,
however small the space gained, or however difficult the means of
securing it. The ancient inhabitants seem to have left no accessible
place untouched. They have exhibited equal art and industry in eliciting
from the grand walls of their marvelous capital whatever the combination
of climate, irrigation and botanical skill could foster in the scanty
soil afforded them. The hanging gardens must have had a wondrous effect
among the noble buildings of the town when it was in all its glory."
This desolation began soon after the captivity of Judah and Edom's
malicious joy in it. For Malachi appeals to Judah, that whereas God had
restored him, He had "laid the mountains and the heritage" of Esau
"waste for the jackals of the wilderness" [Mal
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003).

Yet Edom was the center of the conversation of nations. Occupying, as it
did in its narrowest dimensions, the mountains between the south end of
the Dead Sea and the Aelanitic gulf, it lay on the direct line between
Egypt and Babylonia. A known route lay from Heroopolis to Petra its
capital, and thence to Babylon . Elath and Ezion-geber discharged
through its vally, the Arabah, the wealth which they received by sea
from India or Africa. Petra was the natural halting-place of the
caravans. "The Nabataeans," says Pliny , "enclose Petra, in a valley of
rather more than two miles in extent, surrounded by inaccessible
mountains, through which a stream flows. Here the two roads meet of
those who go to Palmyra of Syria, and of those who come from Gaza."
Eastward again, he says , "they went from Petra to Fora, and thence to
Charax" on the banks of the Tigris, near the Persian gulf.

Yet further the wealth of Arabia Felix poured by a land-route through
Petra. : "To Petra and Palestine, Gerraens and Minaeans and all the
neighboring Arabs brought down from the upper country the frankincense,
it is said, and all other fragrant merchandise." Even after the
foundation of Alexandria had diverted much of the stream of commerce
from Leuce Come, the Aelanitic gulf, and Petra to Myos Hormus on the
Egyptian side of the Red Sea, the Romans still connected Elath and Petra
with Jerusalem by a great road, of which portions are still extant , and
guarded the contact by military stations . Of these routes, that from
Arabia Felix and from Egypt to Babylonia had probably been used for
above 1000 years before the time of Joel. Elath and Eziongeber were
well-known towns at the time of the Exodus [Deu
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#008).

The contact was itself complex and manifold. The land exports of Arabia
Felix and the commerce of Elath necessarily passed through Edom, and
thence radiated to Egypt, Palestine, Syria. The withdrawal of the
commerce of Egypt would not alone have destroyed that of Petra, while
Tyre, Jerusalem, Damascus, still received merchandise through her. To
them she was the natural channel; the pilgrim-route from Damascus to
Mecca lies still by Petra. In Joel's time, not the slightest shadow was
cast on her future. Then Babylon destroyed her for a time; but she
recovered. The Babylonian and Persian Empires perished; Alexander rose
and fell; Rome, the master alike of Alexandria and Petra, meant Petra
still to survive. No human eye could even then tell that it would be
finally desolate; much less could any human knowledge have foreseen it
in that of Joel. But God said by him, "Edom shall be a desolate
wilderness," and it is so!

As, however, Egypt and Edom are only instances of the enemies of God's
people and Church, so their desolation is only one instance of a great
principle of God's Government, that "the triumphing of the wicked is
short, and the joy of the ungodly for a moment" [Job
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#005); that, after their short-lived
office of fulfilling God's judgment on His people, the judgment rolls
round on themselves, "and they that hate the righteous shall be
desolate" [Psa 34:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#021).

[Joel 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joe 3:20</span></span>

Judah shall dwell for ever - Not earthly Judah, nor earthly Jerusalem,
for these must come to an end, together with the earth itself, of whose
end the prophets well knew. It is then the one people of God, the true
Judah, the people who praise God, the Israel, which is indeed Israel.
Egypt and Edom and all the enemies of God should come to an end; but His
people shall never come to an end. "The gates of hell shall not prevail
against her." The enemy shall not destroy her; time shall not consume
her; she shall never decay. The people of God shall abide before Him and
through Him here, and shall dwell with Him forever.

[Joel 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joe 3:21</span></span>

For I will cleanse her blood that I have not cleansed - The word
rendered "cleansed" is not used of natural cleansing, nor is the image
taken from the cleansing of the body. The word signifies only to
pronounce innocent, or to free from guilt. Nor is "blood" used of
sinfulness generally, but only of the actual guilt of shedding blood.
The whole then cannot be an image taken from the cleansing of physical
defilement, like the words in the prophet Ezekiel, "then washed I thee
with water; yea, I thoroughly washed away thy blood from thee" [Eze
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#009). Nor again can it mean the
forgiveness of sins generally, but only the pronouncing innocent the
blood which had been shed. This, the only meaning of the words, fall in
with the mention of the "innocent blood," for shedding which, Egypt and
Edom had been condemned. The words are the same. There it was said,
"because they have shed innocent blood; dam naki;" here, "I will
pronounce innocent their blood, nikkethi damam." "How," it is not said.
But the sentence on Egypt and Edom explains how God would do it, by
punishing those who shed it. For in that He punishes the shedding of it,
He declared the "blood" innocent, whose shedding He punished. So in the
Revelation it is said, "I saw under the altar the souls of them that
were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held,
and they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and
true, dost Thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
earth?" [Rev 6:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#010). : "Then, at the
last judgment, when the truth in all things shall be made manifest, He
shall "declare the blood" of His people, who clave to Him and His truth,
which blood their enemies thought they had shed justly and deservedly as
the blood of guilty persons, to have indeed been innocent, by absorbing
them from eternal destruction to which He shall then adjudge their
enemies for shedding of it."

For - (literally and) the Lord dwelleth in Zion He closes with the
promise of God's abiding dwelling. He speaks, not simply of a future,
but of an ever-abiding present. He who is, the unchangeable God , "the
Lord, infinite in power and of eternal Being, who gives necessary being
to all His purposes and promises," dwelleth now in "Mount Zion, the city
of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem" ([Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022); add [Gal
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026); [Rev
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#012); [Rev
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001); [Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002), [Rev
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#010)), now by grace and the presence
of His Holy Spirit, hereafter in glory. Both of the Church militant on
earth and that triumphant in heaven, it is truly to be said, that the
Lord dwelleth in them, and that, perpetually. Of the Church on earth
will be verified what our Saviour Christ saith, "lo I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world" [Mat
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020); and of its members Paul saith,
that "they" are "of the household of God, an holy temple in the Lord, in
whom they are builded together for an habitation of God through the
Spirit" [Eph 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019), [Eph
2:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#021). Of the Church triumphant,
there is no doubt, that "He" doth and will there dwell, and manifest His
glorious presence forever, "in" whose "presence is the fullness of joy,
and at His Right Hand" there are "pleasures for evermore" [Psa
16:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001) :12. It is an eternal dwelling
of the Eternal, varied as to the way and degree of His presence by our
condition, now imperfect, there perfected in Him; but He Himself
dwelleth on for ever. He, the Unchangeable, dwelleth unchangeably; the
Eternal, eternally.

: "Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou city of God" [Psa
87:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#003) Jerusalem, our mother, we thy
children now groan and weep in this valley of tears, hanging between
hope and fear, and, amid toil and conflicts, "lifting up our eyes" to
thee and greeting thee from far. Truly "glorious things are spoken of
thee." But whatever can be said, since it is said to people and in the
words of people, is too little for the "good things" in thee, which
"neither eye hath seen, nor ear heard, nor hath entered into the heart
of man" [Co1 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009). Great to us seem the
things which we suffer; but one of thy most illustrious citizens, placed
amid those sufferings, who knew something of thee, hesitated not to say,
"Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh out for us a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory" [Co2
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017). We will then "rejoice in hope,"
and "by the waters of Babylon," even while "we sit and weep," we will
"remember thee, O Zion. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, may my right hand
forget" her cunning. "Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, I do
not remember thee, if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy" [Psa
137:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001).

O blessed longed-for day, when we shall enter into the city of the
saints, 'whose light is the Lamb,' where 'the King is seen in His
beauty,' where 'all tears are wiped off from the eyes' of the saints,
'and there shall be no more death neither sorrow nor pain, for the
former things have passed away [Rev
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023); [Isa
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#017); [Rev
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#004). "How amiable are Thy tabernacle,
O Lord of Hosts! My soul longeth, yea fainteth for the courts of the
Lord; my heart and my flesh crieth out for the living God" [Psa
84:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#001). "When shall I come and appear
before God?" [Psa 42:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#002), when shall I
see that Father, whom I ever long for and never see, to whom out of this
exile, I cry out, "Our Father, which art in heaven?" O true Father,
"Father of our Lord Jesus Christ" ([Rom
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#006), ...), "Father of mercies and God
of all comfort!" [Co2 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#003). When shall
'I see the Word, who was in the beginning with God,' and who 'is God?'
[Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001). When may I kiss His sacred
Feet, pierced for me, put my mouth to His sacred Side, sit at His Feet,
never to depart from them? O Face, more Glorious than the sun! Blessed
is he, who beholdeth Thee, who hath never ceased to say, 'I shall see
Him, but not now; I shall behold Him, but not nigh' [Num
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017). When will the day come, when,
cleansed from the defilement of my sins, I shall, 'with unveiled face,
behold the glory of the Lord' [Co2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018), and see the sanctifying Spirit,
the Author of all good, through whose sanctifying we are cleansed, that
'we may be like Him, and see Him as He is?' [Jo1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002). 'Blessed are all they that dwell
in Thy house,' O Lord, 'they shall ever praise Thee' [Psa
84:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#004); forever shall they behold Thee
and love Thee."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Introduction](amo000)

</div>
