<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Joel Index](joe.md)  
  [Previous](joe001)  [Next](joe003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joel Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001.md)

[Joel](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joe 2:0</span></span>

The prophet begins anew in this chapter, first delineating in greater
detail the judgments of God; then calling to repentance. The image
reaches its height in the capture of Jerusalem by the Babylonians,
itself an image only of worse judgments, first on the Jews by the
Romans; then on particular Churches; then of the infliction through
antichrist; lastly on the whole world. : "The prophet sets before them
the greatness of the coming woe, of the approaching captivity, of the
destruction imminent, in order to move the people to terror at the
judgment of God, to compunction, to love of obedience. This he does from
the manifoldness of the destruction, the quality of the enemy, the
nature of the victory, the weight of the misery, the ease of the
triumph, the eagerness for ill, the fear of the besieged princes, the
sluggishness of the besieged people. He exhorts all in common to
prostrate themselves at the feet of the divine judgment, if so be God
would look down from His dwelling place, turn the storm into a calm, and
at length out of the shipwreck of captivity bring them back to the haven
of consolation." : "It is no mere prediction. Everything stands before
them, as in actual experience, and before their eyes." Future things
affect people less; so he makes them, as it were, present to their
souls. : "He will not let them vacillate about repentance, but bids
them, laying aside all listlessness, set themselves courageously to ward
off the peril, by running to God, and effacing the charges against them
from their old sins by everrenewed amendment."

[Joel 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joe 2:1</span></span>

Blow ye the trumpet - The trumpet was accustomed to sound in Zion, only
for religious uses; to call together the congregations for holy
meetings, to usher in the beginnings of their months and their solemn
days with festival gladness. Now in Zion itself, the stronghold of the
kingdom, the Holy City, the place which God chose to put His Name there,
which He had promised to establish, the trumpet was to be used, only for
sounds of alarm and fear. Alarm could not penetrate there, without
having pervaded the whole land. With it, the whole human hope of Judah
was gone.

Sound an alarm in My holy mountain - He repeats the warning in varied
expressions, in order the more to impress people's hearts and to stir
them to repentance. Even "the holy mountain" of God was to echo with
alarms; the holiness, once bestowed upon it, was to be no security
against the judgments of God; yea, in it rather were those judgments to
begin. So Peter saith, "The time is come, that judgment must begin at
the house of God" [Pe1 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017.md). The alarm
being blown in Zion, terror was to spread to all the inhabitants of the
land, who were, in fear, to repent. The Church of Christ is foretold in
prophecy under the names of "Zion" and of the holy "mountain." It is the
"stone cut out without hands, which became a great mountain, and filled
the whole earth" [Dan 2:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034.md). Of it,
it is said, "Come ye and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to
the house of the God of Jacob!" [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003.md). And Paul says, "ye are come unto
mount Zion and unto the city of the living God" [Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022.md). The words then are a rule for
all times. The judgments predicted by Joel represent all judgments unto
the end; the conduct, prescribed on their approach, is a pattern to the
Church at all times. : "In this mountain we must wail, considering the
failure of the faithful, in which, "iniquity abounding, charity waxeth
cold." For now (1450 a.d.) the state of the Church is so sunken, and you
may see so great misery in her from the most evil conversation of many,
that one who burns with zeal for God, and truly loveth his brethren,
must say with Jeremiah, "Let mine eyes run down with tears night and
day, and let them not cease, for the virgin daughter of my people is
broken with a great breach" [Jer
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#017.md).

Let all the inhabitants of the land tremble - o: "We should be troubled
when we hear the words of God, rebuking, threatening, avenging, as
Jeremiah saith, 'my heart within me is broken, all my bones shake,
because of the Lord and because of the words of His holiness' [Jer
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#009.md). Good is the trouble which
people, weighing their sins, are shaken with fear and trembling, and
repent."

For the Day of the Lord is at hand - "The Day of the Lord" is any day in
which He avengeth sin, any day of Judgment, in the course of His
Providence or at the end; the day of Jerusalem from the Chaldees or
Romans, the day of antichrist, the day of general or particular
judgment, of which James says, "The coming of the Lord draweth nigh.
Behold the Judge standeth before the door" [Jam
5:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#008.md). : "Well is that called "the day
of the Lord," in that, by the divine appointment, it avengeth the wrongs
done to the Lord through the disobedience of His people."

[Joel 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joe 2:2</span></span>

A day of darkness and of gloominess - o: "A day full of miseries;
wherefore he accumulates so many names of terrors. There was inner
darkness in the heart, and the darkness of tribulation without. They hid
themselves in dark places. There was the cloud between God and them; so
that they were not protected nor heard by Him, of which Jeremiah saith,
"Thou hast covered Thyself with a cloud, that our prayers should not
pass through" [Lam 3:44](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#044.md). There was the
whirlwind of tempest within and without, taking away all rest,
tranquility and peace. Whence Jeremiah hath, "A whirlwind of the Lord is
gone forth injury, it shall fall grievously upon the head of the wicked.
The anger of the Lord shall not return, until He have executed it" [Jer
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#019.md). "The Day of the Lord too shall
come as a thief in the night" [Th1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#002.md). "Clouds and darkness are round
about Him" [Psa 97:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#002.md).

A day of clouds and of thick darkness - The locusts are but the faint
shadow of the coming evils, yet as the first harbingers of God's
successive judgments, the imagery, even in tills picture is probably
taken from them. At least there is nothing in which writers, of every
character, are so agreed, as in speaking of locusts as clouds darkening
the sun. : "These creatures do not come in legions, but in whole clouds,
5 or 6 leagues in length and 2 or 3 in breadth. All the air is full and
darkened when they fly. Though the sun shine ever so bright, it is no
brighter than when most clouded." : "In Senegal we have seen a vast
multitude of locusts shadowing the air, for they come almost every three
years, and darken the sky." : "About 8 o'clock there arose above us a
thick cloud, which darkened the air, depriving us of the rays of the
sun. Every one was astonished at so sudden a change in the air, which is
so seldom clouded at this season; but we soon saw that it was owing to a
cloud of locusts. It was about 20 or 30 toises from the ground (120-180
feet) and covered several leagues of the country, when it discharged a
shower of locusts, who fed there while they rested, and then resumed
their flight. This cloud was brought by a pretty strong wind, it was all
the morning passing the neighborhood, and the same wind, it was thought,
precipitated it in the sea." : "They take off from the place the light
of day, and a sort of eclipse is formed." : "In the middle of April
their numbers were so vastly increased, that in the heat of the day they
formed themselves into large bodies, appeared like a succession of
clouds and darkened the sun." : "On looking up we perceived an immense
cloud, here and there semi-transparent, in other parts quite black, that
spread itself all over the sky, and at intervals shadowed the sun."

The most unimaginative writers have said the same ; "When they first
appear, a thick dark cloud is seen very high in the air, which, as it
passes, obscures the sun. Their swarms were so astonishing in all the
steppes over which we passed in this part of our journey (the Crimea,)
that the whole face of nature might have been described as concealed by
a living veil." : "When these clouds of locusts take their flight to
surmount some obstacle, or traverse more rapidly a desert soil, one may
say, to the letter, that the heaven is darkened by them."

As the morning spread upon the mountains - Some have thought this too to
allude to the appearance which the inhabitants of Abyssinia too well
knew, as preceding the coming of the locusts (see the note at [Joe
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#006).md). A sombre yellow light is cast on
the ground, from the reflection, it was thought, of their yellow wings.
But that appearance itself seems to be unique to that country, or
perhaps to certain flights of locusts. The image naturally describes,
the suddenness, universality of the darkness, when people looked for
light. As the mountain-tops first catch the gladdening rays of the sun,
ere yet it riseth on the plains, and the light spreads from height to
height, until the whole earth is arrayed in light, so wide and universal
shall the outspreading be, but it shall be of darkness, not of light;
the light itself shall be turned into darkness.

A great people and a strong - The imagery throughout these verses is
taken from the flight and inroad of locusts. The allegory is so
complete, that the prophet compares them to those things which are, in
part, intended under them, warriors, horses and instruments of war; and
this, the more, because neither locusts, nor armies are exclusively
intended. The object of the allegory is to describe the order and course
of the divine judgments; how they are terrific, irresistible, universal,
overwhelming, penetrating everywhere, overspreading all things, excluded
by nothing. The locusts are the more striking symbol of this, through
their minuteness and their number. They are little miniatures of a
wellordered army, unhindered by what would be physical obstacles to
larger creatures, moving in order inimitable even by man, and, from
their number, desolating to the uttermost. "What more countless or
mightier than the locusts," asks Jerome, who had seen their inroads,
"which human industry cannot resist?" "It is a thing invincible," says
Cyril, "their invasion is altogether irresistible, and suffices utterly
to destroy all in the fields." Yet each of these creatures is small, so
that they would be powerless and contemptible, except in the Hands of
Him, who brings them in numbers which can be wielded only by the
Creator. Wonderful image of the judgments of God, who marshals and
combines in one, causes each unavailing in itself but working together
the full completion of His inscrutable Will.

There hath not been ever the like - The courses of sin and of punishment
are ever recommencing anew in some part of the world and of the Church.
The whole order of each, sin and punishment, will culminate once only,
in the Day of Judgment. Then only will these words have their complete
fulfillment. The Day of Judgment alone is that Day of terror and of woe,
such as never has been before, and shall never be again. For there will
be no new day or time of terror. Eternal punishment will only be the
continuation of the sentence adjudged then. But, in time and in the
course of God's Providential government, the sins of each soul or people
or Church draw down visitations, which are God's final judgments there.
Such to the Jewish people, before the captivity, was the destruction of
the temple, the taking of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, and that
captivity itself. The Jewish polity was never again restored as before.

Such, to the new polity after the captivity, was the destruction by the
Romans. Eighteen hundred years have seen nothing like it. The Vandals
and then the Muslims swept over the Churches of North Africa, each
destructive in its own way. twelve centuries have witnessed one unbroken
desolation of the Church in Africa. In Constantinople, and Asia Minor,
Palestine, Persia, Churches of the Redeemer became the mosques of the
false prophet. Centuries have flowed by, "yet we see not our signs,
neither is there any among us, that knoweth how long" [Psa
74:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009.md). Wealthy, busy, restless,
intellectual, degraded, London, sender forth of missionaries, but, save
in China, the largest pagan city in the world; converter of the isles of
the sea, but thyself unconverted; fullest of riches and of misery, of
civilization and of savage life, of refinements and debasement; heart,
whose pulses are felt in every continent, but thyself diseased and
feeble, wilt thou, in this thy day, anticipate by thy conversion the Day
of the Lord, or will It come upon thee, "as hath never been the like,
nor shall be, for the years of many generations?" Shalt thou win thy
lost ones to Christ, or be thyself the birthplace or abode of
antichrist? "O Lord God, Thou knowest."

Yet the words have fulfillments short of the end. Even of successive
chastisements upon the same people, each may have some aggravation
unique to itself, so that of each, in turn, it may be said, in that
respect, that no former visitation had been like it, none afterward
should resemble it. Thus the Chaldaeans were chief in fierceness,
Antiochus Epiphanes in his madness against God, the Romans in the
completeness of the desolation. The fourth beast which Daniel saw "was
dreadful and terrible and strong exceedingly, and it was diverse from
all the beasts that were before it" [Dan
7:7-19](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007.md). The persecutions of the Roman
Emperors were in extent and cruelty far beyond any before them. They
shall be as nothing, in comparison to the deceivableness and oppression
of antichrist. The prophet, however, does not say that there should be
absolutely none like it, but only not "for the years of many
genertions." The words "unto generation and generation" elsewhere mean
"forever;" here the word "years" may limit them to length of time. God,
after some signal visitation, leaves a soul or a people to the silent
workings of His grace or of His Providence. The marked interpositions of
His Providence, are like His extraordinary miracles, rare; else, like
the ordinary miracles of His daily operations, they would cease to be
interpositions.

[Joel 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joe 2:3</span></span>

A fire devoureth before them ... - Travelers, of different nations and
characters, and in different lands, some unacquainted with the Bible
words, have agreed to describe under this image the ravages of locusts.
: "They scorch many things with their touch." : "Whatever of herb or
leaf they gnaw, is, as it were, scorched by fire." : "Wherever they
come, the ground seems burned, as it were with fire." : "Wherever they
pass, they burn and spoil everything, and that irremediably." : "I have
myself observed that the places where they had browsed were as scorched,
as if the fire had passed there." : "They covered a square mile so
completely, that it appeared, at a little distance, to have been burned
and strewn over with brown ashes. Not a shrub, nor a blade of grass was
visible." : "A few months afterward, a much larger army alighted and
gave the whole country the appearance of having been burned." "Wherever
they settled, it looks as if fire had devoured and burnt up everything."
: "It is better to have to do with the Tartars, than with these little
destructive animals; you would think that fire follows their track," are
the descriptions of their ravages in Italy, Aethiopia, the Levant,
India, South Africa. The locust, itself the image of God's judgments, is
described as an enemy, invading, as they say, "with fire and sword,"
"breathing fire," wasting all, as he advances, and leaving behind him
the blackness of ashes, and burning villages. : "Whatsoever he seizeth
on, he shall consume as a devouring flame and shall leave nothing whole
behind him."

The land is as the garden of Eden before them - In outward beauty the
land was like that Paradise of God, where He placed our first parents;
as were Sodom and Gomorrah, before God overthrew them [Gen
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010.md). It was like a garden enclosed
and protected from all inroad of evil. They sinned, and like our first
parents forfeited its bliss. "A fruitful land God maketh barren, for the
wickedness of them that dwell therein" [Psa
107:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#034.md). Ezekiel fortells the removal
of the punishment, in connection with the Gospel promise of "a new heart
and a new spirit. They shall say, This land that was desolate is become
like the garden of Eden" [Eze 36:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#026.md),
[Eze 36:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#035.md).

And behind them a desolate wilderness - The desolation caused by the
locust is even more inconceivable to us, than their numbers. We have
seen fields blighted; we have known of crops, of most moment to man's
support, devoured; and in one year we heard of terrific famine, as its
result. We do not readily set before our eyes a whole tract, embracing
in extent several of our counties, in which not the one or other crop
was smitten, but every green thing was gone. Yet such was the scourge of
locusts, the image of other and worse scourges in the treasure-house of
God's displeasure. A Syrian writer relates , "1004 a.d., a large swarm
of locusts appeared in the land of Mosul and Bagdad, and it was very
grievous in Shiraz. It left no herb nor even leaf on the trees, and even
gnawed the pieces of linen which the fullers were bleaching; of each
piece the fuller gave a scrap to its owner: and time was a famine, and a
cor (about two quarters) of wheat was sold in Bagdad for 120 gold dinars
(about 54 British pounds):" and again , "when it (the locust of 784
a.d.,) had consumed the whole tract of Edessa and Sarug, it passed to
the west and for three years after this heavy chastisement there was a
famine in the land." : "We traveled five days through lands wholly
despoiled; and for the canes of maize, as large as the largest canes
used to prop vines, it cannot be said how they were broken and trampled,
as if donkeys had trampled them; and all this from the locusts. The
wheat, barley, tafos , were as if they had never been sown; the trees
without a single leaf; the tender wood all eaten; there was no memory of
herb of any sort. If we had not been advised to take mules laden with
harley and provisions for ourselves, we should have perished of hunger,
we and our mules. This land was all covered with locusts without wings,
and they said that they were the seed of those who had all gone, who had
destroyed the land." : "Everywhere, where their legions march, verdure
disappears from the country, like a curtain which is folded up; trees
and plants stripped of leaves, and reduced to their branches and stalks,
substitute, in the twinkling of an eye, the dreary spectacle of winter
for the rich scenes of spring." "Happily this plague is not very often
repeated, for there is none which brings so surely famine and the
diseases which follow it." : "Desolation and famine mark their progress;
all the expectations of the farmer vanish; his fields, which the rising
sun beheld covered with luxuriance, are before evening a desert; the
produce of his garden and orchard are alike destroyed, for where these
destructive swarms alight, not a leaf is left upon the trees, a blade of
grass in the pastures, nor an ear of corn in the field." : "In 1654 a
great multitude of locusts came from the northwest to the Islands
Tayyovvan and Formosa, which consumed all that grew in the fields, so
that above eight thousand men perished by famine." : "They come
sometimes in such prodigious swarms, that they darken the sky as they
pass by and devour all in those parts where they settle, so that the
inhabitants are often obliged to change their habitations for want of
sustenance, as it has happened frequently in China and the Isle of
Tajowak." : "The lands, ravaged throughout the west, produced no
harvest. The year 1780 was still more wretched. A dry winter produced a
new race of locusts which ravaged what had escaped the inclemency of the
season. The farmer reaped not what he had sown, and was reduced to have
neither nourishment, seed, nor cattle. The people experienced all the
horrors of famine. You might see them wandering over the country to
devour the roots; and, seeking in the bowels of the earth for means to
lengthen their days, perhaps they rather abridged them. A countless
number died of misery and bad nourishment. I have seen countrymen on the
roads and in the streets dead of starvation, whom others were laying
across asses, to go bury them. fathers sold their children. A husband,
in concert with his wife, went to marry her in some other province as if
she were his sister, and went to redeem her, when better off. I have
seen women and children run after the camels, seek in their dung for
some grain of indigested barley and devour it with avidity."

Yea, and nothing shall escape them - Or (which the words also include)
"none shall escape him," literally, "and also there shall be no escaping
as to him or from him." The word , being used elsewhere of the persons
who escape, suggests, in itself, that we should not linger by the type
of the locusts only, but think of enemies more terrible, who destroy not
harvests only, but people, bodies or souls also. Yet the picture of
devastation is complete. No creature of God so destroys the whole face
of nature, as does the locust. A traveler in the Crimea uses
unconsciously the words of the prophet; ; "On whatever spot they fall,
the whole vegetable produce disappears. Nothing escapes them, from the
leaves of the forest to the herbs on the plain. Fields, vineyards,
gardens, pastures, everything is laid waste; and sometimes the only
appearance left is a disgusting superficies caused by their putrefying
bodies, the stench of which is sufficient to breed a pestilence."
Another in South Africa says , "When they make their appearance, not a
single field of grain remains unconsumed by them. This year the whole of
the Sneuwberg will not, I suppose, produce a single bushel." : "They had
(for a space 80 or 90 miles in length) devoured every green herb and
every blade of grass; and had it not been for the reeds on which our
cattle entirely subsisted while we skirted the banks of the river, the
journey must have been discontinued, at least in the line that had been
proposed." : "Not a shrub nor blade of grass was visible." The rapidity
with which they complete the destruction is also observed. : "In two
hours, they destroyed all the herbs around Rama."

All this which is a strong, but true, image of the locusts is a shadow
of God's other judgments. It is often said of God, "A fire goeth before
Him and burneth up His enemies on every side" [Psa
97:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#003.md). "The Lord will come with fire;
by fire will the Lord plead with all flesh" [Isa
66:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#015.md). This is said of the Judgment
Day, as in Paul, "The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with His
mighty angels, in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not
God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ" [Th2
1:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007.md). That awful lurid stream of fire
shall burn up "the earth and all the works that are therein" [Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010.md). All this whole circuit of the
globe shall be enveloped in one burning deluge of fire; all gold and
jewels, gardens, fields, pictures, books, "the cloud-capt towers and
gorgeous palaces, shall dissolve, and leave not a rack behind." The good
shall be removed beyond its reach, for they shall be caught up to meet
the Lord in the air [Th1 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017.md).

But all which is in the earth and those who are of the earth shall be
swept away by it. It shall go before the army of the Lord, the Angels
whom "the Son of man shall send forth, to gather out of His kingdom all
things that shall offend and them that do iniquity. It shall burn after
them" [Mat 13:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#041.md). For it shall burn on
during the Day of Judgment until it have consumed all for which it is
sent. "The land will be a garden of Eden before it." For they will, our
Lord says, be eating, drinking, buying, selling, planting, building,
marrying and giving in marriage [Luk
17:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#027.md), [Luk
17:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#030.md); the world will be "glorifying
itself and living deliciously," full of riches and delights, when it
"shall be utterly burned with fire," and "in one hour so great riches
shall come to nought" [Rev 18:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007.md),
[Rev 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#017.md). "And after it a desolate
wilderness," for there shall be none left. "And none shall escape." For
our Lord says, "they shall gather all things that offend; the angels
shall come forth and sever the wicked from among the just, and shall
cast them into the furnace of fire" [Mat
13:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#041.md), [Mat
13:49-50](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#049.md).

[Joel 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joe 2:4</span></span>

The appearance of them, is as the appearance of horses - "If you
carefully consider the head of the locust," says Theodoret, a Bishop in
Syria, "you will find it exceedingly like that of a horse." Whence the
Arabs, of old and to this day , say; "In the locust, slight as it is, is
the nature of ten of the larger animals, the face of a horse, the eyes
of an elephant, the neck of abull, the horns of a deer, the chest of a
lion, the belly of a scorpion, the wings of an eagle, the thighs of a
camel, the feet of an ostrich, the tail of a serpent."

[Joel 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joe 2:5</span></span>

Like the noise of chariots on the tops of the mountains shall they leap
- The amazing noise of the flight of locusts is likened by those who
have heard them, to all sorts of deep sharp rushing sounds. One says ,
"their noise may be heard six miles off." Others , "within a hundred
paces I heard the rushing noise occasioned by the flight of so many
million of insects. When I was in the midst of them, it was as loud as
the dashing of the waters occasioned by the mill-wheel." : "While
passing over our heads, their sound was as of a great cataract." : "We
heard a noise as of the rushing of a great wind at a distance." : "In
flying they make a rushing rustling noise, as when a strong wind blows
through trees." : "They cause a noise, like the rushing of a torrent."
To add another vivid description , "When a swarm is advancing, it seems
as though brown clouds were rising from the horizon, which, as they
approach, spread more and more. They cast a veil over the sun and a
shadow on the earth. Soon you see little dots, and observe a whizzing
and life. Nearer yet, the sun is darkened; you hear a roaring and
rushing like gushing water. On a sudden you find yourself surrounded
with locusts."

Like the noise of a flame of fire that devoureth the stubble - The sharp
noise caused by these myriads of insects, while feeding, has also been
noticed. : "You hear afar the noise which they make in browsing on the
herbs and trees, as of an army which is foraging without restraint." :
"When they alight upon the ground to feed, the plains are all covered,
and they make a murmuring noise as they eat, when in two hours they
devour all close to the ground." : "The noise which they make in
devouring, ever announces their approach at some distance." : "They say,
that not without a noise is their descent on the fields effected, and
that there is a certain sharp sound, as they chew the grain as when the
wind strongly fanneth a flame."

Their noise, Joel says, is like the "noise of chariots." Whence John
says [Rev 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#009.md), the sound of their
wings was as the sound of many horses rushing to battle. Their sound
should be like the sound of war-chariots, hounding in their speed; but
their inroad should be, where chariots could not go and man's foot could
rarely reach, "on the tops of the mountains" . A mountain range is, next
to the sea, the strongest natural protection. Mountains have been a
limit to the mightiest powers. The Caucasus of old held in the Persian
power; on the one side, all was enslaved, on the other, all was
fearlessly free . Of late it enabled a few mountaineers to hold at bay
the power of Russia. The pass of Thermopylae, until betrayed, enabled a
handful of men to check the invasion of nearly two million.

The mountain-ridges of Spain were, from times before our Lord, the last
home and rallying-place of the conquered or the birth-place of
deliverance . God had assigned to His people a spot, central hereafter
for the conversion of the world, yet where, meantime, they lay enveloped
and sheltered "amid the mountains" which "His Right Hand purchased" [Psa
78:54](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#054.md). The Syrians owned that "their
God" was "the God of the hills" [Kg1
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#023.md); and the people confessed, "as
the hills are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about His
people" [Psa 125:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#002.md). Their protection
was a symbol of His. But His protection withdrawn, nothing should be a
hindrance to those whom He should send as a scourge. The prophet
combines purposely things incompatible, the terrible heavy bounding of
the scythed chariot, and the light speed with which these countless
hosts should in their flight bound over the tops of the mountains, where
God had made no path for man. Countless in number, boundless in might,
are the instruments of God. The strongest national defenses give no
security. Where then is safety, save in fleeing from God displeased to
God appeased?

[Joel 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joe 2:6</span></span>

Before their face the people shall be much pained - The locust being
such a scourge of God, good reason have men to be terrified at their
approach; and those are most terrified who have most felt the
affliction. In Abyssinia, some province of which was desolated every
year, one relates , "When the locusts travel, the people know of it a
day before, not because they see them, but they see the sun yellow and
the ground yellow, through the shadow which they cast on it (their wings
being yellow) and immediately the people become as dead, saying, 'we are
lost, for the Ambadas (so they call them) are coming.' I will say what I
have seen three times; the first was at Barva. During three years that
we were in this land, we often heard them say, 'such a realm, such a
land, is destroyed by locusts:' and when it was so, we saw this sign,
the sun was yellow, and the shadow on the earth the same, and the whole
people became as dead." "The Captain of the place called Coiberia came
to me with men, Clerks, and Brothers (Monks) to ask me, for the love
God, to help them, that they were all lost through the locusts." :
"There were men, women, children, sitting among these locusts, the young
brood, as stupefied. I said to them 'why do you stay there, dying? Why
do you not kill these animals, and avenge you of the evil which their
parents have done you? and at least when dead, they will do you no more
evil.' They answered, that they had no courage to resist a plague which
God gave them for their sins. We found the roads full of men, women, and
children, (some of these on foot, some in arms) their bundles of clothes
on their heads, removing to some land where they might find provisions.
It was pitiful to see them."

Burkhardt relates of South Arabia , "The Bedouins who occupy the
peninsula of Sinai are frequently driven to despair by the multitudes of
locusts, which constitute a land-plague. They remain there generally for
forty or fifty days, and then disappear for the rest of the year." Pliny
describes their approach , "they overshadow the sun, the nations looking
up with anxiety, lest they should cover their lands. For their strength
suffices, and as if it were too little to have passed seas, they
traverse immense tracts, and overspread them with a cloud, fatal to the
harvest."

All faces shall gather blackness - Others, of high-authority, have
rendered, shall "withdraw (their) beauty" . But the word signifies to
collect together, in order that what is so collected should be present,
not absent ; and so is very different from another saying, the stars
shall withdraw their shining [Joe
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#010.md); [Joe
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#015.md). The "their" had also needed to
be expressed.) He expresses how the faces contract a livid color from
anxiety and fear, as Jeremiah says of the Nazarites, "Their visage is
darker than blackness" ([Lam 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#008.md), see
Margin). : "The faces are clothed with lurid hue of coming death; hence
they not only grow pale, but are blackened." A slight fear drives the
fresh hue from the cheek: the livid hue comes only with the deepest
terror. So Isaiah says; "they look amazed one to the other; faces of
flame are their faces" [Isa 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#008.md).

[Joel 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joe 2:7</span></span>

They shall run like mighty men - They are on God's message, and they
linger not, "but rejoice to run their course" [Psa
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#005.md). "The height of walls cannot
hinder the charge of the mighty; they enter not by the gates but over
the walls" , as of a city taken by assault. People can mount a wall few
at a time; the locusts scale much more steadily, more compactly, more
determinately, and irresistibly. The picture unites the countless
multitude, condensed march, and entire security of the locust with the
might of warriors.

They shall march every one on his ways - There is something awful and
majestic in the well-ordered flight of the winged locusts, or their
march while yet unwinged. "This," says Jerome, "we have seen lately in
this province (Palestine). For when the hosts of locusts came, and
filled the air between heaven and earth, they flew, by the disposal of
God ordaining, in such order, as to hold each his place, like the minute
pieces of mosaic, fixed in the pavement by the artist's hands, so as not
to incline to one another a hair's breadth." "You may see the locust,"
says Theodoret, "like enemies, both mounting the walls, and marching on
the roads, and not allowing itself to be dispersed by any violence, but
making the assault by a sort of concert." "It is said," says Cyril,
"that they go in rank, and fly as in array, and are not severed from
each other, but attend one on the other, like sisters, nature infusing
into them this mutual love." : "They seemed to be impelled by one common
instinct, and moved in one body, which had the appearance of being
organized by a leader." : "There is something frightful in the
appearance of these locusts proceeding in divisions, some of which are a
league in length and 200 paces in breadth." : "They continued their
journey, as if a signal had been actually given them to march."

So, of the young brood it is related; : "In June, their young broods
begin gradually to make their appearance; no sooner were any of them
hatched than they immediately collected themselves together, each of
them forming a compact body of several hundred yards square, which,
marching afterward directly forward, climbed over trees, walls and
houses, ate up every plant in their way, "and let nothing escape them."
: "They seemed to march in regular battalions, crawling over everything
that lay in their passage, in one straight front." So the judgments of
God hold on their course, each going straight to that person for whom
God in the awful wisdom of His justice ordains it. No one judgment or
chastisement comes by chance. Each is directed and adapted, weighed and
measured, by Infinite Wisdom, and reaches just that soul, for which God
appointed it, and no other, and strikes upon it with just that force
which God ordains it. As we look on, God's judgments are like a heavy
sleet of arrows; yet as each arrow, shot truly, found the mark at which
it was aimed, so, and much more, does each lesser or greater judgment,
sent by God, reach the heart for which He sends it and pierces it just
as deeply as He wills.

[Joel 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joe 2:8</span></span>

When they fall upon the sword - (literally, "among the darts") they
shall not be wounded It may be that the prophet would describe how the
locust seems armed as in a suit of armor. As one says , "Their form was
wondrous; they had a sort of gorget round their neck like a lancer, and
a helm on their head, such as soldiers wear." But, more, he exhibits
their indomitableness and impenetrableness, how nothing checks, nothing
retards, nothing makes any impression upon them. : "They do not suffer
themselves to be impeded by any obstacles, but fly boldly on, and are
drowned in the sea when they come to it." : "When on a march during the
day, it is utterly impossible to turn the direction of a troop, which is
generally with the wind." : "The guard of the Red Town attempted to stop
their irruption into Transylvania by firing at them; and indeed when the
balls and shot swept through the swarm, they gave way and divided; but
having filled up their ranks in a moment, they proceeded on their
journey."

And in like way of the young swarms ; "The inhabitants, to stop their
progress, made trenches all over their fields and gardens and filled
them with water; or else, placing in a row great quantities of heath,
stubble, and such like combustible matter, they set them on fire on the
approach of the locusts. But all this was to no purpose, for the
trenches were quickly filled up, and the fires put out by infinite
swarms, succeeding one another; while the front seemed regardless of
danger, and the van pressed on so close, that a retreat was impossible."
: "Like waves, they roll over one another on and on, and let themselves
be stopped by nothing. Russians and Germans try many means with more or
less success against them, when they come from the waste against the
grainlands. Bundles of straw are laid in rows and set on fire before
them; they march in thick heaps into the fire, but this is often put out
thro' the great mass of the animals and those advancing from behind
march away over the corpses of their companions, and continue the
march." : "Their number was astounding; the whole face of the mountain
was black with them. On they came like a living deluge. We dug trenches,
and kindled fires, and beat and burned to death heaps upon heaps, but
the effort was utterly useless. wave after wave rolled up the mountain
side, and poured over rocks, walls, ditches and hedges, those behind
covering up and bridging over the masses already killed. After a long
and fatiguing contest, I descended the mountain to examine the depth of
the column, but I could not see to the end of it." "It was perfectly
appalling to watch this animated river, as it flowed up the road and
ascended the hill."

Both in ancient and modern times, armies have been marched against them
; but in vain, unless they destroyed them, before they were full-grown.

Since the very smallest of God's judgments are thus irreversible, since
creatures so small cannot be turned aside, since we cannot turn away the
time of one of the least of our Master's servants, since they are each
as a "man of might", (so he calls them, it is the force of the word
rendered "each") what of the greater? what of the whole?

[Joel 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joe 2:9</span></span>

They shall run to and fro in the city - "The city" is questionless
Jerusalem. So to the Romans, "the city" meant Rome; to the Athenians,
Athens; among ourselves, "town" or "the city" are idiomatic names for
the whole of London or "the city of London." In Wales "town" is, with
the country people, the neighboring town with which alone they are
familiar. There is no ambiguity in the living language. In Guernsey, one
who should call Port Pierre by any other name than "the town," would
betray himself to be a stranger. In Hosea, and Amos, prophets for
Israel, "the city" is Samaria [Hos
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#009.md); [Amo
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#006.md). In Solomon [Psa
72:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#016.md); [Pro
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#021.md); [Pro
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#003.md) and the prophets of Judah ([Mic
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#009.md); [Lam
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001.md), etc.; [Eze
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#023.md); [Eze
33:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#021).md), "the city" is Jerusalem; and
that the more, because it was not only the capital, but the center of
the worship of the One True God. Hence, it is called "the city of God
[Psa 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004.md); [Psa
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001.md), [Psa
48:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#008.md); [Psa
87:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#003.md), the city of the Lord" [Psa
101:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#008.md); [Isa
60:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#014.md), then "the city of the Great
King [Psa 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002.md); [Mat
5:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#035.md), the holy city" [Isa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#002.md); [Isa
52:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001.md); [Neh
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#001.md), [Neh
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#018.md); [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024.md); and God calls it "the city I
have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel [Kg1
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#032.md), the city of righteousness" [Isa
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#026.md). So our Lord spake, "go ye into
the city" [Mat 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#018.md); [Mar
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#013.md); [Luk
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#010.md), and perhaps, , "tarry ye in the
city." So do His Evangelists [Mat
21:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#017.md); [Mat
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#011.md); [Mar
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#001.md), [Mar
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#019.md); [Luk
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041.md); [Act
7:58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058.md); [Joh
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#020).md), and so does Josephus .

All around corresponds with this. Joel had described their approach;
they had come over "the tops of the mountains," those which protected
Jerusalem; and now he describes them scaling "the wall," "mounting the
houses," "entering the windows," "running to and fro in the city." Here
the description has reached its height. The city is given over to those
who assault it. There remaineth nothing more, save the shaking of the
heaven and the earth.

They shall enter in at the windows - So in that first great judgment, in
which God employed the locust, He said, "They shall cover the face of
the earth, that one cannot be able to see the earth; and they shall fill
thy houses, and the houses of all thy servants, and the houses of all
the Egyptians" [Exo 10:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#005.md). : "For
nothing denies a way to the locusts, inasmuch as they penetrate fields,
cornlands, trees, cities, houses, yea, the retirement of the
bed-chambers." "Not that they who are victors, have the fear which
thieves have, but as thieves are accustomed to enter through windows,
and plunder secretly, so shall these, if the doors be closed, to cut
short delay, burst with all boldness through the windows." : "We have
seen this done, not by enemies only, but often by locusts also. For not
only flying, but creeping up the walls also, they enter the houses
through the openings for light." : "a.d. 784, there came the flying
locust, and wasted the corn and left its offspring; and this came forth
and crawled, and scaled walls and entered houses by windows and doors;
and if it entered the house on the south side, it went out on the north;
together with herbs and trees it devoured also woolen clothing, and
men's dresses."

Modern travelers relate the same. : "They entered the inmost recesses of
the houses, were found in every corner, stuck to our clothes and
infested our food." : "They overwhelm the province of Nedjd sometimes to
such a degree, that having destroyed the harvest, they penetrate by
thousands into the private dwellings, and devour whatsoever they can
find, even the leather of the water-vessels." : "In June 1646, at
Novogorod it was prodigious to behold them, because they were hatched
there that spring, and being as yet scarce able to fly, the ground was
all covered, and the air so full of them, that I could not eat in my
chamber without a candle, all the houses being full of them, even the
stables, barns, chambers, garrets, and cellars. I caused cannon-powder
and sulphur to be burnt, to expel them, but all to no purpose. For when
the door was opened, an infinite number came in, and the others went
fluttering about; and it was a troublesome thing when a man went abroad,
to be hit on the face by those creatures, on the nose, eyes, or cheeks,
so that there was no opening one's mouth, but some would get in. Yet all
this was nothing, for when we were to eat, they gave us no respite; and
when we went to cut a piece of meat, we cut a locust with it, and when a
man opened his mouth to put in a morsel, he was sure to chew one of
them." The eastern windows, not being glazed but having at most a
lattice-work , presented no obstacle to this continuous inroad. All was
one stream of infesting, harassing foes.

As the windows are to the house, so are the senses and especially the
sight to the soul. As the strongest walls and battlements and towers
avail not to keep out an enemy, if there be an opening or chink through
which he can make his way, so, in vain is the protection of God's
Providence or His Grace , if the soul leaves the senses unguarded to
admit unchallenged sights, sounds, touches, which may take the soul
prisoner. : "Death," says Jeremiah, "entereth through the window" [Jer
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#021.md). Thy window is thy eye. If thou
seest, to lust, death hath entered in; if thou hearest enticing words,
death hath entered in: if softness gain possession of thy senses, death
has made his way in." The arrow of sin is shot through them. : "When the
tongue of one introduces the virus of perdition, and the ears of others
gladly drink it in, "death enters in;" while with itching ears and mouth
men minister eagerly to one another the deadly draught of detraction,
"death enters in at the windows." : "Eve had not touched the forbidden
tree, except she had first looked on it heedlessly. With what control
must we in this dying life restrain our sight, when the mother of the
living came to death through the eyes! The mind of the prophet, which
had been often lifted up to see hidden mysteries, seeing heedlessly
another's wife, was darkened," and fell. "To keep purity of heart, thou
must guard the outward senses." An enemy is easily kept out by the
barred door or window, who, having entered in unawares, can only by
strong effort and grace be forced out. "It is easier," said the pagan
philosopher , "to forbid the beginnings of feelings than to control
their might."

Like a thief - that is, they should come unawares, so as to take people
by surprise, that there should be no guarding against them. As this is
the close at this wonderful description, it may be that he would, in the
end, describe the suddenness and inevitableness of God's judgments when
they do come, and of the final judgment. It is remarkable that our Lord,
and His Apostles from Him adopt this image of the prophet, in speaking
of the coming of the Day of Judgment and His own. "Behold I come as a
thief. This know that if the goodman of the house had known what hour
the thief would come, he would have watched. Be ye therefore ready also,
for the Son of man cometh at an hour when ye think not. Yourselves know
perfectly that the Day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night. Ye
are not in darkness, that that Day should overtake you as a thief" ([Rev
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#015.md) (add [Rev
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#003)..md); [Mat
24:43-44](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#043.md); [Luk
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#039.md); [Th1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#002.md); [Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010).md).

[Joel 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joe 2:10</span></span>

The earth shall quake before them - "Not," says Jerome, "as though
locusts or enemies had power to move the heavens or to shake the earth;
but because, to those under trouble, for their exceeding terror, the
heaven seems to fall and the earth to reel. But indeed, for the
multitude of the locusts which cover the heavens, sun and moon shall be
turned into darkness, and the stars shall withdraw their shining, while
the cloud of locusts interrupts the light, and allows it not to reach
the earth." Yet the mention of moon and stars rather suggests that
something more is meant than the locusts, who, not flying by night
except when they cross the sea, do not obscure either. Rather, as the
next verse speaks of God's immediate, sensible, presence, this verse
seems to pass from the image of the locusts to the full reality, and to
say that heaven and earth should shake at the judgments of God, before
He appeareth. Our Lord gives the same description of the forerunners of
the Day of Judgment; "there shall be signs in the sun and in the moon
and in the stars; and upon the earth distress of nations with
perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring, people's hearts failing them
for fear and for looking after those things which are coming on the
earth, for the powers of heaven shall be shaken" [Luk
21:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#025.md).

[Joel 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joe 2:11</span></span>

And the Lord shall utter His voice - The prophet had described at length
the coming of God's judgments, as a mighty army. But lest amid the
judgments, people should, (as they often do) forget the Judge, he
represents God, as commanding this His army, gathering, ordering,
marshalling, directing them, giving them the word, when and upon whom
they should pour themselves. Their presence was a token of His. They
should neither anticipate that command, nor linger. But as an army
awaits the command to move, and then, the word being given, rolls on
instantly, so God's judgments await the precise moment of His Will, and
then fall. "The voice of the Lord" is elsewhere used for the thunder;
because in it He seems to speak in majesty and terror to the guilty
soul. But here the voice refers, not to us, but to the army, which He is
imaged as marshalling; as Isaiah, referring perhaps to this place, says
"The Lord of hosts mustereth the host of the battle" [Isa
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#004.md).

God had spoken, and His people had not obeyed; now He speaks not to them
anymore, but to their enemies. He calls the Medes and Persians, "My
sanctified ones, My mighty ones" [Isa
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#003.md), when they were to exercise His
judgments on Babylon; and our Lord calls the Romans His armies. "He sent
forth His armies and destroyed those murderers and burned up their city"
[Mat 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#007.md). Then follow as threefold
ground of terror. "For His camp is very great." All the instruments
wherewith God punishes sin, are pictured as His one camp, each going, as
He commands, "Who bringeth forth the host of heaven by number: He
calleth them all by names, by the greatness of His might, for that He is
strong in power; not one faileth" [Isa
40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026.md). For he is "strong, that
executeth His word," or, "for" it (His camp) is "strong, executing His
word." Weak though His instruments be in themselves, they are mighty
when they do His commands, for He empowers them, as Paul saith, "I can
do all things through Christ instrengthening me" [Phi
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#013.md). "For the Day of the Lord is
great," great, on account of the great things done in it. As those are
called evil days, "an evil time," in which evil comes; as it is called
"an acceptable time;" in which we may be accepted; so the Day of God's
judgment is "great and very terrible," on account of the great and
terrible acts of His justice done in it. who can abide it? The answer is
implied in the question. "No one, unless God enable him."

This is the close of the threatened woe. The close, so much beyond any
passing scourge of any created destroyer, locusts or armies, suggests
the more what has been said already, that the prophet is speaking of the
whole aggregate of God's judgments unto the Day of Judgment.

: "The Lord saith, that He will send an Angel with the sound of a
trumpet, and the Apostle declares that the resurrection of the dead
shall take place amid the sound of a trumpet. In the Revelation of John
too, we read that the seven Angels received seven trumpets, and as they
sounded in order, that was done which Scripture describes. The priests
and teachers accordingly are here bidden to lift up their voice like a
trumpet in Zion, that is, the Church, that so all the inhabitants of the
earth may be troubled or confounded, and this confusion may draw them to
Salvation. "By the Day of the Lord," understand the Day of judgment, or
the day when each departeth out of the body. For what will be to all in
the Day of judgment, this is fulfilled in each in the day of death. It
is a "day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and of thick
darkness," because everything will be full of punishment and torment.

The great and strong people of the angels will come, to render to each
according to his works; and as the rising morn first seizes the
mountains, so judgment shall begin with the great and mighty, so that
"mighty men shall be mightily tormented" (Wisd. 6:6). "There hath not
been ever the like, neither shall be any more after it." For all evils,
contained in ancient histories and which have happened to people, by
inundation of the sea, or overflow of rivers, or by pestilence, disease,
famines wild beasts, ravages of enemies, cannot be compared to the Day
of judgment. "A fire devoureth, or consumeth before" this people, to
consume in us "hay, wood, stubble." Whence it is said of God, "thy God
is a consuming fire" [Deu 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024.md). And
"after" him "a flame burneth," so as to leave nothing unpunished.
whomsoever this people toucheth not, nor findeth in him what is to be
burned, shall be likened to the garden of God, and the paradise of
pleasure, i. e., of Eden. If it burn any, it will reduce this (as it
were) wilderness to dust and ashes, nor can any escape its fury.

For they shall run to and fro to torture those over whom they shall
receive power, like horsemen flying hither and thither. Their sound
shall be terrible, as "chariots" hurrying along level places, and upon
the tops of the mountains they shall leap," longing to torment all who
are lofty and set on high in the Church. And since "before them there is
a devouring fire," they will destroy everything, "as the fire devoureth
the stubble." They shall come to punish, "as a strong people in battle
array." Such will be the fear, of all, such the conscience of sinners,
that none shall shine or have any brightness of joy, but his face shall
be turned into darkness. They shall not turn aside, in fulfilling the
office enjoined them, but each shall carry on the punishments on sinners
entrusted to him. At the presence of that people, "the earth shall quake
and the heavens tremble. For heaven and earth shall pass away, but the
word of the Lord shall endure forever." The sun and moon also shall not
endure to see the punishments of the miserable, and shall remove and,
for bright light, shall be shrouded in terrible darkness. "The stars
also shall withdraw their shining," in that the holy also shall not
without fear behold the presence of the Lord. Amid all this, "The Lord
shall utter His voice" before His army. For as the Babylonians, in
punishing Jerusalem, are called the army of God, so the evil angels (of
whom it is written, "He cast upon them the fierceness of His anger,
wrath, and indignation, and trouble, by sending evil angels among them"
[Psa 78:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#049).md) are called the army of God
and His camp, in that they do the Will of God."

The Day of the Lord, is great and terrible - Of which it is written,
elsewhere, "to what end do ye desire the Day of the Lord? it is darkness
and not light and very terrible" (from [Amo
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#018).md), and few or none can abide it,
but will furnish some ground of severity against himself.

[Joel 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joe 2:12</span></span>

Therefore - (And) now also All this being so, one way of escape there
is, true repentance. As if God said , "All this I have therefore spoken,
in order to terrify you by My threats. Wherefore "turn unto Me with all
your hearts," and show the penitence of your minds "by fasting and
weeping and mourning," that, fasting now, ye may "be filled" hereafter
"weeping now," ye may laugh hereafter; mourning now, ye may hereafter
"be comforted" [Luk 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#021.md); [Mat
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#004.md). And since it is your custom "to
rend your garments" in sorrow, I command you to rend, not them but your
hearts which are full of sin, which, like bladders, unless they be
opened, will burst of themselves. And when ye have done this, return
unto the Lord your God, whom your former sins aleinated from you; and
despair not of pardon for the greatness of your guilt, for mighty mercy
will blot out mighty sins."

: "The strict Judge cannot be overcome, for He is Omnipotent; cannot be
deceived, for He is Wisdom; cannot be corrupted, for He is justice;
cannot be sustained, for He is Eternal; cannot be avoided, for He is
everywhere. Yet He can be entreated, because He is mercy; He can be
appeased, because He is Goodness; He can cleanse, because He is the
Fountain of grace; He can satisfy, because He is the Bread of life; He
can soothe, because He is the Unction from above; He can beautify,
because He is Fullness; He can beatify because He is Bliss. Turned from
Him, then, and fearing His justice, turn ye to Him, and flee to His
mercy. Flee from Himself to Himself, from the rigor of justice to the
Bosom of mercy. The Lord who is to be feared saith it. He who is Truth
enjoins what is just, profitable, good, "turn ye to Me," etc."

Turn ye - even "to Me," i. e., so as to return "quite to" (see the note
at [Hos 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002).md) God, not halting, not
turning half way, not in some things only, but from all the lusts and
pleasures to which they had turned from God. : "Turn quite to Me," He
saith, "with all your heart," with your whole mind, whole soul, whole
spirit, whole affections. For I am the Creator and Lord of the heart and
mind, and therefore will, that that whole should be given, yea, given
back, to Me, and endure not that any part of it be secretly stolen from
Me to be given to idols, lusts or appetites." "It often happens with
some people," says Gregory , "that they stoutly gird themselves up to
encounter mine vices, but neglect to overcome others, and while they
never rouse themselves up against these, they are re-establishing
against themselves, even those which they had subdued."

Others, "in resolve, aim at right courses, but are ever doubling back to
their wonted evil ones, and being, as it were, drawn out without
themselves, they return back to themselves in a round, desiring good
ways, but never forsaking evil ways." In contrast to these half
conversions, he bids us turn to God with our whole inmost soul, so that
all our affections should be fixed on God, and all within us, by a
strong union, cleave to Him, for "in whatever degree our affections are
scattered among created things, so far is the conversion of the heart to
God impaired." "Look diligently," says Bernard , "what thou lovest, what
thou fearest, wherein thou rejoicest or art saddened, and under the rags
of conversion thou wilt find a heart pervered. The whole heart is in
these four affections; and of these I think we must understand that
saying, "turn to" the Lord "with all thy heart."

Let then thy love be converted to Him, so that thou love nothing
whatever save Himself, or at least for Him. Let thy fear also be
converted unto Him, for all fear is perverted, whereby thou fearest
anything besides Him or not for Him. So too let thy joy and sorrow
equally be converted unto Him. This will be, if thou only grieve or joy
according to Him." : "There is a conversion with the whole heart, and
another with a part. The conversion with the whole heart God seeketh,
for it suffices to salvation. That which is partial he rejecteth, for it
is feigned and far from salvation. In the heart, there are three powers,
reason, will, memory; reason, of things future; will, of things present;
memory, of things past. For reason seeks things to come; the will loves
things present; memory retains things past. Reason illumines; will
loves; memory retains. When then the reason seeks that Highest Good and
finds, the will receives and loves, the memory anxiously keeps and
closely embraces, then the soul turns with the whole heart to God. But
when the reason slumbers and neglects to seek heavenly things, or the
will is tepid and cares not to love them, or the memory is torpid and is
careless to retain them, then the soul acts false, falling first into
the vice of ignorance, secondly into the guilt of negligence, thirdly
into the sin of malice.

In each, the soul acts false; else ignorance would be expelled by the
light of reason, and negligence be excluded by zeal of will, and malice
be quenched by diligence of memory (of divine things). Reason then
seeking begetteth knowledge; will embracing produceth love; memory
holding fast, edification. The first produceth the light of knowledge,
the second, the love of righteousness; the third preserveth the treasure
of grace. This is that conversion of heart, which God requireth; this is
that, which sufficeth to salvation."

And with fasting - o: "In their returning to Him, it is required in the
first place, that it be with the heart in the inward man, yet so that
the outward man is not left unconcerned, but hath his part also, in
performance of such things whereby he may express, how the inward man is
really affected; and so by the concurrence of both is true conversion
made up. "With fasting," which shall make for the humbling of the heart,
which pampering of the flesh is apt to puff up and make insensible of
its own condition, and forgetful of God and His service, as Jeshurun
who, being "waxed fat, kicked, and forsook the God which made him and
lightly esteemed the God of his salvation [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015.md). To waiting then on God's
service and prayer, it is usually joined in Scripture, as almost a
necessary accompaniment, called for by God, and by holy men practiced."

And with weeping and with mourning - that is, by "beating" on the
breast, (as the word originally denoted,) "as the publican smote upon
his breast" [Luk 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013.md), and "all the
people that came together to that sight" (of Jesus on the Cross),
"beholding the things which were done, smote their breasts" [Luk
23:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#048.md). : "These also, in themselves
signs of grief, stir up in the heart more grief, and so have their
effects on the person himself, for the increase of his repentance, as
well as for shewing it." It also stirs up in others like passions, and
provokes them also to repentance." : "These things, done purely and
holily, are not conversion itself, but are excellent signs of
conversion." : "We ought "to turn in fasting," whereby vices are
repressed, and the mind is raised. We ought to "turn in weeping," out of
longing for our home, out of displeasure at our faults, out of love to
the sufferings of Christ, and for the manifold transgressions and errors
of the world." "What avails it," says Gregory , "to confess iniquities,
if the affliction of penitence follow not the confession of the lips?
For three things are to be considered in every true penitent, conversion
of the mind, confession of the mouth, and revenge for the sin. This
third sort is as a necessary medicine, that so the imposthume of guilt,
pricked by confession, be purified by conversion, and healed by the
medicine of affliction. The sign of true conversion is not in the
confession of the mouth, but in the affliction of penitence. For then do
we see that a sinner is well converted, when by a worthy austerity of
affliction he strives to efface what in speech he confesses. Wherefore
John Baptist, rebuking the ill-converted Jews who flock to him says, "O
generation of vipers - bring forth therefore fruits worthy of
repentance."

[Joel 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joe 2:13</span></span>

And rend your hearts and not your garments - that is, "not your garments
only" (see the note at [Hos 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006).md). The
rending of the clothes was an expression of extraordinary uncontrollable
emotion, chiefly of grief, of terror, or of horror. At least, in Holy
Scripture it is not mentioned as a part of ordinary mourning, but only
upon some sudden overpowering grief, whether public or private . It was
not used on occasion of death, unless there were something very grievous
about its circumstances. At times it was used as an outward expression,
one of deep grief, as when the leper was commanded to keep his clothes
rent [Lev 13:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#045.md), or when David, to
express his abhorrence at the murder of Abner, commanded "all the people
with him, rend your clothes;" Ahab used it, with fasting and haircloth,
on God's sentence by Elijah and obtained a mitigation of the temporal
punishment of his sin; Jeremiah marvels that neither "the king,"
Jehoiakim, "nor any of his servants, rent their garments" [Jer
36:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#024.md), on reading the roll containing
the woes which God had by him pronounced against Judah. The holy
garments of the priests were on no occasion to be rent [Lev
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#006.md); [Lev
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#010.md); (probably because the wholeness
was a symbol of perfection, from where care was to be taken that the
ephod should not accidentally be torn [Exo
28:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#032.md); [Exo
39:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#023).md) so that the act of Caiaphas was
the greater hypocrisy [Mat 26:65](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#065.md); [Mar
14:63](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#063.md).

He used it probably to impress his own blasphemous accusation on the
people, as for a good end, the Apostles Paul and Barnabas rent their
[Act 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#014.md) clothes, when they heard
that, after the cure of the impotent man, the priest of Jupiter with the
people would have done sacrifice unto them. Since then apostles used
this act, Joel plainly doth not forbid the use of such outward behavior,
by which their repentance might be expressed, but only requires that it
be done not in outward show only, but accompanied with the inward
affections. : "The Jews are bidden then to rend their hearts rather than
their garments, and to set the truth of repentance in what is inward,
rather than in what is outward." But since the rending of the garments
was the outward sign of very vehement grief, it was no commonplace
superficial sorrow, which the prophet enjoined, but one which should
pierce and rend the inmost soul, and empty it of its sins and its love
for sin. : Any very grieving thing is said to cut one's heart, to "cut
him to the heart."

A truly penitent heart is called a "broken and a contrite heart." Such a
penitent rends and "rips up by a narrow search the recesses of the
heart, to discover the abominations thereof," and pours out before God
"the diseased and perilous stuff" pent up and festering there, "expels
the evil thoughts lodged in it, and opens it in all things to the
reception of divine grace. This rending is no other than the spiritual
circumcision to which Moses exhorts. Whence of the Jews, not thus rent
in heart, it is written in Jeremiah, 'All the nations are uncircumcised,
and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in heart' [Jer
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#026.md). This rending then is the casting
out of the sins and passions."

And turn unto the Lord your God - God owns Himself as still their God,
although they had turned and were gone from Him in sin and were
alienated from Him. To Him, the true, Unchangeable God, if they
returned, they would find Him still "their God." "Return, ye backsliding
children, I will heal your backsliding," God saith by Jeremiah; "Behold,
Israel answers, we come unto Thee, for Thou art the Lord our God" [Jer
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#022.md).

For He is very gracious and very merciful - Both these words are
intensive. All the words, "very gracious, very merciful, slow to anger,
and of great kindness," are the same and in the same order as in that
revelation to Moses, when, on the renewal of the two tables of the law,
"the Lord descended in the cloud and proclaimed the name of the Lord"
[Exo 34:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#005).md). The words are frequently
repeated, showing how deeply that revelation sunk in the pious minds of
Israel. They are, in part, pleaded to God by Moses himself [Num
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#018.md); David, at one time, pleaded
them all to God [Psa 85:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#001.md) :15;
elsewhere he repeats them of God, as in this place [Psa
103:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#008.md); [Psa
145:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#008.md). Nehemiah, in praising God for
His forgiving mercies, prefixes the title, "God of pardons" [Neh
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#017.md), and adds, "and Thou forsakedst
them not;" as Joel, for the special object here, adds, "and repenteth
Him of the evil." A Psalmist, and Hezekiah in his message to Isaiah, and
Nehemiah in the course of that same prayer, repeat the two words of
intense mercy, "very gracious and very merciful" [Psa
111:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#004.md); [Ch2
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#009.md); [Neh
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#031.md), which are used of God only,
except once by that same Psalmist [Psa
112:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#004.md), with the express object of
showing how the good man conformeth himself to God. The word "very
gracious" expresses God's free love, whereby He sheweth Himself good to
us; "very merciful" expresses the tender yearning of His love over our
miseries (see the note at [Hos 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#019).md);
"great kindness," expresses God's tender love, as love.

He first says, that God is "slow to anger" or "long-suffering," enduring
long the wickedness and rebellion of man, and waiting patiently for the
conversion and repentance of sinners. Then he adds, that God is
"abundant in kindness," having manifold resources and expedients of His
tender love, whereby to win them to repentance. Lastly He is "repentant
of the evil." The evil which lie foretells, and at last inflicts, is (so
to speak) against His Will, "Who willeth not that any should perish,"
and, therefore, on the first tokens of repentance "He repenteth Him of
the evil," and doeth it not.

The words rendered, "of great kindness," are better rendered elsewhere,
"abundant, plenteous in goodness, mercy" [Exo
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006.md); [Psa
86:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#015.md); [Psa
103:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#008.md). Although the mercy of God is in
itself one and simple, yet it is called abundant on account of its
divers effects. For God knoweth how in a thousand ways to succor His
own. Whence the Psalmist prays, "According to the multitude of Thy
mercies, turn Thou unto me" [Psa 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#007.md),
[Psa 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#016.md). "According to the
multitude of Thy tender mercies, do away mine offences" [Psa
51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001.md).

[Joel 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joe 2:14</span></span>

Who knoweth if He will return - God has promised forgiveness of sins and
of eternal punishment to those who turn to Him with their whole heart.
Of this, then, there could be no doubt. But He has not promised either
to individuals or to Churches, that He will remit the temporal
punishment which He had threatened. He forgave David the sin. Nathan
says, "The Lord also hath put away thy sin." But he said at the same
time, "the sword shall never depart from thy house [Sa2
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#013.md), [Sa2
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#010.md); and the temporal punishment of
his sin pursued him, even on the bed of death. David thought that the
temporal punishment of his sin, in the death of the child, might be
remitted to him. He used the same form of words as Joel, "I said, who
can tell whether God will be gracious unto me, that the child may live?"
[Sa2 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#022.md). But the child died. The
king of Nineveh used the like words, "Who can tell if God will return
and repent and turn away from His fierce anger, that we perish not?"
[Jon 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#009.md).

And he was heard. God retained or remitted the temporal punishment, as
He saw good for each. This of the prophet Joel is of a mixed character.
The "blessing" which they crave, he explains to be "the meat offering
and the drink offering," which had been "cut off or withholden" from the
house of their God. For "if He gave them wherewith to serve Him," after
withdrawing it, it was clear that "He would accept of them and be
pleased with their service." Yet this does not imply that He would
restore all to them. A Jewish writer notes that after the captivity,
"the service of sacrifices alone returned to them," but that "prophecy,
(soon after), the ark, the Urim and Thummim, and the other things (the
fire from heaven) were missing there." As a pattern, however, to all
times, God teaches them to ask first what belongs to His kingdom and His
righteousness, and to leave the rest to Him. So long as the means of
serving Him were left, there was hope of all. Where the sacrament of the
Body and Blood of Christ (whereof "the meat offering and the drink
offering" were symbols) remains, there are "the pledges of His love,"
the earnest of all other blessing.

He says, "leave a blessing behind Him," speaking of God as one
estranged, who had been long absent and who returns, giving tokens of
His forgiveness and renewed good-pleasure. God often visits the penitent
soul and, by some sweetness with which the soul is bathed, leaves a
token of His renewed presence. God is said to repent, not as though He
varied in Himself, but because He deals variously with us, as we receive
His inspirations and follow His drawings, or no.

[Joel 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joe 2:15</span></span>

Before, he had, in these same words [Joe
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001.md); [Joe
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#014.md), called to repentance, because
the Day of the Lord was coming, was near, "a day of darkness," etc. Now
, because God is "gracious and merciful, slow to anger and plenteous in
goodness," he agains exhorts, "Blow ye the trumpet;" only the call is
more detailed, that every sex and age should form one band of suppliants
to the mercy of God. : "Most full abolition of sins is then obtained,
when one prayer and one confession issueth from the whole Church. For
since the Lord promiseth to the pious agreement of two or three, that He
will grant whatever is so asked, what shall be denied to a people of
many thousands, fulfilling together one observance, and supplicating in
harmony through One Spirit?" "We come together," says Tertullian of
Christian worship, "in a meeting and congregation as before God, as
though we would in one body sue Him by our prayers. This violence is
pleasing to God."

[Joel 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joe 2:16</span></span>

Sanctify the congregation - o: "Do what in you lies, by monishing,
exhorting, threatening, giving the example of a holy life, that the
whole people present itself holy before its God" , "lest your prayers be
hindered, and a little leaven corrupt the whole lump."

Assemble the elders - o: "The judgment concerned all; all then were to
join in seeking mercy from God. None were on any pretence to be
exempted; not the oldest, whose strength was decayed, or the youngest,
who might seem not yet of strength." The old also are commonly freer
from sin and more given to prayer.

Gather the children - o: "He Who feedeth the young ravens when they cry,
will not neglect the cry of poor children. He assigns as a reason, why
it were fitting to spare Nineveh, the "six-score thousand persons that
could not discern between their right hand and their left" [Jon
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#011.md). The sight of them who were
involved in their parents' punishment could not but move the parents to
greater earnestness. So when Moab and Ammon [Ch2
20:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#001.md), [Ch2
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#013.md), a great multitude, came against
Jehoshaphat, he proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah, and Judah
gathered themselves together to ask help of the Lord; even out of all
the cities of Judah, they came to seek the Lord. And all Judah was
standing before the Lord, their little ones also, their wives, and their
children." So it is described in the book of Judith, how "with great
vehemency did they humble their souls, both they and their wives and
their children - and every man and woman and the little children - fell
before the temple, and cast ashes upon their heads and spread out their
sackcloth before the Face of the Lord" (Judith 4:9-11).

Let the bridegroom go forth - He says not even, the married, or the
newly married, he who had taken a new wife, but he uses the special
terms of the marriage-day, "bridegroom" and "bride." The new-married man
was, during a year, exempted from going out to war, or from any duties
which might "press upon him" [Deu
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#005.md). But nothing was to free from
this common affliction of sorrow. Even the just newly married, although
it were the very day of the bridal, were to leave the marriage-chamber
and join in the common austerity of repentance. It was mockery of God to
spend in delights time consecrated by Him to sorrow. He says, "In that
day did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to
baldness, and to girding with sackcloth. And behold joy and gladness -
surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you until ye die, saith
the Lord God of Hosts" [Isa 22:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#012.md).
Whence, in times of fasting or prayer, the Apostle suggests the giving
up of pure pleasures, "that ye may give yourselves to fasting and
prayer" [Co1 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005.md).

: "He then who, by chastisement in food and by fasting and alms, says
that he is doing acts of repentance, in vain doth he promise this in
words, unless he "go forth out of his chamber" and fulfill a holy and
pure fast by a chaste penitence."

[Joel 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joe 2:17</span></span>

Let the priests, the ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch and
the altar - The porch in this, Solomon's temple, was in fact a tower, in
front of the holy of holies, of the same breadth with the temple,
namely, 20 cubits, and its depth half its breadth, namely, 10 cubits
[Kg1 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#003.md), and its height 120 cubits,
the whole "overlaid within with pure gold" [Ch2
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#004.md). The brass altar for
burnt-offerings stood in front of it [Ch2
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#012.md). The altar was of brass, twenty
cubits square; and so, equal in breadth to the temple itself, and ten
cubits high [Ch2 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#001.md). The space then
between the porch and the altar was enclosed on those two sides [Ch2
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#007.md); it became an inner part of the
court of the priests. Through it the priests or the high priest passed,
whenever they went to sprinkle the blood, typifying the atonement,
before the veil of the tabernacle, or for any other office of the
tabernacle. It seems to have been a place of prayer for the priests. It
is spoken of as an aggravation of the sins of those 25 idolatrous
priests, that here, where they ought to worship God, they turned their
backs toward the Temple of the Lord, to worship the sun [Eze
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#016.md). Here, in the exercise of his
office, Zechariah was standing [Ch2
24:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#020.md); [Mat
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035.md), when the Spirit of God came
upon him and he rebuked the people and they stoned him. Here the
priests, with their faces toward the holy of holies and the temple which
He had filled with His Glory, were to weep. Tears are a gift of God. In
holier times, so did the priests weep at the holy eucharist in thought
of the Passion and Precious Death of our Lord Jesus, which we then plead
to God, that they bore with them, as part of their dress, linen
wherewith to dry their tears .

And let them say - A form of prayer is provided for them. From this the
words, "spare us good Lord, spare thy people," enter into the litanies
of the Christian Church.

And give not thine heritage to reproach - The enmity of the pagan
against the Jews was an enmity against God. God had avouched them as His
people and His property. Their land was an heritage from God. God, in
that He had separated them from the pagan, and revealed Himself to them,
had made them His special heritage. Moses [Exo
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#012.md); [Num
14:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#013.md); [Deu
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#028.md), [Deu
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#009.md), then Joshua [Jos
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#009.md), the Psalmists Ps. 74; [Psa
79:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#001.md); 115, plead with God, that His
own power or will to save His people would be called in question, if he
should destroy them, or give them up. God, on the other hand, tells
them, that not for any deserts of theirs, but for His own Name's sake,
He delivered them, lest the Pagan should be the more confirmed in their
errors as to Himself [Eze 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#005.md); [Eze
36:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#021.md). It is part of true penitence
to plead to God to pardon us, not for anything in ourselves, (for we
have nothing of our own but our sins) but because we are the work of His
hands, created in His image, the prince of the Blood of Jesus, called by
His Name.

That the pagan should rule over them - This, and not the rendering in
the margin, use a byword against them, is the uniform meaning of the
Hebrew phrase. It is not to be supposed that the prophet Joel would use
it in a sense contrary to the uniform usage of all the writers before
him. Nor is there any instance of any other usage of the idiom in any
later writer . "The enigma which was closed," says Jerome, "is now
opened. For who that people is, manifold and strong, described above
under the name of the "palmerworm, the locust, the canker-worm" and "the
catterpillar," is now explained more clearly, "lest the pagan rule over
them." For the heritage of the Lord is given to reproach, when they
serve their enemies, and the nations say, "Where is their God," whom
they boasted to be their Sovereign and their Protector?" Such is the
reproach ever made against God's people, when He does not visibly
protect them, which the Psalmist says was as a sword in his bones ([Psa
42:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#003.md), [Psa
42:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#010.md); add [Psa
79:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#010.md); [Psa
115:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#002.md) : [Mic
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#016).md); his tears were his meat day and
night while they said it. The Chief priests and scribes and elders
fulfilled a prophecy by venturing so to blaspheme our Lord, "He trusted
in God; let Him, deliver Him now, if He will have Him" ([Mat
27:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#043.md), from [Psa
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#008).md).

[Joel 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joe 2:18</span></span>

Then will the Lord be jealous for His land - Upon repentance, all is
changed. Before, God seemed set upon their destruction. It was His great
army which was ready to destroy them; He was at its head, giving the
word. Now He is full of tender love for them, which resents injury done
to them, as done to Himself. The word might more strictly perhaps be
rendered, "And the Lord is jealous" . He would show how instantaneous
the mercy and love of God for His people is, restrained while they are
impenitent, flowing forth upon the first tokens of repentance. The word,
"jealous for," when used of God, jealous for My holy Name [Eze
39:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#025.md), jealous for Jerusalem, [Zac
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#014.md); [Zac
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#002.md), is used, when God resents evil
which had been actually inflicted.

[Joel 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joe 2:19</span></span>

I will send you corn ... - This is the beginning of the reversal of the
threatened judgments. It is clear from this, and still more from what
follows, that the chastisements actually came, so that the repentance
described, was the consequence, not of the exhortations to repentance,
but of the chastisement. What was removed was the chastisement which had
burst upon them, not when it was ready to burst. What was given, was
what before had been taken away. So it ever was with the Jews; so it is
mostly with the portions of the Christian Church or with individuals
now. Seldom do they take warning of coming woe; when it has begun to
burst, or has burst, then they repent and God gives them back upon
repentance what He had withdrawn or a portion of it. So the prophet
seems here to exhibit to us a law and a course of God's judgments and
mercies upon man's sin. He takes away both temporal and spiritual
blessings symbolized here by the grain and wine and oil; upon repentance
He restores them. : "Over and against the wasting of the land, he sets
its richness; against hunger, fullness; against reproach, unperiled
glory; against the cruelty and incursion of enemies, their destruction
and putrefaction; against barrenness of fruits and aridity of trees,
their fresh shoots and richness; against the hunger of the word and
thirst for doctrine, he brings in the fountain of life, and the Teacher
of righteousness; against sadness, joy; against confusion, solace;
against reproaches, glory; against death, life; against ashes, a crown."

O fruitful and manly penitence! O noble maiden, most faithful
intercessor for sins! A plank after shipwreck! Refuge of the poor, help
of the miserable, hope of exiles, cherisher of the weak, light of the
blind, solace of the fatherless, scourge of the petulant, axe of vices,
garner of virtues. Thou who alone bindest the Judge, pleadest with the
Creator, conquerest the Almighty. While overcome, thou overcomest; while
tortured, thou torturest; while wounding, thou healest; while
healthfully succumbing, thou triumphest gloriously. Thou alone, while
others keep silence, mountest boldly the throne of grace. David thou
leadest by the hand and reconcilest; Peter thou restorest; Paul thou
enlightenest; the Publican, taken from the receipt of custom, thou
boldly insertest in the choir of the Apostles; Mary, from a harlot, thou
bearest aloft and joinest to Christ; the robber nailed to the cross, yet
fresh from blood, thou introducest into Paradise. What more? At thy
disposal is the court of heaven."

And I will no more make you a reproach - All the promises of God are
conditional. They presuppose man's faithfulness. God's pardon is
complete. He will not, He says, for these offences, or for any like
offences, give them over to the pagan. So after the captivity He no more
made them a reproach unto the pagan, until they finally apostatized, and
leaving their Redeemer, owned no king but Caesar. They first gave
themselves up; they chose Caesar rather than Christ, and to be servants
of Caesar, rather than that He should not be crucified; and so God left
them in his hands, whom they had chosen.

[Joel 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joe 2:20</span></span>

And I will remove far off from you the northern army - God speaks of the
human agent under the figure of the locusts, which perish in the sea;
yet so as to show at once, that He did not intend the locust itself, nor
to describe the mode in which He should overthrow the human oppressor.
He is not speaking of the locust itself, for the Northern is no name for
the locust which infested Palestine, since it came from the south; nor
would the destruction of the locust be in two opposite seas, since they
are uniformly driven by the wind into the sea, upon whose waves they
alight and perish, but the wind would not carry them into two opposite
seas; nor would the locust perish in a "barren and desolate" land, but
would fly further; nor would it be said of the locust that he was
destroyed, Because he had done great things . But He represents to us,
how this enemy should be driven quite out of the bounds of His people,
so that he should not vex them more, but perish.

The imagery is from the holy land. The "East sea" is the Dead Sea, once
the fertile "vale of Siddim" [Gen
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#003.md), , "in which sea were formerly
Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim, until God overthrew them." This,
in the Pentateuch, is called "the salt sea" [Gen
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#003.md); [Num
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#003.md), [Num
34:12](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#012.md), or "the sea of the plain," or
"desert" ([Deu 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#017.md); [Deu
4:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#049.md); [Jos
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#016.md); [Jos
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#003.md); [Jos
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#025.md); [Jos
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#019.md); also in [Kg2
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025).md), explained in Deuteronomy and
Joshua to be "the salt sea" Deut. 3; Josh. 3; 12; Ezekiel calls it "the
East sea" [Eze 47:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#018.md), and in Numbers
it is said of it, "your south border shall be the salt sea eastward"
[Num 34:3](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#003.md). The utmost, or rather, the
"hinder sea" [Deu 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#024.md); [Deu
34:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#002.md) (i. e., that which is behind one
who is looking toward the east whose Hebrew name is from "fronting" you)
is the Mediterranean, "on whose shores are Gaza and Ascalon, Azotus and
Joppa and Caesarea." The "land barren and desolate," lying between, is
the desert of Arabia, the southern boundary of the holy land.

The picture then seems to be, that the "Northern" foes filled the whole
of Judaea, in numbers like the locust, and that God drove them violently
forth, all along the bounds of the holy land, into the desert, the Dead
Sea, the Mediterranean. Jerome relates a mercy of God in his own time
which illustrates the image; but he writes so much in the language of
Holy Scripture, that perhaps he only means that the locusts were driven
into the sea, not into both seas. "In our times too we have seen hosts
of locusts cover Judaea, which afterward, by the mercy of the Lord, when
the priests and people, 'between the porch and the altar,' i. e.,
between the place of the Cross and the Resurrection prayed the Lord and
said, 'spare Thy people,' a wind arising, were carried headlong 'into
the Eastern sea, and the utmost sea.'" Alvarez relates how, priests and
people joining in litanies to God, He delivered them from an exceeding
plague of locusts, which covered 24 English miles, as He delivered Egypt
of old at the prayer of Moses . "When we knew of this plague being so
near, most of the clerks of the place came to me, that I should tell
them some remedy against it. I answered them, that I knew of no remedy
except to commend themselves to God and to pray Him to drive the plague
out of the land. I went to the Embassador and told him that to me it
seemed good that we should make a procession with the people of the land
and that it might please our Lord God to hear us; it seemed good to the
Embassador; and, in the morning of the next day, we collected the people
of the place and all the Clergy; and we took our altar-stone, and those
of the place theirs, and our Cross and theirs, singing our litany, we
went forth from the Church, all the Portuguese and the greater part of
the people of the place. I said to them that they should not keep
silence, but should, as we, cry aloud saying in their tongue Zio
marinos, i. e., in our's, Lord Jesus Christ, have mercy on us.

And with this cry and litany, we went through an open wheat-country for
the space of one third of a league. It pleased our Lord to hear the
sinners, and while we were turning to the place, because their (the
locusts') road was toward the sea whence they had come, there were so
many after us, that it seemed no otherwise than that they sought to
break our ribs and heads with blows of stones, such were the blows they
dealt us. At this time a great thunderstorm arose from toward the sea,
which came in their face with rain and hail, which lasted three good
hours; the river and brooks filled greatly; and when they had ceased to
drive, it was matter of amazement, that the dead locusts on the bank of
the great river measured two cubits high; and so for the rivulets, there
was a great multitude of dead on their banks. On the next day in the
morning there was not in the whole land even one live locust."

And his stink shall come up - The image is still from the locust. It,
being such a fearful scourge of God, every individual full of activity
and life repeated countlessly in the innumerable host, is, at God's will
and in His time, cast by His word into the sea, and when thrown up by
the waves on the shore, becomes in a few hours one undistinguishable,
putrefying, heaving mass. Such does human malice and ambition and pride
become, as soon as God casts aside the sinful instrument of His
chastisement. Just now, a world to conquer could not satisfy it;
superior to man, independent, it deems, of God. He takes away its
breath, it is a putrid carcass. Such was Sennacherib's army; in the
evening inspiring terror; "before the morning, he is not" [Isa
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#014.md). "They were all dead corpses."
[Isa 37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036.md).

The likeness stops here. For the punishment is at an end. The wicked and
the persecutors of God's people are cut off; the severance has taken
place. On the one side, there is the putrefying mass; on the other, the
jubilee of thanksgiving. The gulf is fixed between them. The offensive
smell of the corruption ascends; as Isaiah closes his prophecy, "the
carcases" of the wicked, the perpetual prey of the "worm and the fire,
shall be an abhorring to all flesh." The righteous behold it, but it
reaches them not, to hurt them. In actual life, the putrid exhalations
at times have, among those on the sea-shore, produced a pestilence, a
second visitation of God, more destructive than the first. This,
however, has been but seldom. Yet what must have been the mass of decay
of creatures so slight, which could produce a wide-wasting pestilence!
What an image of the numbers of those who perish, and of the fetidness
of sin! Augustine, in answer to the pagan who imputed all the calamities
of the later Roman Empire to the displeasure of the gods, because the
world had become Christian, says , "They themselves have recorded that
the multitude of locusts was, even in Africa, a sort of prodigy, while
it was a Roman province. They say that, after the locusts had consumed
the fruits and leaves of trees, they were cast into the sea, in a vast
incalculable cloud, which having died and being cast back on the shores,
and the air being infected thereby, such a pestilence arose, that in the
realm of Masinissa alone 800,000 men perished, and manymore in the lands
on the coasts. Then at Utica, out of 30,000 men in the prime of life who
were there, they assert that 10 only remained."

Jerome says of the locusts of Palestine ; "when the shores of both seas
were filled with heaps of dead locusts which the waters had cast up,
their stench and putrefaction was so noxious as to corrupt the air, so
that a pestilence was produced among both beasts and men." Modern
writers say , "The locusts not only produce a famine, but in districts
near the sea where they had been drowned, they have occasioned a
pestilence from the putrid effluvia of the immense numbers blown upon
the coast or thrown up by the tides." : "We observed, in May and June, a
number of these insects coming from the south directing their course to
the northern shore; they darken the sky like a thick cloud, but scarcely
have they quitted the shore before they who, a moment before, ravaged
and ruined the country, cover the surface of the sea with their dead
bodies, to the great distress of the Franks near the harbor, on account
of the stench from such a number of dead insects, driven by the winds
close to the very houses." : "All the full-grown insects were driven
into the sea by a tempestuous northwest wind, and were afterward cast
upon the beach, where, it is said, they formed a bank of 3 or 4 feet
high, extending - a distance of near 50 English miles. It is asserted
that when this mass became putrid and the wind was southeast the stench
was sensibly felt in several parts of Sneuwberg. The column passed the
houses of two of our party, who asserted that it continued without any
interruption for more than a month." : "The south and east winds drive
the clouds of locusts with violence into the Mediterranean, and drown
them in such quantities that when their dead are cast on the shore, they
infect the air to a great distance." Wonderful image of the
instantaneous, ease, completeness, of the destruction of God's enemies;
a mass of active life exchanged, in a moment, into a mass of death.

Because he hath done great things - Literally, (as in the English
margin) ""because he hath magnified to do," i. e., as used of man, "hath
done proudly." To do greatly [Joe
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#021.md); [Psa
126:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#002.md); [Sa1
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#024.md), or to magnify Himself, [Eze
38:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#023.md), when used of God, is to display
His essential greatness, in goodness to His people, or in vengeance on
their enemies. Man's great deeds are mostly deeds of great ambition,
great violence, great pride, great iniquity; and so of him, the words
"he magnified himself, [Isa 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#015.md);
[Dan 11:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#036.md), he did greatly" [Lam
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#009.md); [Zep
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#008.md); [Dan
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#004.md), [Dan
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#008.md), [Dan
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#011.md), [Dan
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#025.md), mean, he did ambitiously,
proudly, and so offended God. In like way "great doings," when used of
God, are His great works of good ; of man, his great works of evil . :
"Man has great deserts, but evil." "To speak great things" [Psa
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003.md); [Dan
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008.md), [Dan
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#011.md), [Dan
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#020.md), is to speak proud things:
"greatness of heart" [Isa 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#009.md); [Isa
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#012.md) is pride of heart. He is
speaking then of man who was God's instrument in chastening His people;
since of irrational, irresponsible creatures, a term which involves
moral fault, would not have been used, nor would a moral fault have been
set down as the ground why God destroyed them. The destruction of
Sennacherib or Holofernes have been assigned as the fulfillment of this
prophecy. They were part of its fulfillment, and of the great law of God
which it declares, that instruments, which He employs, and who exceed or
accomplish for their own ends, the office which He assigns them, He
casts away and destroys.

[Joel 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joe 2:21</span></span>

Fear not, O land - Before, they were bidden to tremble [Joe
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001.md), now they are bidden, "fear not;"
before, "to turn in weeping, fasting and mourning;" now, "to bound for
joy and rejoice;" before, "the land mourned;" now, "the land is bidden
to rejoice." The enemy had "done great things;" now the cause of joy is
that God had "done great things;" the Almightiness of God overwhelming
and sweeping over the might put forth to destroy. It is better rendered,
"the Lord hath done great things." If Joel includes herein God's great
doings yet to come, he speaks of them as, in the purpose of God, already
in being; or he may, in this verse, presuppose that this new order of
God's mercies has begun, in the destruction of the Pagan foe.

[Joel 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joe 2:22</span></span>

The reversal of the whole former sentence is continued up to man. The
beasts of the field "groaned, were perplexed, cried" unto God; now they
are bidden, "be not afraid;" before, "the pastures of the wilderness
were devoured by fire;" now, they "spring" with fresh tender life;
before, "the fig tree" was "withered, the vine languished;" now, they
should "yield their strength, put out their full" vigor. For God was
reconciled to His people; and all things served them, serving Him.

[Joel 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joe 2:23</span></span>

Be glad then and rejoice in the Lord your God - All things had been
restored for their sakes; they were to rejoice, not chiefly in these
things, but in God; nor only in God, but in the Lord their God. "For He
hath given you the former rain moderately." The word rendered
"moderately" should be rendered "unto righteosness;" the word often as
it occurs never having any sense but that of "righteousness;" whether of
God or man. The other word מורה môwreh, rendered "the former rain,"
confessedly has that meaning in the latter part of the verse, although
"yoreh" יורה yôwreh is the distinctive term for "latter rain" [Deu
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#014.md); [Jer
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#024.md). "Moreh" mostly signifies "a
teacher" ([Kg2 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#028.md); [Job
36:22](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#022.md); [Pro
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#013.md); [Isa
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#015.md); [Isa
30:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#020), (twice.md); [Hab
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#018).md), which is connected with the
other ordinary meanings of the root, "torah, law, etc." The older
translators then agreed in rendering, "of righteousness," or, "unto
righteousness" , in which case the question as to "moreh," is only,
whether it is to be taken literally of "a teacher," or figuratively of
spiritual blessings, as we say, "the dew of His grace." Even a Jew
paraphrases , "But ye, O children of Zion, above all other nations, be
glad and rejoice in the Lord your God. For in Him ye shall have perfect
joy, in the time of your captivity. "For He will give you an instructor
to righteosness;" and He is the king Messias, which shall teach them the
way in which they shall walk, and the doings which they shall do." The
grounds for so rendering the word are:

\(1\) Such is almost its uniform meaning.

\(2\) The righteousness spoken of is most naturally understood of
righteousness in man; it is a condition which is the result and object
of God's gifts, not the Righteousness of God. But "He hath given you the
early rain unto righteousness," i. e., that ye may be righteous, is an
unaccustomed expression.

\(3\) There is a great emphasis on the word , which is not used in the
later part of the verse, where rain, (whether actual, or symbolic of
spiritual blessings) is spoken of.

\(4\) The following words, "and He maketh the rain to descend for you,"
according to the established Hebrew idiom relates to a separate action,
later, in order of time or of thought, than the former. But if the
former word "moreh" signified "early rain," both would mean one and the
same thing. We should not say, "He giveth you the former rain to
righteousness, and then He maketh the rain, the former rain and the
latter rain to descend;" nor doth the Hebrew.

It seems then most probable, that the prophet prefixes to all the other
promises, that first all-containing promise of the Coming of Christ.
Such is the custom of the prophets, to go on from past judgments and
deliverances, to Him who is the center of all this cycle of God's
dispensations, the Son manifest in the Flesh. He had been promised as a
Teacher when that intermediate dispensation of Israel began, the prophet
like unto Moses. His Coming old Jacob looked to, "I have longed for Thy
salvation, O Lord." Him, well known and longed for by the righteous of
old, Joel speaks of as the subject of rejoicing, as Zechariah did
afterward, "Rejoice greatly, daughter of Zion; behold thy King cometh
unto thee." So Joel here, "Exult and joy in the Lord thy God, for He
giveth," or "will give thee, the Teacher unto righteousness," i. e., the
result and object of whose Coming is righteousness; or, as Daniel says,
"to bring in everlasting righteousness;" and Isaiah, "By His knowledge,"
i. e., by the knowledge of Him, "shall My righteous Servant justify
many," i. e., make many righteous. How His coming should issue in
righteousness, is not here said. It is presupposed. But Joel speaks of
His Coming, as a gift, "He shall give you;" as Isaiah says, "unto us a
Son is given;" and that, as the Teacher, as Isaiah says, "I have given
Him a witness to the peoples, a Prince and a Commander unto the people"
[Isa 55:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#004.md); and that, "for
righteousness."

"It is the custom of the holy prophets," says Cyril, "on occasion of
good things promised to a part or a few, to introduce what is more
general or universal. And these are the things of Christ. To this then
the discourse again proceeds. For when was ground given to the earth to
rejoice? When did the Lord do mighty things, but when the Word, being
God, became Man, that, flooding all below with the goods from above, He
might be found to those who believe in Him, as a river of peace, a
torrent of pleasure, as the former and latter rain, and the giver of all
spiritual fruitfulness?"

The early rain and the latter rain - o: "He multiplies words,
expresssive of the richness of the fruits of the earth, that so we may
understand how wondrous is the plenteousness of spiritual goods." Being
about to speak of the large gift of God the Holy Spirit as an
"out-pouring," he says here that "the largeness of the spiritual gifts
thereafter should be as abundant as the riches temporal blessings"
hitherto, when God disposed all things to bring about the fruitfulness
which He had promised. "The early and latter rain," coming respectively
at the seed-time and the harvest, represent the beginning and the
completion; and so, by the analogy of earthly and spiritual sowing,
growth and ripeness, they represent preventing and perfecting grace; the
inspiration of good purposes and the gift of final perseverance, which
brings the just to glory consummated; "the principles of the doctrine of
Christ" and "the going on unto perfection [Heb
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#001.md).

In the first month - This would belong only to the latter rain, which
falls about the first month, Nisan, or our April, "the former rain"
falling about 6 months earlier, at their seed time . Or, since this
meaning is uncertain , it may be, "at the first" , i. e., as soon as
ever it is needed, or in contrast to the more extensive gifts afterward;
or, "as at first" i. e., all shall, upon their penitence, be restored as
at first. These lesser variations leave the sense of the whole the same,
and all are supported by good authorities. It is still a reversal of the
former sentence, that, whereas afore the rivers of water were dried up,
now the rains should come, each in its season. "In the first month," and
"at the beginning," express the same thought, the one with, the other
without a figure.

For no one then needed to be told that the latter rain, if it fell,
should fall "in the first month," which was its appointed season for
falling. If then the words had this meaning, there must have been this
emphasis in it, that God would give them good gifts punctually,
instantly, at man's first and earliest needs, at the first moment when
it would be good for him to have them. 'As at the beginning,' would
express the same which he goes on to say, that God would bestow the same
largeness of gifts as He did, before they forfeited His blessings by
forsaking Him. So He says, "I will restore thy judges as at the first,
and thy counselors as at the beginning" ; and, "She shall sing there as
in the days of her youth, and as in the day when she come up out of the
land of Egypt" [Hos 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#015.md); and, "then
shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as
in the days of old and as in the former years" [Mal
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#004.md).

Likeness does not necessarily imply equality as in the words, "The Lord
thy God will raise up unto thee a prophet like unto me" [Deu
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015.md); and, "that they may be one,
even as We are One" [Joh 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#022.md). The
good things of the Old Testament had a likeness to those of the New,
else "the law" would not have been even the shadow of good things to
come [Heb 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001.md); they had not equality,
else they would have been the very things themselves. : "Christ is the
whole delight of the soul, from When and through whom there cometh to
those who love Him, all fullness of good and supply of heavenly gifts,
represented in "the early and latter rain," and "the full floor of
wheat," and "the fats overflowing with wine and oil." It is true also as
to the fullness of the mysteries. For the living water of Holy Baptism
is given us as in rain; and as in grain, the Bread of Life, and as in
wine the Blood." Before, "the barns were broken down," since there was
nothing to store therein.

As other parts of the natural and spiritual husbandry correspond, and
our Lord Himself compares His gracious trials of those who bear fruit,
with the pruning of the vine [Joh
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#002.md); it may be that the "vat" wherein
the grape or the olive, through pressure, yield their rich juice, is a
symbol of the "tribulations," through which we "must enter the kingdom
of God" [Act 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#022.md). : "The holy mind,
placed as if in a winefat, is pressed, refined, drawn out pure. It is
pressed by calamity; refined from iniquity, purified from vanity. Hence
are elicited the groans of pure confession; hence, stream the tears of
anxious compunction; hence flow the sighs of pleasurable devotion; hence
melt the longings of sweetest love; hence are drawn the drops of purest
contemplation. Wheat is the perfecting of righteousness; wine, the
clearness of spiritual understanding; oil, the sweetness of a most pure
conscience."

[Joel 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joe 2:25</span></span>

And I will restore to you the years that the locust hath eaten - The
order in which these destroyers are named not being the same as before,
it is plain that the stress is not on the order, but on the
successiveness of the inroads, scourge after scourge. It is plain too
that they did not come in the same year, or two years, but year after
year, for he says, not "year," but in the plural, "years." The locusts,
although not the whole plague, intended, are not excluded. : "As the
power of God was shewn in the plagues of Egypt by small animals, such as
the cyniphes, gnats so small as scarce to be seen, so also now," in
creatures so small "is shown the power of God and weakness of man. If a
creature so small is stronger than man, "why are earth and ashes proud?"
The locusts, small as they are, are in God's hands "a great army," (and
from this place probably, Muhammed taught his followers so to call them)
and mighty empires are but "the forces of God and messengers of His
Providence for the punishing of" His people "by them," "the rod of His
Anger;" and when they have done their commission and are cast away by
Him, they are as the vilest worms.

: "Since then after repentance God promises such richness, what will
Novatus say, who denies repentance or that sinners can be reformed into
their former state, if they but do works meet for repentance? For God in
such wise receives penitents, as to call them His people, and to say,
that they "shall never be confounded," and to promise, that He will
dwell in the midst of them, and that they shall have no other God, but
shall, with their whole mind, trust in Him who abides in them forever."

Through repentance all which had been lost by sin, is restored. In
itself deadly sin is an irreparable evil. It deprives the soul of grace,
of its hope of glory; it forfeits heaven, it merits hell. God, through
Christ, restores the sinner, blots out sin, and does away with its
eternal consequences. He replaces the sinner where he was before he
fell. So God says by Ezekiel; "If the wicked will turn from all the sins
which he hath committed and keep all My statutes, and do that which is
lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die; all his
transgressions that he hath committed shall not be mentioned unto him"
[Eze 18:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#021.md); and, "as for the
wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day that he
turneth from his wickedness" [Eze
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#012.md). God forgives that wickedness,
as though it had never been. If it had never been, man would have all
the grace, which he had before his fall.

So then also, after he has been forgiven, none of his former grace, no
store of future glory, will be taken from him. The time which the sinner
lost, in which he might have gained increase of grace and glory, is lost
forever. But all which he had gained before, returns. All his lost love
returns through penitence; all his past attainments, which were before
accepted by God, are accepted still for the same glory. "Former works
which were deadened by sins following, revive through repentance" . The
penitent begins anew God's service, but he is not at the beginning of
that service, nor of his preparation for life eternal. If the grace
which he had before, and the glory corresponding to that grace, and to
his former attainments through that grace, were lost to him, then,
although eternally blessed, he would be punished eternally for forgiven
sin, which, God has promised, should "not be remembered."

God has also promised to reward all which is "done in the body [Co2
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010.md). What is evil, is effaced by the
Blood of Jesus. What, through His Grace, was good, and done for love of
Himself, He rewards, whether it was before anyone fell, or after his
restoration. Else He would not, as He says He will, reward all. And who
would not believe, that, after David's great fall and great repentance,
God still rewarded all that great early simple faith and patience, which
He gave him? Whence writers of old say , "It is pious to believe that
the recovered grace of God which destroys a man's former evils, also
reintegrates his good, and that God, when He hath destroyed in a man
what is not His, loves the good which He implanted even in the sinner."
: "God is pleased alike with the virtue of the just, and the meet
repentance of sinners, which restored to their former estate David and
Peter." "Penitence is an excellent thing which recalleth to perfection
every defect." : "God letteth His sun arise on sinners, nor doth He less
than before, give them, most large gifts of life and salvation."

Whence, since the cankerworm, etc. are images of spiritual enemies, this
place has been paraphrased ; "I will not allow the richness of spiritual
things to perish which ye lost through the passions of the mind." Nay,
since none can recover without the grace of God and using that grace,
the penitent, who really rises again by the grace of God, rises with
larger grace than before, since he has both the former grace, and; in
addition, this new grace, whereby he rises.

[Joel 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joe 2:26</span></span>

And ye shall eat in plenty and be satisfied - It is of the punishment of
God, when people eat and are not satisfied (see [Hos
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#010).md); it is man's sin, that they are
satisfied, and do not to praise God, but the more forget Him [Hos
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#006.md). And so God's blessings become a
curse to him. God promises to restore His gifts, and to give grace
withal, that they should own and thank Him.

Who hath dealt wondrously with you - "First, wonderfully He afflicted
and chastened them, and then gave them wonderful abundance of all
things, and very great and miraculous consolation after vehement
tribulution, so that they might truly say, This is the change of the
Right Hand of the Most High."

And My people shall never be ashamed - o: "So that they persevere in His
service. Although he incur temporal confusion, yet this shall not last
for ever, but the people of the predestinate, penitent, and patient in
adversity, will be saved forever."

[Joel 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joe 2:27</span></span>

And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel - God had foretold
their rebellion His forsaking them, "the troubles" which should "find"
them, and that they should say, "Are not these evils come upon us,
because our God is not among us?" [Deu
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#017.md). It had been the mockery of the
Pagan in their distress, "Where is their God?" [Joe
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#017.md). "Now, by the fulfillment of His
promises and by all God's benefits, they should know that He was among
them by special grace as His own peculiar people." Still more was this
to be fulfilled to Christians, in whose heart He dwells by love and
grace, and of whom He says, "Where two or three are gathered together in
My name, there will I be in the midst of them." In the highest sense,
"God was in the midst of them," in that "God the Son, equal to God the
Father as touching His Godhead, did, in the truth of human nature, take
our flesh. This to see and know, is glory and bliss ineffable. Therefore
He repeats, and by repeating, confirms, what he had said, "And My people
shall never be ashamed." Yea, glorious, magnified, honored, shall be the
people, to whom such a Son was promised, and of whom He was born.
Glorious to them is that which the Apostle saith, that "He took not on
Him the nature of Angels, but He took the seed of Abraham," and this
glory shall be eternal."

[Joel 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joe 2:28</span></span>

And it shall come to pass afterward - After the punishment of the Jews
through the Pagan, and their deliverance; after the Coming of the
Teacher of righteousness, was to follow the outpouring of the Spirit of
God.

I will pour out My Spirit on all flesh - o: "This which He says, "on all
flesh," admits of no exception of nations or persons. For before Jesus
was glorified, He had poured His Spirit only on the sons of Zion, and
out of that nation only were there prophets and wise men. But after He
was glorified by His Resurrection and Ascension, He made no difference
of Jews and Gentiles, but willed that remission of sins should be
preached to all alike."

All flesh - is the name of all mankind. So in the time of the flood, it
is said "all flesh had corrupted his way: the end of all flesh is come
before Me." Moses asks, "who of all flesh hath heard the voice of the
Lord God, as we have, and lived?" So in Job; "in whose Hand is the
breath of all flesh of man." If He set His heart upon man, if He gather
to Himself his spirit and his breath, all flesh shall perish together.
And David; "Thou that hearest prayer, to Thee shall all flesh come; let
all flesh bless His Holy Name forever and ever" [Gen
6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#012.md); [Deu
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#026.md); [Job
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#010.md); [Job
34:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#014.md); [Psa
65:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#002.md); [Psa
145:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#021.md). In like way speak Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Zechariah [Isa
40:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#005.md); [Isa
49:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#026.md); [Isa
66:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#016.md), [Isa
66:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#023.md); [Jer
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#031.md); [Jer
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#027.md); [Jer
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#005.md); [Eze
20:48](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#048.md); [Eze
21:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#004.md); [Zac
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#013.md). The words "all flesh" are in the
Pentateuch, and in one place in Daniel, used, in a yet wider sense, of
everything which has life ([Gen 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#017.md),
[Gen 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#019.md); [Gen
7:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#015.md), [Gen
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#021.md); [Gen
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#017.md); [Gen
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#011.md), [Gen
9:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#015.md); [Lev
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#014.md); [Num
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#015.md); [Dan
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#012.md); probably [Psa
136:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#025).md); but, in no one case, in any
narrower sense.

It does not include every individual in the race, but it includes the
whole race, and individuals throughout it, in every nation, sex,
condition, "Jew or Gentile, Greek or Barbarian," i. e., educated or
uneducated, rich or poor, bond or free, male or female. As "all" were to
be "one in Christ Jesus" [Gal 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028.md), so
on all was to be poured the Holy Spirit, the Bond who was to bind all in
one. He names our nature from that which is the lowest in it, "the
flesh," with the same condescension with which it is said, "The Word was
made flesh" , from where we speak of the "Incarnation" of our Blessed
Lord, i. e., "His taking on Him our Flesh." He humbled Himself to take
our flesh; He came, as our Physician, to heal our flesh, the seat of our
concupisceuce. So also God the Holy Spirit vouchsafes to dwell in our
flesh, to sanctify it and to heal it. He, whom God saith He will pour
out on all flesh, is the Spirit of God, and God. He does not say that He
will pour out graces, or gifts, ordinary or extraordinary, influences,
communications, or the like.

He says, "I will pour out My Spirit;" as Paul says, "know ye not that ye
are the temple of God, and the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?" [Co1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016.md). "Ye are not in the flesh but in
the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His" [Rom
8:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009.md). It is said indeed, "on the
Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy Spirit," but the gift
of the Holy Spirit was the Holy Spirit Himself, as it had been just
said, "the Holy Spirit fell on all them that heard the word" [Act
10:44-45](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#044.md). It is said, "the love of God
is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, which is given us" [Rom
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005.md); but the "Holy Spirit" is first
"given," and He poureth out into the soul "the love of God." As God the
Word, when He took human nature, came into it personally, so that "the
fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily in it" [Col
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009.md); so, really, although not
personally, "doth the Holy Spirit, and so the whole Trinity, enter into
our mind by sanctification, and dwelleth in it as in His throne."

No created being, no Angel, nor Archangel could dwell in the soul. :
"God Alone can be poured out into the soul, so as to possess it,
enlighten it, teach, kindle, bend, move it as He wills," sanctify,
satiate, fill it. And "as God is really present with the blessed, when
He sheweth to them His Essence by the beatific vision and light of
glory, and communicates it to them, to enjoy and possess; so He, the
Same, is also in the holy soul, and thus diffuseth it in His grace,
love, and other divine gifts." At the moment of justification, "the Holy
Spirit and so the whole Holy Trinity entereth the soul at His temple,
sanctifying and as it were dedicating and consecrating it to Himself,
and at the same moment of time, although in the order of nature
subsequently, He communicates to it His love and grace. Such is the
meaning of, "We will come unto him, and make Our abode with him." This
is the highest union of God with the holy soul; and greater than this
can none be given to any creature, for by it we become "partakers of the
divine Nature," as Peter saith [Pe2
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#004.md). See here, O Christian, the
dignity of the holiness whereunto thou art called and with all zeal
follow after, preserve, enlarge it.

This His Spirit, God says, "I will pour," i. e., give largely, as though
He would empty out Him who is Infinite, so that there should be no
measure of His giving, save our capacity of receiving. So He says of
converted Israel, "I have poured out My Spirit upon the house of Israel"
[Eze 39:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#029.md), and, "I will pour out upon
the house of David and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of
grace and supplication" [Zac 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010.md).

And your sons and your daughters shall prophesy - This cannot limit what
he has said, that God would pour out His Spirit upon all flesh. He gives
instances of that out-pouring, in those miraculous gifts, which were at
the first to be the tokens and evidence of His inward presence. These
gifts were at the first bestowed on the Jews only. The highest were
reserved altogether for them. Jews only were employed as Apostles and
Evangelists; Jews only wrote, by inspiration of God, the "oracles of
God," as the source of the faith of the whole world. : "The Apostles
were sons of Israel; the Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the other
women who abode at the same time and prayed with the Apostles, were
daughters. Luke mentions, "All these were persevering with one accord in
prayer with the women and Mary the Mother of Jesus, and His brethren."
These sons and daughters of the Sons of Zion, having received the
Spirit, prophesied, i. e., in divers tongues they spoke of the heavenly
mysteries."

In the narrower sense of "foretelling the future, the Apostles, the
Blessed Virgin [Luk 1:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#048.md), Zacharias
([Luk 1:67](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#067) ff.md), and Anna [Luk
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#036.md), [Luk
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#038.md), Elizabeth [Luk
1:42-45](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#042.md), the virgin daughters of
Philip [Act 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#009.md), Agabus [Act
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028.md); [Act
21:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#010.md), John in the Apocalypse,"
Simeon [Luk 2:27-35](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#027.md), and Paul also
oftentimes [Act 20:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#029.md); [Th2
2:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003.md); [Ti2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001.md), [Ti2
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#004.md); [Ti1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001.md) prophesied. At Antioch, there were
certain "prophets" [Act 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001.md); and "the
Holy Spirit in every city witnessed, saying, that bonds and afflictions
awaited him in Jerusalem" [Act 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#023.md).
"But it is superfluous," adds Theodoret after giving some instances, "to
set myself to prove the truth of the prophecy. For down to our times
also hath this gift been preserved, and there are among the saints,
people who have the eye of the mind clear, who foreknow and foretell
many of the things which are about to be." So the death of Julian the
Apostate, who fell, as it seemed, by a chance wound in war with the
Persians was foreseen and foretold ; and Cyprian foretold the day of his
own martyrdom and the close of Decian persecution, which ended through
the death of the Emperor in a rash advance over a morass, when victory
was gained . The stream of prophecy has been traced down through more
than four centuries from the Birth of the Redeemer. One of the Bishops
of the Council of Nice was gifted with a prophetic spirit .

Your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions -
"God often attempers Himself and His oracles to the condition of people,
and appears to each, as suits his state" [Act
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028.md); [Act
21:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#010.md). It may then be, that to old
men while sleeping by reason of age, He appeared most commonly in
dreams; to young men, while watching, in visions. But it is so common in
Hebrew, that each part of the verse should be filled up from the other,
that perhaps the prophet only means, that their old and young should
have dreams and see visions, and both from God. Nor are these the
highest of God's revelations; as He says, that to the prophet He would
"make" Himself known in a vision and would "speak in a dream," but to
Moses "mouth to mouth; even apparently, and not in dark speeches; and
the similitude of the Lord shall he behold [Num
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006.md), [Num
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#008.md).

The Apostles also saw waking visions, as Peter at Joppa ([Act
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#010.md) ff; [Act
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#005) ff.md); (and that so frequently,
that when the Angel delivered him, he thought that it was one of his
accustomed visions [Act 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#009),.md) and
Paul after his conversion, and calling him to Macedonia; and the Lord
appeared unto him in vision at Corinth, revealing to him the conversions
which should be worked there, and at Jerusalem foretelling to him the
witness he should bear to Him at Rome. In the ship, the Angel of the
Lord foretold to him his own safety, and that God had given him all who
sailed with him [Act 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#012.md); [Act
16:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006.md), [Act
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#009.md); [Act
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#009.md); [Act
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021.md); [Act
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#011.md); [Act
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#024.md). Ananias [Act
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#010.md) and Cornelius [Act
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#003.md) also received revelations through
visions. But all these were only revelations of single truths or facts.
Of a higher sort seems to be that revelation, whereby our Lord revealed
to Paul Himself and His Gospel which Paul was to preach, and "the wisdom
of God," and the glories of the world to come, and the conversion of the
Gentiles; and when he was "caught up to the third heaven, and abundance
of revelations were vouchsafed to him" [Gal
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#012.md), [Gal
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016.md); [Co1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007.md); [Eph
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#003.md); [Co2
12:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#001.md).

[Joel 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joe 2:29</span></span>

And also upon the servants - God tells beforehand that he would be no
respecter of persons. He had said, that He would endow every age and
sex. He adds here, and every condition, even that of slaves, both male
and female. He does not add here, that they shall prophesy. Under the
law, God had provided for slaves, that, even if aliens, they should by
circumcision be enrolled in His family and people; that they should have
the rest and the devotion of the sabbath; and share the joy of their
great festivals, going up with their masters and mistresses to the place
which God appointed. They were included in one common ordinance of joy;
"Ye shall rejoice before the Lord your God, ye and your sons and your
daughters, and (literally) your men slaves and your women slaves, and
the Levite which is within your gates" [Gen
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#023.md), [Gen
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#027.md); [Exo
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#010.md); [Deu
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#012.md), [Deu
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#018.md); [Deu
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#011.md), [Deu
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#014.md). In the times before the Gospel,
they doubtless fell under the contempt in which the Pharisees held all
the less educated class; "These people who knoweth not the law" (i. e.,
according to the explanation of their schools) "is cursed."

Whence it was a saying of theirs , "Prophecy doth not reside except on
one wise and mighty and rich." As then elsewhere it was given as a mark
of the Gospel, "the poor have the Gospel preached unto them," so here.
It was not what the Jews of his day expected, for he says, "And on the
servants too." But he tells beforehand, what was against the pride both
of his own times and of the time of its fulfillment, that "God chose the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and God hath chosen
the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty;
and base things of the world and things which are despised hath God
chosen, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are,
that no flesh should glory in His presence" [Co1
1:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027.md). The prophetic word circles
round to that wherewith it began, the all-containing promise of the
large out-pouring of the Spirit of God; and that, upon those whom the
carnal Jews at all times would least expect to receive it. It began with
including the pagan; "I will pour out My Spirit on all flesh;" it
instances individual gifts; and then it ends by resting on the slaves;
"and on these too in those days will I pour out My Spirit." The order of
the words is significant. He begins, "I will pour out My Spirit upon all
flesh," and then, in order to leave the mind resting on these same great
words, he inverts the order, and ends, "and upon the servants and upon
the handmaidens I will pour out My Spirit." It leaves the thoughts
resting on the great words, "I will pour out My Spirit."

The Church at Rome, whose "faith was spoken of throughout the whole
world" [Rom 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008.md), was, as far as it
consisted of converted Jews, made up of slaves, who had been set free by
their masters. For such were most of the Roman Jews , "who occupied that
large section of Rome beyond the Tiber." Most of these, Philo says,
"having been made freemen, were Roman citizens. For having been brought
as captives to Italy, set free by their purchasers, without being
compelled to change any of their country's rites, they had their
synagogues and assembled in them, especially on the sabbath."

Peter, in declaring that these words began to be fulfilled in the Day of
Pentecost, quotes them with two lesser differences. "I will pour out of
My Spirit, and upon My servants and My handmaidens." The words declare
something in addition, but do not alter the meaning, and so Peter quotes
them as they lay in the Greek, which probably was the language known by
most of the mixed multitude, to whom he spake on the day of Pentecost.
The words, "I will pour out My Spirit," express the largeness and the
fullness of the gift of Him , "Who is Very God, Unchangeable and
Infinite, who is given or poured out, not by change of place but by the
largeness of His presence." The words, "I will pour out of My Spirit,"
express in part, that He who is Infinite cannot be contained by us who
are finite; in part, they indicate, that there should be a distribution
of gifts, although "worked by One and the Same Spirit," as the prophet
also implies in what follows.

Again, the words, "the servants and the handmaidens," mark the outward
condition; the words "My servants and My handmaidens," declare that
there should be no difference between "bond and free." The servants and
handmaidens should have that highest title of honor, that they should be
the servants of God. For what more can the creature desire? The Psalmist
says to God, "Lo I am Thy servant and the son of Thine handmaid" [Psa
116:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#016.md); and God gives it as a title of
honor to Abraham and Moses and Job and David and Isaiah ([Gen
26:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#024.md); [Num
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#007.md); [Jos
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#002.md); [Kg2
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#008.md); [Job
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#008.md); [Job
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#003.md); [Job
42:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#007.md); [Sa2
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#005.md), etc.; [Isa
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#003).md), and Abraham and David call
themselves the servants of God, [Gen
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#019.md); [Psa
86:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#002.md), [Psa
86:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#004.md), and Paul, Peter, and Jude,
"servants of Jesus Christ" [Rom 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001.md);
[Gal 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010.md); [Pe2
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001.md); [Jde
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#001.md), and James, "the servant of God"
([Jam 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001.md); also [Tit
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001).md); and the blessed Virgin, "the
handmaid of the Lord [Luk 1:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#038.md), [Luk
1:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#048.md); yea, and our Lord Himself, in
His Human Nature is spoken of in prophecy as ([Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001.md); [Isa
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006.md); [Isa
52:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013.md); [Zac
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#008.md); [Eze
34:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023.md); [Eze
37:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#024).md) "the Servant of the Lord."

[Joel 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joe 2:30</span></span>

And I will shew wonders - Each revelation of God prepares the way for
another, until that last revelation of His love and of His wrath in the
Great Day. In delivering His people from Egypt, "the Lord shewed signs
and wonders, great and sore, upon Egypt [Deu
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#022.md). Here, in allusion to it, He
says, in the same words, of the new revelation, "I will shew," or "give,
wonders, or wondrous signs," (as the word includes both) wonders beyond
the course and order of nature, and portending other dispensations of
God, of joy to His faithful, terror to His enemies. As when Israel came
out of Egypt, "the pillar of the cloud was a cloud and darkness to the
camp of the Egyptians," but "gave light by night" to the "camp of
Israel" [Exo 14:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#019.md), so all God's
workings are light and darkness at once, according as people are, who
see them or to whom they come. These wonders in heaven and earth "began
in" the First Coming and "Passion of Christ, grew in the destruction of
Jerusalem, but shall be perfectly fulfilled toward the end of the world,
before the final Judgment, and the destruction of the Universe." At the
birth of Christ, there was "the star" which appeared unto the wise men,
"and the multitude of the heavenly host," whom the shepherds saw. At His
Atoning Death, "the sun was darkened," there was the three hours'
darkness over the whole land; and on earth "the veil of the temple was
rent in twain from the top to the bottom, and the earth did quake, and
the rocks rent, and the graves were opened" [Luk
23:44-45](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#044.md); [Mat
27:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#045.md), [Mat
27:51-52](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051.md) : and the Blood and water
issued from the Saviour's side. After His Resurrection, there was the
vision of Angels, terrible to the soldiers who watched the sepulchre,
comforting to the women who sought to honor Jesus. His Resurrection was
a sign on earth, His Ascension in earth and heaven. But our Lord speaks
of signs both in earth and heaven, as well before the destruction of
Jerusalem, as before His second Coming.

With regard to the details, it seems probable that this is an instance
of what we may call an inverted parallelism, that having mentioned
generally that God would give "signs in (1) heaven and (2) earth," the
prophet first instances the "signs in earth," and then those "in
heaven." A very intellectual Jewish expositor has suggested this, and
certainly it is frequent enough to be, in conciser forms, one of the
idioms of the sacred language. In such case, "the blood and fire and
pillars of smoke, will be signs in earth; the turning of the sun into
darkness and the moon into blood will be signs in heaven." When
fortelling the destruction of Jerusalem, the Day of vengeance, which
fell with such accumulated horror on the devoted city, and has for these
1800 years dispersed the people of Israel to the four winds, our Lord
mentions first the signs on earth, then those in heaven. "Nation shall
arise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and great earthquakes
shall be in divers places, and famines, and pestilences; and fearful
sights and great signs shall there be from heaven. [Luk
21:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#010.md). Before the Day of Judgment
our Lord also speaks of both [Luk
21:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#025.md);

\(1\) "there shall be signs in the sun and in the moon and in the stars;

\(2\) and upon the earth distress of nations with perplexity; the sea
and the waves roaring; people's hearts failing them for fear and for
looking after those things which are coming on the earth, for the powers
of heaven shall be shaken."

The Jewish historian relates signs both in heaven and in earth, before
the destruction of Jerusalem. : "A star stood like a sword over
Jerusalem;" "a light which, when the people were assembled at the
Passover at 9 at night, shone so brightly around the altar and the
temple, that it seemed like bright day, and this for half an hour; the
eastern door of the temple, which 20 men scarcely shut at eventide,
stayed with iron-bound bars and very deep bolts let down into the
threshhold of one solid stone, was seen at 6 o'clock at night to open of
its own accord; chariots and armed troops were seen along the whole
country, coursing through the clouds, encircling the cities; at the
feast of Pentecost, the priests entering the temple by night, as their
wont was for worship, first perceived a great movement and sound, and
then a multitudinous voice, 'Let us depart hence.'" These signs were
authenticated by the multitude or character of those who witnessed them.

[Joel 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joe 2:31</span></span>

Before the great and terrible Day of the Lord come - o: "The days of our
life are our days wherein we do what we please; that will be the "Day of
the Lord," when He, our Judge, shall require the account of all our
doings. It will be "great," because it is the horizon of time and
eternity; the last day of time, the beginning of eternity. It will put
an end to the world, guilt, deserts, good or evil. It will be "great,"
because in it great things will be done. Christ with all His Angels will
come down and sit on His Throne; all who have ever lived or shall live,
shall be placed before Him to be judged; all thoughts, words, and deeds
shall be weighed most exactly; on all a sentence will be passed,
absolute, irrevocable throughout eternity; the saints shall be assigned
to heaven, the ungodly to hell; a great gulf shall be placed between,
which shall sever them forever, so that the ungodly shall never see the
godly nor heaven nor God; but shall be shut up in a prison forever, and
shall burn as long as heaven shall be heaven, or God shall be God." :
"That day shall be great to the faithful, terrible to the unbelieving;
great to those who said, 'Truly this is the Son of God;' terrible to
those who said, 'His blood be upon us and upon our children.'" : "When
then thou art hurried to any sin, think on that terrible and unendurable
judgment-seat of Christ, where the Judge sits on His lofty Throne, and
all creation shall stand in awe at His glorious Appearing and we shall
be brought, one by one, to give account of what we have done in life.
Then by him who hath done much evil in life, there will stand terrible
angels. "There" will be the deep gulf, the impassable darkness, the
lightless fire, retaining in darkness the power to burn, but reft of its
rays. There is the empoisoned and ravenous worm insatiably devouring and
never satisfied, inflicting by its gnawing pangs unbearable. There that
sharpest punishment of all, that shame and everlasting reproach. Fear
these things; and, instructed by this fear, hold in thy soul as with a
bridle from the lust of evil."

[Joel 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joe 2:32</span></span>

Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord - To call upon the name
of the Lord, is to worship Him, as He is, depending "upon" Him. "The
name of the Lord," expresses His True Being, That which He is. Hence, so
often in Holy Scripture, people are said to "call on the Name of the
Lord," to bless the Name of the Lord, to praise the Name of the Lord, to
sing praises to His Name, to make mention of His Name, to tell of His
Name, to know His Name" but it is very rarely said "I will praise the
Name of God" ([Psa 69:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#031); Hebrew.md), for
the Name rendered "the Lord," expresses that He is, and that He Alone
is, the Self-Same, the Unchangeable; the name rendered "God" is not the
special Name of God. Hence, as soon as people were multiplied and the
corrupt race of Cain increased, people "began," after the birth of Enos,
the son of Seth, "to call upon the Name of the Lord" [Gen
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#026.md), i. e., in public worship.
Abraham's worship, in the presence of the idolatries of Canaan, is
spoken of, under the same words, "he called upon the Name of the Lord"
[Gen 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#008.md); [Gen
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#004.md); [Gen
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#033.md); [Gen
26:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#025.md). Elijah says to the prophets of
Baal, "call ye on the name of your gods, and I will call on the Name of
the Lord" [Kg1 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#024.md). Naaman the Pagan
says of Elisha, "I thought that he would come out to me, and stand and
call on the Name of the Lord his God" [Kg2
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#011.md). Asaph and Jeremiah pray God;
"Pour out Thy wrath upon the pagan that have not known Thee, and upon
the kingdom (families Jerome) which have not called upon Thy Name" [Psa
79:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#006.md); [Jer
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#025.md); and Zephaniah fortells the
conversion of the Pagan, "that they may all call upon the Name of the
Lord, to serve Him with one consent" [Zep
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#009.md).

To "call" then "upon the Name of the Lord" implies right faith to call
upon Him as He is; right trust in Him, leaning upon Him; right devotion,
calling upon Him as He has appointed; right life, ourselves who call
upon Him being, or becoming by His Grace, what lie wills. They "call"
not "upon the Lord," but upon some idol of their own imagining, who call
upon Him, as other than He has revealed Himself, or remaining themselves
other than those whom He has declared that He will hear. For such deny
the very primary attribute of God, His truth. "Their" God is not a God
of truth. But whosoever shall in true faith and hope and charity have in
this life worshiped God, "shall be delivered," i. e., out of the midst
of all the horrors of that Day, and the horrible damnation of the
ungodly. The "deliverance" is by way of "escape" (for such is the
meaning of the word , "he shall be made to escape, slip through" (as it
were) perils as imminent as they shall be terrible. Our Lord uses the
like word of the same Day, "Watch ye therefore and pray always, that ye
may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to
pass, and to stand before the Son of man" [Luk
21:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#036.md). Those who so call upon Him in
truth shall be heard in that day, as He says, "Ask and it shall be given
you; Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in My Name, He will give it you"
[Mat 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007.md); [Joh
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#023.md).

: "That calling on God whereon salvation depends, is not in words only,
but in heart and in deed. For what the heart believeth, the mouth
confesseth, the hand in deed fulfilleth, The Apostle saith, "No man can
say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Spirit" [Co1
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003.md); yet this very "saying" must be
weighed not by words, but by the afflictions. Whence, we read of Samuel,
"And Samuel among those who call upon His Name," and of Moses and Aaron,
"These called upon the Lord, and He heard them" [Psa
99:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#006.md).

For in Mount Zion ... shall be deliverance - Repentance and remission of
sins" were to "be preached in the Name" of Jesus, "in all nations,
beginning at Jerusalem" [Luk 24:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047.md).
"There" was, under the Old Testament, the center of the worship of God;
there was the Church founded; thence it spread over the whole world.
"The place," "whither the tribes went up, the tribes of the Lord, unto
the testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord" [Psa
122:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#004.md), where God had set His Name,
where alone sacrifice could lawfully be offered, stands, as elsewhere,
for the whole Church. Of that Church, we are in Baptism all made
members, when we are made members of Christ, children of God, and heirs
of heaven. Of that Church all remain members, who do not, by viciousness
of life, or rejecting the truth of God, cast themselves out of it. They
then are members of the soul of the Church, who, not being members of
the visible communion and society, know not, that in not becoming
members of it, they are rejecting the command of Christ, to whom by
faith and love and in obedience they cleave. And they, being members of
the "body" or visible commumion of the Church, are not members of the
"soul" of the Church, who, amid outward profession of the faith, do, in
heart or deeds, deny Him whom in words they confess. The deliverance
promised in that Day, is to those who, being in the body of the Church,
shall by true faith in Christ and fervent love to Him belong to the soul
of the Church also, or who, although not in the body of the Church shall
not, through their own fault, have ceased to be in the body, and shall
belong to its soul, in that through faith and love they cleave to Christ
its Head.

As the Lord hath said - By the prophet Joel himself. This which he had
said, is not man's word, but God's; and what God had said, shall
certainly be. They then who have teared and loved God in this their day,
shall not need to fear him in that Day, for He is the Unchangeable God;
as our Blessed Saviour says; "heaven and earth shall pass away, but My
words shall not pass away" [Mar 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#031.md).
God had said of both Jews and Gentiles, united in one; "Rejoice, O ye
nations, with His people, for He will avenge the blood of His servants,
and will render vengeance to His adversaries, and will be merciful to
His land and unto His people" [Deu
32:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043.md).

And in the remnant - While foretelling His mercies in Christ, God
foretells also, that "few they be that find them" [Mat
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014.md). It is evermore "a remnant, a
residue, a body which escapes;" and so here, the mercies should be
fulfilled, literally, "in the fugitives," in those who flee from the
wrath to come. All prophecy echoes the words of Joel; all history
exemplifies them. Isaiah, Micah, Zephaniah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
Zechariah, all foretell with one voice, that a remnant, and a "remnant"
only, shall be left. In those earlier dispensations of God, in the
flood, the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah; in His dealings with
Israel himself at the entrance into the promised land, the return from
the captivity, the first preaching of the Gospel, the destruction of
Jerusalem, "a remnant" only was saved. It is said in tones of compassion
and mercy, that "a remnant should be saved. The remnant should return,
the remnant of Jacob, to the Mighty God" ([Isa
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#020.md); add [Isa
10:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#021.md); [Isa
6:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009), etc..md). "The Lord of hosts
shall be for a crown of glory to the residue of His people" [Isa
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#005.md). "The Lord shall set His Hand to
recover the remnant of His people which shall be left" ([Isa
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011), add 16.md). "I will gather the
remnant of My flock out of all countries whither I have driven them"
[Jer 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#003.md). "Publish ye, praise ye, and
say, O Lord, save Thy people, the remnant of Israel" [Jer
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#007.md). "Yet I will leave a remnant,
that ye may have some that escape the sword among the nations" [Eze
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#008.md). "Therein shall be left a remnant
which shall be brought forth" [Eze
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#022.md). "I will surely gather the
remnant of Israel" ([Mic 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#012.md); add
[Mic 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#007.md) : [Mic
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#003.md), [Mic
5:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#007).md). "Who is a God like Thee, that
pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of
His heritage?" [Mic 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#018.md). "The remnant
of Israel shall not do iniquity" ([Zep
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#013.md); add [Zep
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#009).md). "The residue of the people shall
not be cut off from the city" [Zac
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#002.md). It is then a summary of the
declarations of the prophets, when Paul says, "Even so, at this present
time also, there is a remnant according to the election of grace. Israel
hath not obtained that which he seeketh for; but the election hath
obtained it, and the rest were blinded" [Rom
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005.md), [Rom
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#007.md). And so the prophet says here;

Whom the Lord shall call - He had said before, "whosoever shall call
upon the Name of the Lord shall be delivered." Here he says, that they
who should "so call on God," shall themselves have been first "called by
God." So Paul, "to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to
be saints, with all that in every place call upon the Name of Jesus
Christ our Lord" [Co1 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#002.md). It is all
of grace. God must first call by His grace; then we obey His call, and
call upon Him; and He has said, "call upon Me in the day of trouble, and
I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify Me" [Psa
50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015.md). God accounts our salvation His
own glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joel Chapter 3](joe003.md)

</div>
