<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh004)  [Next](joh006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#001.md)

[John 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 5:1</span></span>

A feast - Probably the Passover, though it is not certain. There were
two other feasts - the Pentecost and the Feast of Tabernacles - at which
all the males were required to be present, and it might have been one of
them. It is of no consequence, however, which of them is intended.

[John 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 5:2</span></span>

The sheep-market - This might have been rendered the "sheep-gate," or
the gate through which the sheep were taken into the city for sacrifice.
The marginal rendering is "gate," and the word "market" is not in the
original, nor is a "sheep-market" mentioned in the Scriptures or in any
of the Jewish writings. A "sheep-gate" is repeatedly mentioned by
Nehemiah [Neh 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001.md), [Neh
3:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#032.md); [Neh
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#039.md), being that by which sheep and
oxen were brought into the city. As these were brought mainly for
sacrifice, the gate was doubtless near the temple, and near the present
place which is shown as the pool of Bethesda.

A pool - This word may either mean a small lake or pond in which one can
swim, or a place for fish, or any waters collected for bathing or
washing.

Hebrew tongue - Hebrew language. The language then spoken, which did not
differ essentially from the ancient Hebrew.

Bethesda - The house of mercy. It was so called on account of its strong
healing properties - the property of restoring health to the sick and
infirm.

Five porches - The word "porch" commonly means a covered place
surrounding a building, in which people can walk or sit in hot or wet
weather. Here it probably means that there were five covered places, or
apartments, in which the sick could remain, from each one of which they
could have access to the water. This "pool" is thus described by
Professor Hackett ("Illustrations of Scripture," pp. 291, 292): "Just to
the east of the Turkish garrison, and under the northern wall of the
mosque, is a deep excavation, supposed by many to be the ancient pool of
Bethesda, into which the sick descended after the troubling of the
water, and were healed, [Joh 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#001.md) ff.
It is 360 feet long, 130 feet wide, and 75 deep. The evangelist says
that this pool was near the sheep-gate, as the Greek probably signifies,
rather than sheep-market, as rendered in the English version. That gate,
according to [Neh 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001.md) ff, was on the
north side of the temple, and hence, the situation of this reservoir
would agree with that of Bethesda. The present name, Birket Israil, Pool
of Israil, indicates the opinion of the native inhabitants in regard to
the object of the excavation. The general opinion of the most accurate
travelers is that the so-called pool was originally part of a trench or
fosse which protected the temple on the north.

Though it contains no water at present except a little which trickles
through the stones at the west end, it has evidently been used at some
period as a reservoir. It is lined with cement, and adapted in other
respects to hold water." Dr. Robinson established by personal inspection
the fact of the subterranean connection of the pool of "Siloam" with the
"Fountain of the Virgin," and made it probable that the fountain under
the mosque of Omar is connected with them. This spring is, as he himself
witnessed, an "intermittent" one, and there "may" have been some
artificially constructed basin in connection with this spring to which
was given the name of "Bethesda." He supposes, however, that there is
not the slightest evidence that the place or reservoir now pointed out
as "Bethesda" was the Bethesda of the New Testament (Bib. Res., i. 501,
506, 509). In the time of Sandys (1611) the spring was found running,
but in small quantities; in the time of Maundrell (1697) the stream did
not run. Probably in his time, as now, the water which had formerly
filtered through the rocks was dammed up by the rubbish.

[John 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 5:3</span></span>

Impotent folk - Sick people; or people who were weak and feeble by long
disease. The word means those who were "feeble" rather than those who
were afflicted with "acute" disease.

Halt - Lame.

Withered - Those who were afflicted with one form of the palsy that
withered or dried up the part affected. See the notes at [Mat
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024.md).

Moving of the water - It appears that this pool had medicinal properties
only when it was "agitated" or "stirred." It is probable that at regular
times or intervals the fountain put forth an unusual quantity of water,
or water of special properties, and that "about" these times the people
assembled in multitudes who were to be healed.

[John 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 5:4</span></span>

An angel - It is not affirmed that the angel did this "visibly," or that
they saw him do it. They judged by the "effect," and when they saw the
waters agitated, they concluded that they had healing properties, and
descended to them. The Jews were in the habit of attributing all favors
to the ministry of the angels of God, [Gen
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#015.md); [Heb
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014.md); [Mat
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#011.md); [Mat
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010.md); [Luk
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#022.md); [Act
7:53](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#053.md); [Gal
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019.md); [Act
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#011.md). This fountain, it seems, had
strong medicinal properties. Like many other waters, it had the property
of healing certain diseases that were incurable by any other means. Thus
the waters of Bath, of Saratoga, etc., are found to be highly medicinal,
and to heal diseases that are otherwise incurable. In the case of the
waters of Bethesda there does not appear to have been anything
"miraculous," but the waters seem to have been endued with strong
medicinal properties, especially after a periodical agitation. All that
is special about them in the record is that this was produced by the
ministry of an angel. This was in accordance with the common sentiment
of the Jews, the common doctrine of the Bible, and the belief of the
sacred writers. Nor can it be shown to be absurd or improbable that such
blessings should be imparted to man by the ministry of an angel. There
is no more absurdity in the belief that a pure spirit or holy "angel"
should aid man, than that a physician or a parent should; and no more
absurdity in supposing that the healing properties of such a fountain
should be produced by his aid, than that any other blessing should be,
[Heb 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#012.md). What man can prove that all
his temporal blessings do not come to him through the medium of others -
of parents, of teachers, of friends, of "angels?" And who can prove that
it is unworthy the benevolence of angels to minister to the wants of the
poor, the needy, and the afflicted, when "man" does it, and Jesus Christ
did it, and God himself does it daily?

Went down - Descended to the pool.

At a certain season - At a certain time; periodically. The people knew
"about" the time when this was done, and assembled in multitudes to
partake of the benefits. Many medicinal springs are more strongly
impregnated at some seasons of the year than others.

Troubled the water - Stirred or "agitated" the water. There was probably
an increase, and a bubbling and agitation produced by he admission of a
fresh quantity.

Whosoever then first - This does not mean that but one was healed, and
that the first one, but that those who first descended into the pool
were healed. The strong medicinal properties of the waters soon
subsided, and those who could not at first enter into the pool were
obliged to wait for the return of the agitation.

Stepped in - Went in.

Was made whole - Was healed. It is not implied that this was done
instantaneously or by a miracle. The water had such properties that he
was healed, though probably gradually. It is not less the gift of God to
suppose that this fountain restored gradually, and in accordance with
what commonly occurs, than to suppose, what is not affirmed, that it was
done at once and in a miraculous manner.

In regard to this passage, it should be remarked that the account of the
angel in [Joh 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#004.md) is wanting in many
manuscripts, and has been by many supposed to be spurious, There is not
conclusive evidence, however, that it is not a part of the genuine text,
and the best critics suppose that it should not be rejected. One
difficulty has been that no such place as this spring is mentioned by
Josephus. But John is as good a historian, and as worthy to be believed
as Josephus. Besides, it is known that many important places and events
have not been mentioned by the Jewish historian, and it is no evidence
that there was no such place as this because he did not mention it. When
this fountain was discovered, or how long its healing properties
continued to be known, it is impossible now to ascertain. All that we
know of it is what is mentioned here, and conjecture would be useless.
We may remark, however, that such a place anywhere is an evidence of the
great goodness of God. Springs or fountains having healing properties
abound on earth, and nowhere more than in our own country. Diseases are
often healed in such places which no human skill could remove. The Jews
regarded such a provision as proof of the mercy of God. They gave this
healing spring the name of a "house of mercy." They regarded it as under
the care of an angel. And there is no place where man should be more
sensible of the goodness of God, or be more disposed to render him
praise as in a "house of mercy," than when at such a healing fountain.
And yet how lamentable is it that such places - watering places - should
be mere places of gaiety and thoughtlessness, of balls, and gambling,
and dissipation! How melancholy that amid the very places Where there is
most evidence of the goodness of God, and of the misery of the poor, the
sick, the afflicted, men should forget all the goodness of their Maker,
and spend their time in scenes of dissipation, folly, and vice!

[John 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 5:5</span></span>

An infirmity - A weakness. We know not what his disease was. We know
only that it disabled him from walking, and that it was of very long
standing. It was doubtless regarded as incurable.

[John 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 5:7</span></span>

Sir, I have no man ... - The answer of the man implied that he did wish
it, but, in addition to all his other trials, he had no "friend" to aid
him. This is an additional circumstance that heightened his affliction.

[John 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 5:8</span></span>

Rise, take up ... - Jesus not only restored him to health, but he gave
evidence to those around him that this was a real miracle. and that he
was really healed. For almost 40 years he had been afflicted. He was not
even able to walk. Jesus commanded him not only to "walk," but to take
up his "bed" also, and carry that as proof that he was truly made whole.
In regard to this we may observe,

1\. That it was a remarkable command. The poor man had been sick for a
long time, and it does not appear that he expected to be healed except
by being put into the waters. Yet Jesus, when he gives a commandment,
can give strength to obey it.

2\. It is our business to obey the commands of Jesus, however feeble we
feel ourselves to be. His grace will be sufficient for us, and his
burden will be light.

3\. The weak and helpless sinner should put forth his efforts in
obedience to the command of Jesus. Never was a sinner more helpless than
was this man. If God gave him strength to do his will, so he can all
others; and the plea that we can do nothing could have been urged with
far more propriety by this man than it can be by any impenitent sinner.

4\. This narrative should not be abused. It should not be supposed as
intended to teach that a sinner should delay repentance, as if "waiting
for God." The narrative neither teaches nor implies "any such thing." It
is a simple record of a fact in regard to a man who had no power to heal
himself, and who was under no obligation to heal himself. There is no
reference in the narrative to the difficulties of a sinner - no
intimation that it was intended to refer to his condition; and to make
this example an excuse for delay, or an argument for waiting, is to
abuse and pervert the Bible. Seldom is more mischief done than by
attempting to draw from the Bible what it was not intended to teach, and
by an effort to make that convey spiritual instruction which God has not
declared designed for that purpose.

Thy bed - Thy couch; or the mattress or clothes on which he lay.

[John 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 5:9</span></span>

The Sabbath - To carry burdens on the Sabbath was forbidden in the Old
Testament, [Jer 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#021.md); [Neh
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#015.md); [Exo
20:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#008.md). If it be asked, then, why
Jesus commanded a man to do on the Sabbath what was understood to be a
violation of the day, it may be answered,

1\. That the Son of man was Lord of the Sabbath, and had a right to
declare what might be done, and even to dispense with a positive law of
the Jews, [Mat 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#008.md); [Joh
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017.md).

2\. This was a poor man, and Jesus directed him to secure his property.

3\. The Jews extended the obligation of the Sabbath beyond what was
intended by the appointment. They observed it superstitiously, and Jesus
took every opportunity to convince them of their error, and to restore
the day to its proper observance, [Mat
12:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#006.md); [Luk
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#009.md); [Luk
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#014.md); [Luk
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#005.md). This method he took to show them
what the law of God really "permitted" on that day, and that works of
necessity and mercy were lawful.

[John 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 5:10</span></span>

Not lawful - It was forbidden, they supposed, in the Old Testament. The
Jews were very strenuous in the observation of the external duties of
religion.

[John 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 5:11</span></span>

He that made me whole - The man reasoned correctly. If Jesus had power
to work so signal a miracle, he had a right to explain the law. If he
had conferred so great a favor on him, he had a right to expect
obedience; and we may learn that the mercy of God in pardoning our sins,
or in bestowing any signal blessing, imposes the obligation to obey him.
We should yield obedience to him according to what we Know to be his
will, whatever may be the opinions of men, or whatever interpretation
they may put on the law of God. our business is a simple, hearty,
child-like obedience, let the men of the world say or think of us as
they choose.

[John 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 5:12</span></span>

What man is he ... - In this verse there is a remarkable instance of the
"perverseness" of men, of their want of candor, and of the manner in
which they often look at a subject. Instead of looking at the miracle,
and at the man's statement of the manner in which he was healed, they
look only at what they thought to be a violation of the law. They
assumed it as certain that nothing could make his conduct, in carrying
his bed on the Sabbath day, proper; and they meditated vengeance, not
only on the man who was carrying his bed, but on him, also, who had told
him to do it. Thus men often assume that a certain course or opinion is
proper, and when anyone differs from them they look only at the
difference, but not at the reasons for it. One great source of dispute
among men is that they look only at the points in which they differ, but
are unwilling to listen to the reasons why others do not believe as they
do. It is always enough to condemn one in the eyes of a bigot that he
differs from "him," and he looks upon him who holds a different opinion,
as the Jews did at this man, "as certainly wrong;" and such a bigot
looks at the reasons why others differ from him just as the Jews did at
the reason why this man bore his bed on the Sabbath - as not worth
regarding or hearing, or as if they could not possibly be right.

[John 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 5:13</span></span>

Wist not - Knew not.

Had conveyed himself away - Was lost in the crowd. He had silently
mingled with the multitude, or had passed on with the crowd unobserved,
and the man had been so rejoiced at his cure that he had not even asked
for the name of his benefactor.

[John 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 5:14</span></span>

Findeth him - Fell in with him, or saw him.

In the temple - The man seems to have gone at once to the temple -
perhaps a privilege of which he had been long deprived. They who are
healed from sickness should seek the sanctuary of God and give him
thanks for his mercy. Compare the notes at [Isa
38:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#020.md). There is nothing more improper,
when we are raised up from a bed of pain, than to forget God our
benefactor, and neglect to praise him for his mercies.

Thou art made whole - Jesus calls to his remembrance the fact that he
was healed, in order that he might admonish him not to sin again.

Sin no more - By this expression it was implied that the infirmity of
this man was caused by sin - perhaps by vice in his youth. His crime or
dissipation had brought on him this long and distressing affliction.
Jesus shows him that he knew the cause of his sickness, and takes
occasion to warn him not to repeat it. No man who indulges in vice can
tell what may be its consequences. It must always end in evil, and not
unfrequently it results in loss of health, and in long and painful
disease. This is always the case with intemperance and all gross
pleasures. Sooner or later, sin will always result in misery.

Sin no more - Do not repeat the vice. You have had dear-bought
experience, and if repeated it will be worse. When a man has been
restored from the effects of sin, he should learn to avoid the very
appearance of evil. He should shun the place of temptation; he should
not mingle again with his old companions; he should touch not, taste
not, handle not. God visits with heavier judgment those who have been
once restored from the ways of sin and who return again to it. The
drunkard that has been reformed, and that returns to his habits of
drinking, becomes more beastly; the man that professes to have
experienced a change of heart, and who then indulges in sin, sinks
deeper into pollution, and is seldom restored. The only way of safety in
all such cases is to "sin no more;" not to be in the way of temptation;
not to expose ourselves; not to touch or approach that which came near
to working our ruin. The man who has been intemperate and is reformed,
if he tastes the poison at all, may expect to sink deeper than ever into
drunkenness and pollution.

A worse thing - A more grievous disease, or the pains of hell. "The doom
of apostates is a worse thing than thirty-eight years' lameness"
(Henry).

[John 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 5:16</span></span>

Persecuted Jesus - They opposed him; attempted to ruin his character; to
destroy his popularity; and probably held him up before the people as a
violator of the law of God. Instead of making inquiry whether he had not
given proof that he was the Messiah, they "assumed" that he must be
wrong, and ought to be punished. Thus every bigot and persecutor does in
regard to those who differ from them.

To slay him - To put him to death. This they attempted to do because it
was directed in the law of Moses, [Exo
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#015.md); [Exo
35:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#002.md). See [Luk
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#007.md), [Luk
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#011.md); [Luk
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#014.md). We see here,

1\. How full of enmity and how bloody was the purpose of the Jews, All
that Jesus had done was to restore an infirm man to health - a thing
which they would have done for their cattle [Luk
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#007.md), and yet they sought. his life
because he had done it for a sick "man."

2\. Men are often extremely envious because good is done by others,
especially if it is not done according to the way of their denomination
or party.

3\. Here was an instance of the common feelings of a hypocrite. He often
covers his enmity against the power of religion by great zeal for the
form of it. He hates and persecutes those who do good, who seek the
conversion of sinners, who love revivals of religion and the spread of
the gospel, because it is not according to some matter of form which has
been established, and on which he supposes the whole safety of the
church to hang. There was nothing that Jesus was more opposed to than
hypocrisy, and nothing that he set himself more against than those who
suppose all goodness to consist in "forms," and all piety in the
"shibboleths" of a party.

[John 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 5:17</span></span>

My Father - God.

Worketh hitherto - Worketh "until now," or until this time. God has not
ceased to work on the Sabbath. He makes the sun to rise; He rolls the
stars; He causes the grass, the tree, the flower to grow. He has not
suspended His operations on the Sabbath, and the obligation to "rest" on
the Sabbath does not extend to Him. He created the world in six days,
and ceased the work of creation; but He has not ceased to govern it, and
to carry forward, by His providence, His great plans on the Sabbath.

And I work - "As God does good on that day; as he is not bound by the
law which requires his creatures to rest on that day, so "I" do the
same. The law on that subject may be dispensed with, also, in my case,
for the Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath." In this reply it is implied
that he was equal with God from two circumstances:

1\. Because he called God his Father, [Joh
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#018.md).

2\. Because he claimed the same exemption from law which God did,
asserting that the law of the Sabbath did not bind him or his Father,
thus showing that he had a right to impose and repeal laws in the same
manner as God. He that has a right to do this must be God.

[John 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 5:18</span></span>

The more to kill him - The answer of Jesus was suited greatly to
irritate them. He did not deny what he had done, but he "added" to that
what he well knew would highly offend them. That he should claim the
right of dispensing with the law, and affirm that, in regard to its
observance, he was in the same condition with God, was eminently suited
to enrage them, and he doubtless knew that it might endanger his life.
We may learn from his answer:

1\. that we are not to keep back truth because it may endanger us.

2\. that we are not to keep back truth because it will irritate and
enrage sinners. The fault is not in the "truth," but in the "sinner."

3\. that when any one portion of truth enrages hypocrites, they will be
enraged the more they hear.

Had broken the sabbath - They supposed he had broken it.

Making himself equal with God - This shows that, in the view of the
Jews, the name Son of God, or that calling God his Father, implied
equality with God. The Jews were the best interpreters of their own
language, and as Jesus did not deny the correctness of their
interpretations, it follows that he meant to be so understood. See [Joh
10:29-38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029.md). The interpretation of the
Jews was a very natural and just one. He not only said that God was his
Father, but he said that he had the same right to work on the Sabbath
that God had; that by the same authority, and in the same manner, he
could dispense with the obligation of the day. They had now two
pretences for seeking to kill him - one for making himself equal with
God, which they considered blasphemy, and the other for violating the
Sabbath. For each of these the law denounced death, [Num
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#035.md); [Lev
24:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#011.md).

[John 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 5:19</span></span>

The Son can do nothing of himself - Jesus, having stated the extent of
his authority, proceeds here to show its "source and nature," and to
prove to them that what he had said was true. The first explanation
which he gives is in these words: "The Son" - whom he had just impliedly
affirmed to be equal with God - did nothing "of himself;" that is,
nothing without the appointment of the Father; nothing contrary to the
Father, as he immediately explains it. When it is said that he can "do
nothing" of himself, it is meant that such is the union subsisting
between the Father and the Son that he can do nothing "independently" or
separate from the Father. Such is the nature of this union that he can
do nothing which has not the concurrence of the Father, and which he
does not command. In all things he must, from the necessity of his
nature, act in accordance with the nature and will of God. Such is the
intimacy of the union, that the fact that "he" does anything is proof
that it is by the concurring agency of God. There is no separate action
- no separate existence; but, alike in being and in action, there is the
most perfect oneness between him and the Father. Compare [Joh
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030.md); [Joh
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021.md).

What he seeth the Father do - In the works of creation and providence,
in making laws, and in the government of the universe. There is a
special force in the word "seeth" here. No person can see God acting in
his works; but the word here implies that the Son sees him act, as we
see our fellow-men act, and that he has a knowledge of him, therefore,
which no mere mortal could possess.

What things soever - In the works of creation and of providence, and in
the government of the worlds. The word is without limit - all that the
Father does the Son likewise does. This is as high an assertion as
possible of his being "equal" with God. If one does "all" that another
does or can do, then there must be equality. If the Son does all that
the Father does, then, like him, he must be almighty, omniscient,
omnipresent, and infinite in every perfection; or, in other words, he
must be God. If he had "this" power, then he had authority, also, to do
on the Sabbath day what God did.

[John 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 5:20</span></span>

The Father loveth the Son - This authority he traces to the love which
the Father has for him - that special, ineffable, infinite love which
God has for his only-begotten Son, feebly and dimly illustrated by the
love which an earthly parent has for an only child.

Showeth him - Makes him acquainted with. Conceals nothing from him. From
apostles, prophets, and philosophers no small part of the doings of God
are concealed. From the "Son" nothing is. And as God shows him "all"
that he does, he must be possessed of omniscience, for to no finite mind
could be imparted a knowledge of "all" the works of God.

Will show him - Will appoint and direct him to do greater works than
these.

Greater works than these - Than healing the impotent man, and commanding
him to carry his bed on the Sabbath day. The greater works to which he
refers are those which he proceeds to specify - he will raise the dead
and judge the world, etc.

May marvel - May wonder, or be amazed.

[John 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 5:21</span></span>

As the Father raiseth up the dead - God has power to raise the dead. By
his power it had been done in at least two instances - by the prophet
Elijah, in the case of the son of the widow of Sarepta [Kg1
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#022.md), and by the prophet Elisha, in
the case of the Shunamite's son, [Kg2
4:32-35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#032.md). The Jews did not doubt that
God had power to raise the dead. Jesus here expressly affirms it, and
says he has the same power.

Quickeneth them - Gives them "life." This is the sense of the word
"quickeneth" throughout the Bible.

Even so - In the same manner. By the same authority and power. The power
of raising the dead must be one of the highest attributes of the
divinity. As Jesus affirms that he has the power to do this "in the same
manner" as the Father, so it follows that he must be equal with God.

The Son quickeneth - Gives life to. This may either refer to his raising
the dead from their graves, or to his giving spiritual life to those who
are dead in trespasses and sins. The former he did in the case of
Lazarus and the widow's son at Nain, [Joh
11:43-44](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043.md); [Luk
7:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#014.md). The latter he did in the case
of all those who were converted by his power, and still does it in any
instance of conversion.

Whom he will - It was in the power of Jesus to raise up any of the dead
as well as Lazarus. It depended on his will whether Lazarus and the
widow's son should come to life. So it depends on his will whether
sinners shall live. He has power to renew them, and the renewing of the
heart is as much the result of his "will" as the raising of the dead.

[John 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 5:22</span></span>

Judgeth no man - Jesus in these verses is showing his "equality with
God." He affirmed [Joh 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017.md) that he
had the same power over the Sabbath that his Father had; in [Joh
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019.md), that he did the same things as
the Father; in [Joh 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021.md) particularly
that he had the same power to raise the dead. He now adds that God has
given him the authority to "judge" men. The Father pronounces judgment
on no one. This office he has committed to the Son. The power of judging
the world implies ability to search the heart, and omniscience to
understand the motives of all actions. This is a work which none but a
divine being can do, and it shows, therefore, that the Son is equal to
the Father.

Hath committed ... - Hath appointed him to be the judge of the world. In
the previous verse he had said that he had power "to raise the dead;" he
here adds that it will be his, also, to "judge" them when they are
raised. See Matt. 25; [Act 17:31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031.md).

[John 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 5:23</span></span>

That all men should honour ... - To honor is to esteem, reverence,
praise, do homage to. We honor one when we ascribe to him in our hearts,
and words, and actions the praise and obedience which are due to him. We
honor God when we obey him and worship him aright. We honor the Son when
we esteem him to be as he is; when we have right views and feelings
toward him. As he is declared to be God [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md), as he here says he has power and
authority equal with God, so we honor him when we regard him as such.
The primitive Christians are described by Pliny, in a letter to the
Emperor Trajan, as meeting together to sing hymns to Christ "as God." So
we honor him aright when we regard him as possessed of wisdom, goodness,
power, eternity, omniscience - equal with God.

Even as - To the same extent; in the same manner. Since the Son is to be
honored even as the Father, it follows that he must be equal with the
Father. To "honor the Father" must denote "religious" homage, or the
rendering of that honor which is due to God; so to honor the Son must
also denote "religious" homage. If our Saviour here did not intend to
teach that he ought to be "worshipped," and to be esteemed as "equal"
with God, it would be difficult to teach it by any language which we
could use.

He that honoureth not the Son - He that does not believe on him, and
render to him the homage which is his due as the equal of God.

Honoureth not the Father - Does not worship and obey the Father the
First Person of the Trinity - that is does not worship God. He may
imagine that he worships God, but there is no God but the God subsisting
as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. He that withholds proper homage from
one, withholds it from all. He that should refuse to honor "the Father,"
could not be said to honor "God;" and in the like manner, he that
honoreth not "the Son," honoreth not "the Father." This appears further
from the following considerations:

1\. The Father wills that the Son should be honored. He that refuses to
do it disobeys the Father.

2\. They are equal. He that denies the one denies also the other.

3\. The same feeling that leads us to honor the "Father" will also lead
us to honor the "Son," for he is "the brightness of his glory, and the
express image of his person," [Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003.md).

4\. The evidence of the existence of the Son is the same as that of the
Father. He has the same wisdom, goodness, omnipresence, truth, power.

And from these verses we may learn:

1\. That those who do not render proper homage to Jesus Christ do not
worship the true God.

2\. There is no such God as the infidel professes to believe in. There
can be but one God; and if the God of the Bible be the true God, then
all other gods are false gods.

3\. Those who withhold proper homage from Jesus Christ, who do not honor
him even as they honor the Father, cannot be Christians.

4\. One evidence of piety is when We are willing to render proper praise
and homage to Jesus Christ - to love him, and serve and obey him, with
all our hearts.

5\. "As a matter of fact," it may be added that they who do not honor
the Son do not worship God at all. The infidel has no form of worship;
he has no place of secret prayer, no temple of worship, no family altar.
Who ever yet heard of an infidel that prayed? Where do such men build
houses of worship? Where do they meet to praise God? Nowhere. As
certainly as we hear the name "infidel," we are certain at once that we
hear the name of a man who has no form of religion in his family, who
never prays in secret, and who will do nothing to maintain the public
worship of God. Account for it as men may, it is a fact that no one can
dispute, that it is only they who do honor to the Lord Jesus that have
any form of the worship of God, or that honor him; "and their veneration
for God is just in proportion to their love for the Redeemer - just as
they honor him."

[John 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 5:24</span></span>

He that heareth my word - To "hear," in this place, evidently denotes
not the outward act of hearing, but to receive in a proper manner; to
suffer it to make its proper impression on the mind; to obey. The word
"hear" is often used in this sense, [Mat
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#015.md); [Joh
8:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#047.md); [Act
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#023.md). Many persons outwardly hear the
gospel who neither understand nor obey it.

My word - My doctrine, my teaching. All that Jesus taught about Himself,
as well as about the Father.

On him that sent me - On the Father, who, in the plan of redemption, is
represented as "sending" his Son to save men. See [Joh
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#017.md). Faith in God, who sent his Son,
is here represented as being connected with everlasting life; but there
can be no faith in him who "sent" his Son, without faith also in him who
is "sent." The belief of one of the true doctrines of religion is
connected with, and will lead to, the belief of all.

Hath everlasting life - The state of man by nature is represented as
death in sin, [Eph 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001.md). Religion is
the opposite of this, or is "life." The "dead" regard not anything. They
are unaffected by the cares, pleasures, amusements of the world. They
hear neither the voice of merriment nor the tread of the living over
their graves. So with sinners. They are unmoved with the, things of
religion. They hear not the voice of God; they see not his loveliness;
they care not for his threatenings. But religion is "life." The
Christian lives with God, and feels and acts as if there was a God.
Religion, and its blessings here and hereafter, are one and the same.
The happiness of heaven is living for God - being sensible of his
presence, and glory, and power - and rejoicing in that. There shall be
no more "death" there, [Rev 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#004.md). This
"life," or this religion, whether on earth or in heaven, is the same -
the same joys extended and expanded forever. Hence, when a man is
converted, it is said that he "has" everlasting life; not merely shall
have but is already in possession of that life or happiness which shall
be everlasting. It is life begun, expanded, ripening for the skies. He
has already entered on his inheritance - that inheritance which is
everlasting.

Shall not come into condemnation - He was by nature under condemnation.
See [Joh 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#018.md). Here it is declared
that he shall not return to that state, or he will not be again
condemned. This promise is sure; it is made by the Son of God, and there
is no one that can pluck them out of his hand, [Joh
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#028.md). Compare the notes at [Rom
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001.md).

But is passed from death unto life - Has "passed over" from a state of
spiritual death to the life of the Christian. The word translated "is
passed" would be better expressed by "has passed." It implies that he
has done it voluntarily; that none compelled him; and that the passage
is made unto "everlasting" life. Because Christ is the author of this
life in the soul, he is called the "Life" [Joh
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004.md); and as he has "always" existed,
and is the Source of "all life," he is called the "eternal life," [Jo1
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020.md).

[John 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 5:25</span></span>

The hour - The time.

Is coming - Under the preaching of the gospel, as well as in the
resurrection of the dead.

Now is - It is now taking place. Sinners were converted under his
ministry and brought to spiritual life.

The dead - Either the dead in sins, or those that are in their graves.
The words of the Saviour will apply to either. Language, in the
Scriptures, is often so used as to describe two similar events. Thus the
destruction of Jerusalem and the end of the world are described by Jesus
in the same language, Matt. 24-25. The return of the Jews from Babylon,
and the coming of the Messiah, and the spread of his gospel, are
described in the same language by Isaiah, Isa. 40-61. Compare the notes
at [Isa 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014.md). The renewal of the
heart, and the raising of the dead at the judgment, are here also
described in similar language, because they so far resemble each other
that the same language will apply to both.

The voice of the Son of God - The voice is that by which we give
command. Jesus raised up the dead by his command, or by his authority.
When he did it he spoke, or commanded it to be done. [Mar
5:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#041.md); "he took the damsel by the hand,
and said, Talitha cumi." [Luk 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#014.md);
"and he came and touched the bier, and said, Young man, I say unto thee,
Arise." [Joh 11:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043.md); "he cried with a
loud voice, Lazarus, come forth." So it is by his command that those who
are dead in sins are quickened or made alive, [Joh
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021.md). And so at the day of judgment
the dead will be raised by his command or voice, though there is no
reason to think that his voice will be audibly heard, [Joh
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028.md).

Shall live - Shall be restored to life."

[John 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 5:26</span></span>

As the Father hath life - God is the source of all life. He is thence
called the living God, in opposition to idols which have no life. [Act
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#015.md); "we preach unto you that ye
should turn from these vanities (idols) 'unto the living God,'" [Jos
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#010.md); [Sa1
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#026.md); [Jer
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#010.md). See also [Isa
40:18-31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018.md).

In himself - This means that life in God, or existence, is not derived
from any other being. Our life is derived from God. [Gen
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007.md); God "breathed into his nostrils
the breath of life, and man became a living soul" - that is, a living
being. All other creatures derive their life from him. [Psa
104:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030.md), [Psa
104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029.md); "thou sendest forth thy
spirit, they are created; thou takest away their breath, they die and
return to their dust." But God is underived. He always existed as he is.
[Psa 90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002.md); "from everlasting to
everlasting thou art God." He is unchangeably the same, [Jam
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017.md). It cannot be said that he is
"self-existent," because that is an absurdity; no being can originate or
create himself; but he is not dependent on any other for "life." Of
course, no being can take away his existence; and of course, also, no
being can take away his happiness. He has "in himself" infinite sources
of happiness, and no other being, no change in his universe can destroy
that happiness.

So - In a manner like his. It corresponds to the first "as," implying
that one is the same as the other; life in the one is the "same," and
possessed in the same manner, as in the other.

Hath he given - This shows that the power or authority here spoken of
was "given" or committed to the Lord Jesus. This evidently does not
refer to the manner in which the second person of the Trinity exists,
for the power and authority of which Christ here speaks is that which he
exercises as "Mediator." It is the power of raising the dead and judging
the world. In regard to his divine nature, it is not affirmed here that
it is in any manner derived; nor does the fact that God is said to have
"given" him this power prove that he was inferior in his nature or that
his existence was derived. For:

1\. It has reference merely "to office." As Mediator, he may be said to
have been appointed by the Father.

2\. Appointment to office does not prove that the one who is appointed
is inferior in nature to him who appoints him. A son may be appointed to
a particular work by a parent, and yet, in regard to talents and every
other qualification, may be equal or superior to the father. He sustains
the relation of a son, and in this relation there is an official
inferiority. General Washington was not inferior in nature and talents
to the men who commissioned him. He simply derived authority from them
to do what he was otherwise fully "able" to do. So the Son, "as
Mediator," is subject to the Father; yet this proves nothing about his
nature.

To have life - That is, the right or authority of imparting life to
others, whether dead in their graves or in their sins.

In himself - There is much that is remarkable in this expression. It is
in Him as it is in God. He has the control of it, and can exercise it as
he will. The prophets and apostles are never represented as having such
power in themselves. They were dependent; they performed miracles in the
name of God and of Jesus Christ [Act
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006.md); [Act
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#030.md); [Act
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#018.md); but Jesus did it by his own
name, authority, and power. He had but to speak, and it was done, [Mar
5:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#041.md); [Luk
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#014.md); [Joh
11:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043.md). This wonderful commission he
bore from God to raise up the dead as he pleased; to convert sinners
when and where he chose; and finally to raise up all the dead, and
pronounce on them an eternal doom according to the deeds done in the
body. None could do this but he who had the power of creation - equal in
omnipotence to the Father, and the power of searching all hearts - equal
in omniscience to God.

[John 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 5:27</span></span>

Hath given him authority - Hath appointed him to do this. Has made him
to be judge of all. This is represented as being the appointment of the
Father, [Act 17:31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031.md). The word
"authority" here (commonly rendered "power") implies all that is
necessary to execute judgment - all the physical power to raise the
dead, and to investigate the actions and thoughts of the life; and all
the "moral right" or authority to sit in judgment on the creatures of
God, and to pronounce their doom.

To execute judgment - To do judgment - that is, to judge. He has
appointment to "do justice;" to see that the universe suffers no wrong,
either by the escape of the guilty or by the punishment of the innocent.

Because be is the Son of man - The phrase "Son of man" here seems to be
used in the sense of "because he is a man," or because he has human
nature. The term is one which Jesus often gives to himself, to show his
union with man and his interest in man. See the notes at [Mat
8:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#019.md). It is to be remarked here
that the word "son" does not have the article before it in the original:
Because he is A son of man - that is, because he is a man. It would seem
from this that there is a propriety that one in our nature should judge
us. What this propriety is we do not certainly know. It may be:

1\. Because one who has experienced our infirmities, and who possesses
our nature, may be supposed by those "who are judged" to be better
qualified than one in a different nature.

2\. Because he is to decide between "man" and "God," and it is proper
that our feelings, and nature, and views should be represented in the
judge, as well as those of God.

3\. Because Jesus has all the feelings of compassion we could ask - all
the benevolence we could desire in a judge; because he has ShowN his
disposition to defend us by giving his life, and it can never be alleged
by those who are condemned that their judge was a distant, cold, and
unfriendly being.

Some have supposed that the expression "Son of man" here means the same
as "Messiah" (see [Dan 7:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013).md), and
that the meaning is that God hath made him judge because he was the
Messiah. Some of the ancient versions and fathers connected this with
the following verse, thus: "Marvel not because I am a man, or because
this great work is committed to a man apparently in humble life. You
shall see greater things than these." Thus, the Syriac version reads it,
and Chrysostom, Theophylact, and some others among the fathers.

[John 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 5:28</span></span>

Marvel not - Do not wonder or be astonished at this.

The hour is coming - The "time" is approaching or will be.

All that are in the graves - All the dead, of every age and nation. They
are described as "in the graves." Though many have turned to their
native dust and perished from human view, yet God sees them, and can
regather their remains and raise them up to life. The phrase "all that
are in the graves" does not prove that the same particles of matter will
be raised up, but it is equivalent to saying "all the dead." See the
notes at [Co1 15:35-38](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#035.md).

Shall hear his voice - He will restore them to life, and command them to
appear before him. This is a most sublime description, and this will be
a wonderful display of almighty power. None but God can "see" all the
dead, none but he could remould their frames, and none else could
command them to return to life.

[John 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 5:29</span></span>

Shall come forth - Shall come out of their graves. This was the language
which he used when he raised up Lazarus, [Joh
11:43-44](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043.md).

They that have done good - That is, they who are righteous, or they who
have by their good works "shown" that they were the friends of Christ.
See [Mat 25:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034.md).

Resurrection of life - Religion is often called life, and everlasting
life. See the notes at [Joh 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024.md). In
the resurrection the righteous will be raised up to the full enjoyment
and perpetual security of that life. It is also called the resurrection
of life, because there shall be no more "death," [Rev
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#004.md). The enjoyment of God himself and
of his works; of the society of the angels and of the redeemed; freedom
from sickness, and sin, and dying, will constitute the life of the just
in the resurrection. The resurrection is also called the resurrection of
the just [Luk 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#014.md), and the first
resurrection, [Rev 20:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#005.md).

The resurrection of damnation - The word "damnation" means the sentence
passed on one by a judge - judgment or condemnation. The word, as we use
it, applies only to the judgment pronounced by God on the wicked; but
this is not its meaning always in the Bible. Here it has, however, that
meaning. Those who have done evil will be raised up "to be condemned or
damned." This will be the object in raising them up - this the sole
design. It is elsewhere said that they shall then be condemned to
everlasting punishment [Mat 25:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046.md), and
that they shall be punished with everlasting destruction [Th2
1:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008.md); and it is said of the unjust
that they are reserved unto the day of judgment to be punished, [Pe2
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#009.md). That this refers to the future
judgment - to the resurrection then, and not to anything that takes
place in this life - is clear from the following considerations:

1\. Jesus had just spoken of what would be done in this life - of the
power of the gospel, [Joh 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025.md). He
adds here that something still more wonderful - something beyond this -
would take place. "All that are in the graves" shall hear his voice.

2\. He speaks of those who are in their graves, evidently referring to
the dead. Sinners are sometimes said to be dead in sin, but sinners are
not said to be "in a grave." This is applied in the Scriptures only to
those who are deceased.

3\. The language used here of the "righteous" cannot be applied to
anything in this life. When God converts men, it is not because they
"have been good."

4\. Nor is the language employed of the evil applicable to anything
here. In what condition among men can it be said, with any appearance of
sense, that they are brought forth from their graves to the resurrection
of damnation? The doctrine of those Universalists who hold that all
people will be saved immediately at death, therefore, cannot be true.
This passage proves that at the day of judgment the wicked will be
condemned. Let it be added that if "then" condemned they will be lost
forever. Thus, in [Mat 25:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046.md), it is
said to be "everlasting" punishment; [Th2
1:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008.md), it is called "everlasting"
destruction. There is no account of redemption in hell - no Saviour, no
Holy Spirit, no offer of mercy there.

[John 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 5:30</span></span>

Of mine own self - See [Joh 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019.md). The
Messiah, the Mediator, does nothing without the concurrence and the
authority of God. Such is the nature of the union subsisting between
them, that he does nothing independently of God. Whatever he does, he
does according to the will of God.

As I hear I judge - To "hear" expresses the condition of one who is
commissioned or instructed. Thus [Joh
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#026.md), "I speak to the world those
things which I have "heard" of him;" [Joh
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#028.md), "As the Father hath taught me, I
speak those things." Jesus here represents himself as commissioned,
taught, or sent of God. When he says, "as I 'hear,'" he refers to those
things which the Father had "showed" him [Joh
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#020.md) - that is, he came to communicate
the will of God; to show to man what God wished man to know.

I judge - I determine or decide. This was true respecting the
institutions and doctrines of religion, and it will be true respecting
the sentence which he will pass on mankind at the day of judgment. He
will decide their destiny according to what the Father wills and wishes
- that is, according to justice.

Because I seek ... - This does not imply that his own judgment would be
wrong if he sought his own will, but that he had no "private" ends, no
selfish views, no improper bias. He came not to aggrandize himself, or
to promote his own views, but he came to do the will of God. Of course
his decision would be impartial and unbiased, and there is every
security that it will be according to truth. See [Luk
22:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#042.md), where he gave a memorable
instance, in the agony of the garden, of his submission to his Father's
will.

[John 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 5:31</span></span>

If I bear witness of myself - If I have no other evidence than my own
testimony about myself.

My witness - My testimony; my evidence. The proof would not be decisive.

Is not true - The word "true," here, means worthy of belief, or
established by suitable evidence. See [Mat
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#016.md); "We Know that thou art true" -
that is, worthy of confidence, or that thou hast been truly sent from
God, [Luk 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#021.md); [Joh
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#013.md), [Joh
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#017.md). The law did not admit a man to
testify in his own case, but required two witnesses, [Deu
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#006.md). Though what Jesus said was true
[Joh 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#013.md), [Joh
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#017.md), yet he admitted it was not
sufficient testimony alone to claim their belief. They had a right to
expect that his statement that he came from God would be confirmed by
other evidence. This evidence he gave in the miracles which he performed
as proof that God had sent him.

[John 5:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 5:32</span></span>

There is another - That is, God. See [Joh
5:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#036.md).

[John 5:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 5:33</span></span>

Ye sent unto John - See [Joh 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#019.md).

He bare witness ... - See [Joh 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#026.md),
[Joh 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029.md), [Joh
1:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#036.md). This testimony of John ought to
have satisfied them. John was an eminent man; many of the Pharisees
believed on him; he was candid, unambitious, sincere, and his evidence
was impartial. On this Jesus might have rested the proof that he was the
Messiah, but he was willing, also, to adduce evidence of a higher order.

[John 5:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 5:34</span></span>

I receive not testimony from men - I do not depend for proof of my
Messiahship on the testimony of men, nor do I pride myself on the
commendations or flattery of men.

But these things ... - "This testimony of John I adduce that you might
be convinced. It was evidence of your own seeking. It was clear, full,
explicited You 'sent' to make inquiry, and he gave you a candid and
satisfactory answer. Had you believed that, you would have believed in
the Messiah and been saved." Men are often dissatisfied with the very
evidence of the truth of religion which they sought, and on which they
professed themselves willing to rely.

[John 5:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 5:35</span></span>

He was - It is probable that John had been cast into prison before this.
Hence, his public ministry had ceased, and our Saviour says he was such
a light.

Light - The word in the original properly means a "lamp," and is not the
same which in [Joh 1:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004.md) is translated
"light." That is a word commonly applied to the sun, the fountain of
light; this means a lamp, or a light that is lit up or kindled
artificially from oil or tallow. A teacher is often called a "light,"
because he guides or illuminates the minds of others. [Rom
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#019.md); "thou art confident that thou
art a guide of the blind, a light of them that sit in darkness;" [Joh
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012.md); [Joh
12:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#046.md); [Mat
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014.md).

A burning - A lamp lit up that burns with a steady luster.

Shining - Not dim, not indistinct. The expression means that he was an
eminent teacher; that his doctrines were clear, distinct, consistent.

Ye were willing - You willed, or you chose; you went out voluntarily.
This shows that some of those whom Jesus was now addressing were among
the great multitudes of Pharisees that came unto John in the wilderness,
[Mat 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007.md). As they had at one time
admitted John to be a prophet, so Jesus might with great propriety
adduce his testimony in his favor.

For a season - In the original, for an "hour" - denoting only a short
time. They did it, as many others do, while he was popular, and it was
the "fashion" to follow him.

To rejoice in his light - To rejoice in his doctrines, and in admitting
that he was a distinguished prophet; perhaps, also, to rejoice that he
professed to be sent to introduce the Messiah, until they found that he
bore testimony to Jesus of Nazareth.

[John 5:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 5:36</span></span>

Greater witness - Stronger, more decisive evidence.

The works - The miracles - healing the sick and raising the dead.

Hath given me - Hath committed to me, or appointed me to do. Certain
things he intrusted in his hands to accomplish.

To finish - To do or to perform until the task is completed. The word is
applied to the "termination" of anything, as we say a task is "ended" or
a work is completed. So Jesus said, when he expired, It is "finished"
[Joh 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#030.md). From this it appears that
Jesus came to "accomplish" a certain work; and hence we see the reason
why he so often guarded his life and sought his safety until the task
was fully completed. These works or miracles bore witness of him; that
is, they showed that he was sent from God, because none but God could
perform them, and because God would not give such power to any whose
life and doctrines he did not approve. They were more decisive proof
than the testimony of John, because:

1\. John worked no miracles, [Joh
10:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#041.md).

2\. It was possible that a man might be deceived or be an impostor. It
was not possible for God to deceive.

3\. The miracles which Jesus performed were such as no human being could
work, and no angel. He that could raise the dead must have all power,
and he who commissioned Jesus, therefore, must be God.

[John 5:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 5:37</span></span>

The Father himself ...hath borne witness of me - This God had done,

1\. By the miracles which Jesus had performed, and of which he was
conversing.

2\. At the baptism of Jesus, where he said, "This is my beloved Son,"
[Mat 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017.md).

3\. In the prophecies of the Old Testament. It is not easy to say here
to which of these he refers. Perhaps he has reference to all.

Ye have neither heard his voice - This difficult passage has been
interpreted in various ways. The main design of it seems to be clear -
to reprove the Jews for not believing the evidence that he was the
Messiah. In doing this he says that they were indisposed to listen to
the testimony of God. He affirmed that God had given sufficient evidence
of his divine mission, but they had disregarded it. The first thing that
he notices is that they had not heard his voice. The word "hear," in
this place, is to be understood in the sense of "obey" or listen to. See
the notes at [Joh 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025.md). The voice of
God means his commands or his declarations, however made; and the
Saviour said that it had been the "characteristic" of the Jews that they
had not listened to the voice or command of God. As this had been their
general characteristic, it was not wonderful that they disregarded now
his testimony in regard to the Messiah. The voice of God had been
literally heard on the mount. See [Deu
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#012.md); "Ye heard the voice of the
words."

At any time - This has been the uniform characteristic of the nation
that they have disregarded and perverted the testimony of God, and it
was as true of that generation as of their fathers.

Nor seen his shape - No man hath seen God at any time, [Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018.md). But the word "shape," here, does
not mean "God himself." It refers to the visible "manifestation" of
himself; to the "appearance" which he assumed. It is applied in the
Septuagint to his manifesting himself to Moses, [Num
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#008.md); "With him will I speak mouth to
mouth, 'even apparently;'" in Greek, "in a form" or "shape" the word
used here. It is applied to the visible symbol of God that appeared in
the cloud and that rested on the tabernacle, [Num
9:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#015.md). It is the same word that is
applied to the Holy Spirit appearing in bodily shape like a dove, [Luk
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#022.md). Jesus does not here deny that
God had "appeared" in this manner, but he says they had not seen - that
is, had not "paid attention to," or "regarded," the appearance of God.
He had manifested himself, but they disregarded it, and, in particular,
they had disregarded his manifestations in attestation of the Messiah.
As the word "hear" means to obey, to listen to, so the word "see" means
"to pay attention to, to regard" [Jo2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#008.md); [Jo1
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#006.md), and thus throws light on [Joh
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009.md); "He that hath seen me hath seen
the Father." "I am a 'manifestation' of God - God appearing in human
flesh, as he appeared formerly in the symbol of the cloud; and he that
'regards me,' or attends to me, regards the Father."

[John 5:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 5:38</span></span>

His word abiding in you - His law does not abide in you - that is, you
do not regard or obey it. This was the "third" thing that he charged
them with.

1\. They had not obeyed the command of God.

2\. They had not regarded his manifestations, either in the times of the
old dispensation, or now through the Messiah.

3\. They did not yield to what he had said in the revelation of the Old
Testament.

For whom he hath sent - God had foretold that the Messiah would come. He
had now given evidence that Jesus was he; but now they rejected him, and
this was proof that they did not regard the word of God.

[John 5:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 5:39</span></span>

Search the scriptures - The word translated "search" here means to
"search diligently" or "search anxiously." It was applied to miners, who
search for precious metals - who look anxiously for the "bed" of the ore
with an intensity or anxiety proportionate to "their sense" of the value
of the metal. Compare the notes at [Job
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#003.md). It is applied by Homer to a
lioness robbed of her whelps, and who "searches" the plain to "trace
out" the footsteps of the man who has robbed her. It is also applied by
him to dogs tracing their game by searching them out by the scent of the
foot. It means a diligent, faithful, anxious investigation The word may
be either in the indicative or imperative mood. In our translation it is
in the imperative, as if Jesus commanded them to search the Scriptures.
Cyril, Erasmus, Beza, Bengel, Kuinoel, Tholuck, DeWette, and others,
give it as in the indicative: Chrysostom, Augustine, Luther, Calvin,
Wetstein, Stier, Alford, and others, regard it as in the imperative, or
as a command. It is impossible to determine which is the true
interpretation. Either of them makes good sense, and it is proper to use
the passage in either signification. There is abundant evidence that the
Jews did search the books of the Old Testament. It is equally clear that
all people ought to do it.

The scriptures - The writings or books of the Old Testament, for those
were all the books of revelation that they then possessed.

In them ye think ye have eternal life - The meaning of this is: "Ye
think that by studying the Scriptures you will obtain eternal life. You
suppose that they teach the way to future blessedness, and that by
diligently studying them you will attain it." We see by this:

1\. That the Jews in the time of Jesus were expecting a future state.

2\. The Scriptures teach the way of life, and it is our duty to study
them.

The Bereans are commended for searching the Scriptures [Act
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#011.md); and Timothy is said from a
child to have "known the holy scriptures, which are able to make us wise
unto salvation," [Ti2 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015.md). Early life
is the proper time to search the Bible, for they who seek the Lord early
shall find him.

They are they ... - They bear witness to the Messiah. They predict his
coming, and the manner of his life and death, [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001.md); [Dan
9:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026.md), etc. See the notes at [Luk
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#027.md).

[John 5:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">joh 5:40</span></span>

And ye will not come ... - Though the Old Testament bears evidence that
I am the Messiah; though you professedly search it to learn the way to
life, and though my works prove it, yet you will not come to me to
obtain life. From this we may learn:

1\. that life is to be obtained in Christ. He is the way, the truth, and
the life, and he only can save us.

2\. that, in order to do that, we must "come to him" - that is, must
come in the way appointed, as lost sinners, and be willing to be saved
by him alone.

3\. that the reason why sinners are not saved lies in the will. "The
only reason why sinners die is because 'they will not come' to Christ
for life and happiness: it is not because they 'cannot,' but because
they 'will not'" (Henry).

4\. Sinners have a particular opposition to going to "Jesus Christ" for
eternal life. They would prefer any other way, and it is commonly not
until all other means are tried that they are willing to submit to him.

[John 5:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 5:41</span></span>

I receive not honour ... - "I do not say these things because I am
desirous of human applause, but to account for the fact that you do not
believe on me. The reason is, that you have not the love of God in you."
In this passage we see:

1\. That we should not seek for human applause. It is of very little
value, and it often keeps men from the approbation of God, [Joh
5:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#044.md).

2\. They who will not believe on Jesus Christ give evidence that they
have no love for God.

3\. The reason why they do not believe on him is because they have no
regard for his character, wishes, or law.

Love of God - Love to God.

In you - In your hearts. You do not love God.

[John 5:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">joh 5:43</span></span>

I am come in my Father's name - By the authority of God; or giving proof
that I am sent by him.

If another shall come in his own name - A false teacher setting up
himself, and not even pretending to have a divine commission. The Jews
were much accustomed to receive and follow particular teachers. In the
time of Christ they were greatly divided between the schools of Hillel
and Shammai, two famous teachers.

Ye will receive - You will follow, or obey him as a teacher.

[John 5:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">joh 5:44</span></span>

Which receive honour one of another - Who are studious of praise, and
live for pride, ambition, and vainglory. This desire, Jesus says, was
the great reason why they would not believe on him. They were unwilling
to renounce their worldly honors, and become the followers of one so
humble and unostentatious as he was. They expected a Messiah of pomp and
splendor, and would not submit to one so despised and of so lowly a
rank. Had the Messiah come, as they expected, with pomp and power, it
would have been an honor, in their view, to follow him; as it was, they
despised and rejected him. The great reason why multitudes do not
believe is their attachment to human honors, or their pride, and vanity,
and ambition. These are so strong, that while they continue they cannot
and will not believe. They might, however, renounce these things, and
then, the obstacles being removed, they would believe. Learn:

1\. A man cannot believe the gospel while he is wholly under the
influence of ambition. The two are not compatible. The religion of the
gospel is humility, and a man who has not that "cannot" be a Christian.

2\. Great numbers are deterred from being Christians by pride and
ambition. Probably there is no single thing that prevents so really
young men from becoming Christians as this passion. The proud and
ambitious heart refuses to bow to the humiliating terms of the gospel.

3\. Though while a man is under this governing principle he cannot
believe the gospel, yet this proves nothing about his ability to lay
that aside, and to yield to truth. that is another question. A child
cannot open a trunk when he gets on the lid and attempts to raise his
own weight and the cover of the trunk too; but that settles nothing
about the inquiry whether he might not get off and then open it. The
true question is whether a man can or cannot lay aside his ambition and
pride, and about that there ought not to be any dispute. No one doubts
that it may be done; and if that can be done, he can become a Christian.

Seek not the honour - The praise, the glory, the approbation of God. The
honor which comes from men is their praise, flattery, commendation; the
honor that comes from God is his approbation for doing his will. God
alone can confer the honors of heaven - the reward of having done our
duty here. That we should seek, and if we seek that, we shall come to
Christ, who is the way and the life.

[John 5:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">joh 5:45</span></span>

Do not think that I will accuse you - Do not suppose that I intend to
follow your example. They had accused Jesus of breaking the law of God,
[Joh 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#016.md). He says that he will not
imitate their example, though he implies that he might accuse them.

To the Father - To God.

There is one that accuseth you - Moses might be said to accuse or
reprove them. He wrote of the Messiah, clearly foretold his coming, and
commanded them to hear him. As they did not do it, it might be said that
they had disregarded his command; and as Moses was divinely commissioned
and had a right to be obeyed, so his command reproved them: they were
disobedient and rebellious.

He wrote of me - He wrote of the Messiah, and I am the Messiah, [Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015.md); [Gen
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003.md); compare [Joh
8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056.md); [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010.md); [Deu
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015.md).

[John 5:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">joh 5:47</span></span>

If ye believe not his writings - If you do not credit what he has
written which you profess to believe, it is not to be expected that you
will believe my declarations. And from this we may learn:

1\. That many men who profess to believe the Bible have really no regard
for it when it crosses their own views and inclinations.

2\. It is our duty to study the Bible, that we may be established in the
belief that Jesus is the Messiah.

3\. The prophecies of the Old Testament are conclusive proofs of the
truth of the Christian religion.

4\. He that rejects one part of the Bible, will, for the same reason,
reject all.

5\. The Saviour acknowledged the truth of the writings of Moses, built
his religion upon them, appealed to them to prove that he was the
Messiah, and commanded men to search them. We have the testimony of
Jesus, therefore, that the Old Testament is a revelation from God. He
that rejects his testimony on This subject must reject his authority
altogether; and it is vain for any man to profess to believe in the New
Testament, or in the Lord Jesus, without also acknowledging the
authority of the Old Testament and of Moses.

We have in this chapter an instance of the profound and masterly manner
in which Jesus could meet and silence his enemies. There is not anywhere
a more conclusive argument, or a more triumphant meeting of the charges
which they had brought against him. No one can read this without being
struck with his profound wisdom; and it is scarcely possible to conceive
that there could be a more distinct declaration and proof that he was
equal with God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 6](joh006.md)

</div>
