<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh011)  [Next](joh013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001)

[John 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 12:1</span></span>

Then Jesus came to Bethany - This was near to Jerusalem, and it was from
this place that he made his triumphant entry into the city. See the
notes at [Mat 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001).

[John 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 12:2</span></span>

See this passage explained in the notes at [Mat
26:3-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#003).

[Joh 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#002)

A supper - At the house of Simon the leper, [Mat
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#006).

Lazarus was ... - The names of Martha and Lazarus are mentioned because
it was not in their own house, but in that of Simon. Lazarus is
particularly mentioned, since it was so remarkable that one who had been
once dead should be enjoying again the endearments of friendship. This
shows, also, that his resurrection was no illusion - that he was really
restored to the blessings of life and friendship. Calmet thinks that
this was about two months after his resurrection, and it is the last
that we hear of him. How long he lived is unknown, nor is it recorded
that he made any communication about the world of spirits. It is
remarkable that none who have been restored to life from the dead have
made any communications respecting that world. See [Luk
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#031), and the notes at [Co2
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004).

[Joh 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#004)

Which should betray him - Greek, "who was to betray him" - that is, who
would do it.

[Joh 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#005)

Three hundred pence - About 40,00, or 8 British pounds, 10 shillings
(circa 1880's).

And given to the poor - The avails or value of it given to the poor.

[Joh 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#006)

Had the bag - The word translated "bag" is compounded of two words,
meaning "tongue," and "to keep or preserve." It was used to denote the
bag in which musicians used to keep the tongues or reeds of their pipes
when traveling. Hence, it came to mean any bag or purse in which
travelers put their money or their most precious articles. The disciples
appear to have had such a bag or purse in common, in which they put
whatever money they had, and which was designed especially for the poor,
[Luk 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#003); [Joh
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#029); [Act
2:44](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#044). The keeping of this, it seems,
was intrusted to Judas; and it is remarkable that the only one among
them who appears to have been naturally avaricious should have received
this appointment. It shows us that every man is tried according to his
native propensity. This is the object of trial - to bring out man's
native character; and every man will find opportunity to do evil
according to his native disposition, if he is inclined, to it.

And bare ... - The word translated "bare" means literally "to carry as a
burden." Then it means "to carry away," as in [Joh
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#015); "If thou hast borne him hence."
Hence, it means to carry away as a thief does, and this is evidently its
meaning here. It has this sense often in classic writers. Judas was a
thief and stole what was put into the bag. The money he desired to be
entrusted to him, that he might secretly enrich himself. It is clear,
however, that the disciples did not at this time know that this was his
character, or they would have remonstrated against him. They learned it
afterward. We may learn here:

1\. that it is not a new thing for members of the church to be covetous.
Judas was so before them.

2\. that such members will be those who complain of the great waste in
spreading the gospel.

3\. that this deadly, mean, and grovelling passion will work all evil in
a church. It brought down the curse of God on the children of Israel in
the case of Achan Josh. 7, and it betrayed our Lord to death. It has
often since brought blighting on the church; and many a time it has
betrayed the cause of Christ, and drowned men in destruction and
perdition, [Ti1 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#009).

[John 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 12:10</span></span>

That they might put Lazarus also to death - When men are determined not
to believe the gospel, there is no end to the crimes to which they are
driven. Lazarus was alive, and the evidence of his resurrection was so
clear that they could not resist it. They could neither deny it, nor
prevent its effect on the people. As it was determined to kill Jesus, so
they consulted about the propriety of removing Lazarus first, that the
number of his followers might be lessened, and that the death of Jesus
might make less commotion. Unbelief stops at no crime. Lazarus was
innocent; they could bring no charge against him; but they deliberately
plotted murder rather than believe on the Lord Jesus Christ.

[John 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 12:12</span></span>

See this passage explained in the notes at Mat. 21:1-16. Also [Mar
11:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#001); Luke 19:29-44.

[Joh 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#016)

Was glorified - Was raised from the dead, and had ascended to heaven.

[Joh 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#017)

Bare record - Testified that he had raised him, and, as was natural,
spread the report through the city. This excited much attention, and the
people came out in multitudes to meet one who had power to work such
miracles.

[Joh 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#019)

Prevail nothing - All your efforts are ineffectual to stop the progress
of his opinions, and to prevent the people from believing on him.

The world - As we should say, "Everybody - all the city has gone out."
The fact that he met with such success induced them to hasten their
design of putting him to death, [Joh
11:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#053).

[John 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 12:20</span></span>

Certain Greeks - In the original, "some Hellenists" - -the name commonly
given to the Greeks. The same name was commonly used by the Jews to
denote all the pagan nations, because most of those whom they knew spoke
the Greek language, [Joh 7:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#034); [Rom
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016); [Rom
2:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#009); [Rom
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#009). "Jews and Greeks." The Syriac
translates this place, "Some of the Gentiles." There are three opinions
in regard to these persons:

1\. that they were Jews who spoke the Greek language, and dwelt in some
of the Greek cities. It is known that Jews were scattered in Asia Minor,
Greece, Macedonia, Egypt, etc., in all which places they had synagogues.
See the notes at [Joh 7:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#035),

2\. that they were proselytes from the Greeks.

3\. that they were still Gentiles and idolaters, who came to bring
offerings to Yahweh to be deposited in the temple. Lightfoot has shown
that the surrounding pagans were accustomed not only to send presents,
sacrifices, and offerings to the temple, but that they also frequently
attended the great feasts of the Jews. Hence, the outer court of the
temple was called the court of the Gentiles. Which of these opinions is
the correct one cannot be determined.

[John 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 12:21</span></span>

Bethsaida of Galilee - See the notes at [Joh
1:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#044).

Would see Jesus - It is probable that the word "see," here, implies also
a desire to converse with him, or to hear his doctrine about the nature
of his kingdom. They had seen or heard of his triumphal entry into
Jerusalem, and, either by curiosity or a desire to be instructed, they
came and interceded with his disciples that they might be permitted to
see him. In this there was nothing wrong. Christ made the curiosity of
Zacchaeus the means of his conversion, [Luk
19:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001). If we wish to find the
Saviour, we must seek for him and take the proper means.

[John 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 12:22</span></span>

Telleth Andrew - Why he did not at once tell Jesus is not known.
Possibly he was doubtful whether Jesus would wish to converse with
Gentiles, and chose to consult with Andrew about it.

Tell Jesus - Whether the Greeks were with them cannot be determined.
From the following discourse if would seem probable that they were, or
at least that Jesus admitted them to his presence and delivered the
discourse to them.

[John 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 12:23</span></span>

The hour is come - The time is come. The word "hour" commonly means a
definite part or a division of a day; but it also is used to denote a
brief period, and a fixed, definite, determined time. It is used in this
sense here. The appointed, fixed time is come - that is, is so near at
hand that it may be said to be come.

The Son of man - This is the favorite title which Jesus gives to
himself, denoting his union with man, and the interest he felt in his
welfare. The title is used here rather than "The Son of God," because as
a man he had been humble, poor, and despised; but the time had come
when, as a man, he was to receive the appropriate honors of the Messiah.

Be glorified - Be honored in an appropriate way - that is, by the
testimony which God would give to him at his death, by his resurrection,
and by his ascension to glory. See [Joh
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039).

[John 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 12:24</span></span>

Verily, verily - An expression denoting the great importance of what he
was about to say. We cannot but admire the wisdom by which he introduces
the subject of his death. They had seen his triumph. They supposed that
he was about to establish his kingdom. He told them that the time had
come in which he was to be glorified, but not in the manner in which
they expected. It was to be by his death. But as they would not at once
see how this could be, as it would appear to dash their hopes, he takes
occasion to illustrate it by a beautiful comparison. All the beauty and
richness of the harvest results from the fact that the grain had died.
If it had not died it would never have germinated or produced the glory
of the yellow harvest. So with him. By this he still keeps before them
the truth that he was to be glorified, but he delicately and beautifully
introduces the idea still that he must die.

A corn - A grain.

Of wheat - Any kind of grain - wheat, barley; etc. The word includes all
grain of this kind.

Into the ground - Be buried in the earth, so as to be accessible by the
proper moisture.

And die - The whole body or substance of the grain, except the germ,
dies in the earth or is decomposed, and this decomposed substance
constitutes the first nourishment of the tender germ a nutriment
wonderfully adapted to it, and fitted to nourish it until it becomes
vigorous enough to derive its support entirely from the ground. In this
God has shown his wisdom and goodness. No one thing could be more
evidently fitted for another than this provision made in the grain
itself for the future wants of the tender germ.

Abideth alone - Produces no fruit. It remains without producing the rich
and beautiful harvest. So Jesus intimates that it was only by his death
that he would be glorified in the salvation of men, and in the honors
and rewards of heaven, [Heb 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009); "We
see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering
of death, crowned with glory and honor." [Phi
2:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008); "he humbled himself, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross; wherefore God also
hath highly exalted him," etc. [Heb
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002); "who, for the joy that was set
before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at
the right hand of the throne of God." See also [Eph
1:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020).

[John 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 12:25</span></span>

He that loveth his life ... - This was a favorite principle, a sort of
"axiom" with the Lord Jesus, which he applied to himself as well as to
his followers. See the [Mat 10:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#039)
note; [Luk 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#024) note.

[John 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 12:26</span></span>

Serve me - Will be my disciple, or will be a Christian. Perhaps this was
said to inform the Greeks [Joh 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#020)
of the nature of his religion.

Let him follow me - Let him imitate me; do what I do, bear what I bear,
and love what I love. He is discoursing here particularly of his own
sufferings and death, and this passage has reference, therefore, to
calamity and persecution. "You see me triumph - you see (me enter
Jerusalem, and you supposed that my kingdom was to be set up without
opposition or calamity; but it is not. I am to die; and if you will
serve me, you must follow me even in these scenes of calamity; be
willing to endure trial and to bear shame, looking for future reward."

Where I am - See [Joh 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#003); [Joh
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024). That is, he shall be in heaven,
where the Son of God then was in his divine nature, and where he would
be as the glorified Messiah. See the notes at [Joh
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013). The natural and obvious meaning
of the expression "I am" implies that he was then in heaven. The design
of this verse is to comfort them in the midst of persecution and trial.
They were to follow him to any calamity; but, as he was to be glorified
as the result of his sufferings, so they also were to look for their
reward in the kingdom of heaven, [Rev
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#021); "To him that overcometh will I
grant to sit with me in my throne."

[John 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 12:27</span></span>

Now is my soul troubled - The mention of his death brought before him
its approaching horrors, its pains, its darkness, its unparalleled woes.
Jesus was full of acute sensibility, and his human nature shrunk from
the scenes through which he was to pass. See [Luk
23:41-44](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#041).

What shall I say? - This is an expression denoting intense anxiety and
perplexity. As if it were a subject of debate whether he could bear
those sufferings; or whether the work of man's redemption should be
abandoned, and he should call upon God to save him. Blessed be his name
that he was willing to endure these sorrows, and did not forsake man
when he was so near being redeemed! On the decision of that moment - the
fixed and unwavering purpose of the Son of God depended man's salvation.
If Jesus had forsaken his purpose then, all would have been lost.

Father, save me - This ought undoubtedly to have been read as a question
- "Shall I say, Father, save me?" Shall I apply to God to rescue me? or
shall I go forward to bear these trials? As it is in our translation, it
represents him as actually offering the prayer, and then checking
himself. The Greek will bear either interpretation. The whole verse is
full of deep feeling and anxiety. Compare [Mat
26:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#038); [Luk
12:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#050).

This hour - These calamities. The word "hour," here, doubtless has
reference to his approaching sufferings the appointed hour for him to
suffer. Shall I ask my Father to save me from this hour - that is, from
these approaching sufferings? That it might have been done, see [Mat
26:53](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#053).

But for this cause - That is, to suffer and die. As this was the design
of his coming as he did it deliberately - -as the salvation of the world
depended on it, he felt that it would not be proper to pray to be
delivered from it. He came to suffer, and he submitted to it. See [Luk
23:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#042).

[John 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 12:28</span></span>

Glorify thy name - The meaning of this expression in this connection is
this: "I am willing to bear any trials; I will not shrink from any
sufferings. Let thy name be honored. Let thy character, wisdom,
goodness, and plans of mercy be manifested and promoted, whatever
sufferings it may cost me." Thus Jesus showed us that God's glory is to
be the great end of our conduct, and that we are to seek that, whatever
sufferings it may cost us.

I have both glorified it - The word "it" is not here in the original,
but it is not improperly supplied by the translators. There can be no
doubt that when God says here that he had glorified his name, he refers
to what had been done by Christ, and that this was to be understood as
an attestation that he attended him and approved his work. See [Joh
12:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#030). He had honored his name, or had
glorified him, by the pure instructions which he had given to man
through him; by the power displayed in his miracles; by proclaiming his
mercy through him; by appointing him to be the Messiah, etc.

Will glorify it again - By the death, the resurrection, and ascension of
his Son, and by extending the blessings of the gospel among all nations.
It was thus that he sustained his Son in view of approaching trials; and
we may learn:

1\. that God will minister grace to us in the prospect of suffering.

2\. that the fact that God will be honored by our afflictions should
make us willing to hear them.

3\. that whatever was done by Christ tended to honor the name of God.
This was what he had in view. He lived and suffered, not for himself,
but to glorify God in the salvation of men.

[John 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 12:29</span></span>

The people - A part of the people.

It thundered - The unexpected sound of the voice would confound and
amaze them; and though there is no reason to doubt that the words were
spoken distinctly [Mat 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017), yet some
of the people, either from amazement or envy, would suppose that this
was a mere natural phenomenon.

An angel spake - It was the opinion of many of the Jews that God did not
speak to men except by the ministry of angels, [Heb
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#002); "The word spoken by angels;" [Gal
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019); "It was ordained by angels in
the hand of a mediator."

[John 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 12:30</span></span>

Came not because of me - Not to strengthen or confirm me; not that I had
any doubts about my course, or any apprehension that God would not
approve me and glorify his name.

For your sakes - To give you a striking and indubitable proof that I am
the Messiah; that you may remember it when I am departed, and be
yourselves comforted, supported, and saved.

[John 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 12:31</span></span>

Now is the judgment of this world - Greek: "crisis." This expression,
doubtless, has reference to his approaching death, and whatever he means
by judgment here relates to something that was to be accomplished by
that death. It cannot mean that then was to be the time in which the
world was to be finally judged, for he says that he did not come then to
judge the world [Joh 12:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#047); [Joh
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#015), and he has clearly declared that
there shall be a future day when he will judge all mankind. The meaning
of it may be thus expressed: "Now is approaching the decisive scene, the
eventful period - the crisis - when it shall be determined who shall
rule this world. There has been a long conflict between the powers of
light and darkness between God and the devil. Satan has so effectually
ruled that he may be said to be the prince of this world; but my
approaching death will destroy his kingdom, will break down his power,
and will be the means of setting up the kingdom of God over man." The
death of Christ was to be the most grand and effectual of all means that
could be used to establish the authority of the law and the government
of God, [Rom 8:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003). This it did by
showing the regard which God had for his law; by showing his hatred of
sin, and presenting the strongest motives to induce man to leave the
service of Satan; by securing the influences of the Holy Spirit, and by
his putting forth his own direct power in the cause of virtue and of
God. The death of Jesus was the determining cause, the grand crisis, the
concentration of all that God had ever done, or ever will do, to break
down the kingdom of Satan, and set up his power over man. Thus was
fulfilled the prediction [Gen 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015), "I
will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her
seed; it shall bruise thy head and thou shalt bruise his heel."

Now shall the prince of this world - Satan, or the devil, [Joh
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030); [Joh
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#011). He is also called the god of
this world, [Co2 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004); [Eph
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012); "The rulers of the darkness of
this world" - that is, the rulers of this dark world a well-known
Hebraism. He is also called "the prince of the power of the air, the
spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience," [Eph
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002). All these names are given him
from the influence or power which he has over the men of this world,
because the great mass of men have been under his control and subject to
his will.

Be cast out - His kingdom shall be destroyed; his empire shall come to
an end. It does not mean that his reign over all men would entirely
cease then, but that then would be the crisis, the grand conflict in
which he would be vanquished, and from that time his kingdom begin to
decline, until it would finally cease, and then be free altogether from
his dominion. See [Luk 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018); [Col
1:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018); [Act
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#018); [Co1
15:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025); [Rev
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#014).

[John 12:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 12:32</span></span>

Be lifted up - See [Joh 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014); [Joh
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#028).

Will draw - [Joh 6:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044). The same word
is used in both places.

All men - I will incline all kinds of men; or will make the way open by
the cross, so that all men may come. I will provide a way which shall
present a strong motive or inducement - the strongest that can be
presented to all men to come to me.

[John 12:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 12:34</span></span>

We have heard out of the law - Out of the Old Testament; or rather we
have been so taught by those who have interpreted the law to us.

That Christ - That the Messiah.

Abideth for ever - Will remain forever, or will live forever. The
doctrine of many of them certainly was that the Messiah would not die;
that he would reign as a prince forever over the people. This opinion
was founded on such passages of Scripture as these: [Psa
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004), "Thou art a priest forever;"
[Dan 2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044); [Dan
8:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013). In the interpretation of
these passages they had overlooked such places as [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001); nor did they understand how
the fact that he would reign for ever could be reconciled with the idea
of his death. To us, who understand that his reign does not refer to a
temporal, an earthly kingdom, it is easy.

How sayest thou ... - We have understood by the title "the Son of man"
the same as the Messiah, and that he is to reign forever. How can he be
put to death?

Who is this Son of man? - "The Son of man we understand to be the
Messiah spoken of by Daniel, who is to reign forever. To him, therefore,
you cannot refer when you say that he must be lifted up, or must die.
Who is it - what other Son of man is referred to but the Messiah?"
Either ignorantly or willfully, they supposed he referred to some one
else than the Messiah.

[John 12:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 12:35</span></span>

Yet a little while is the light with you - Jesus did not reply directly
to their question. He saw that they were offended by the mention of his
death, and he endeavored to arrive at the same thing indirectly. He
tells them, therefore, that the light would be with them a little while,
and that they ought to improve the opportunity while they had it to
listen to his instructions, to require with candor, and thus to forsake
their false notions respecting the Messiah.

The light - [Joh 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004). It is probable
that they understood this as denoting the Messiah. See [Joh
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012); "I am the light of the world;"
[Joh 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#004).

Walk ... - [Joh 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#009). Whatever you
have to do, do it while you enjoy this light. Make good use of your
privileges before they are removed. That is, while the Messiah is with
you, avail yourselves of his instructions and learn the way to life.

Lest darkness - Lest God should take away all your mercies, remove all
light and instruction from you, and leave you to ignorance, blindness,
and woe. This was true that darkness and calamity were to come upon the
Jewish people when the Messiah was removed; and it is also true that God
leaves a sinner to darkness and misery when he has long rejected the
gospel.

For he ... - See [Joh 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#010).

[John 12:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 12:36</span></span>

While ye have light - This implied two things:

1\. that he was the light, or was the Messiah.

2\. that he was soon to be taken away by death.

In this manner he answered their question - not directly, but in a way
to convey the truth to their minds, and at the same time to administer
to them a useful admonition. Jesus never aroused the prejudices of men
unnecessarily, yet he never shrank from declaring to them the truth in
some way, however unpalatable it might be.

Believe in the light - That is, in the Messiah, who is the light of the
world.

That ye may be the children ... - That ye may be the friends and
followers of the Messiah. See the notes at [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001). Compare [Joh
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012); [Eph
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008); "Now are ye light in the Lord;
walk as children of light."

Did hide himself from them - [Joh
8:59](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#059). He went out to Bethany, where he
commonly passed the night, [Luk 21:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#037).

[John 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 12:37</span></span>

So many miracles - This does not refer to any miracles performed on this
occasion, but to all his miracles performed in view of the nation, in
healing the sick, opening the eyes of the blind, raising the dead, etc.
John here gives the summary or the result of all his work undeniable
proof of his being the Messiah, yet the nation did not believe on him.

Before them - Before the Jewish nation. Not in the presence of the
people whom he was then addressing, but before the Jewish people.

They believed not - The Jewish nation did not believe as a nation, but
rejected him.

[John 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 12:38</span></span>

The saying - The word of Isaiah, or that which Isaiah predicted. This
occurs in [Isa 53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001).

Might be fulfilled - That the same effect should occur which occurred in
the time of Isaiah. This does not mean that the Pharisees rejected
Christ in order that the prophecy of Isaiah should be fulfilled, but
that by their rejection of him the same thing had occurred which took
place in the time of Isaiah. His message was despised by the nation, and
he himself put to death. And it was also true - by the same causes, by
the same nation that the same gospel message was rejected by the Jews in
the time of Christ. The same language of the prophet would express both
events, and no doubt it was intended by the Holy Spirit to mark both
events. In this way it was completely fulfilled. See the notes at [Isa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001).

Our report - Literally, by report is meant "what is heard." Our speech,
our message. That is, few or none have received the message. The form of
the question is an emphatic way of saying that it was rejected.

The arm of the Lord - The arm is a symbol of power, as it is the
instrument by which we execute our purposes. It is put for the power of
God, [Isa 51:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009); [Isa
52:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#010). Thus, he is said to have
brought out the children of Israel from Egypt with a high arm that is,
with great power. It hence means God's power in defending his people, in
overcoming his enemies, and in saving the soul. In this place it clearly
denotes the power displayed by the miracles of Christ.

Revealed - Made known, seen, understood. Though the power of God was
displayed, yet the people did not see and understand it.

[John 12:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 12:39</span></span>

They could not believe - See [Mar 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#005);
"He could there do no mighty works," etc. The works can and could are
often used in the Bible to denote the existence of such obstacles as to
make a result certain, or as affirming that while one thing exists
another thing cannot follow. Thus, [Joh
5:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#044); "How can ye believe which
receive honor one of another." That is, while this propensity to seek
for honor exists, it will effectually prevent your believing. Thus [Gen
37:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#004) it is said of the brethren of
Joseph that they "could not speak peaceably unto him." That is, while
their hatred continued so strong, the other result would follow. See
also [Mat 12:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#034); [Rom
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#007); [Joh
6:60](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#060); [Amo
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#003). In this case it means that there
was some obstacle or difficulty that made it certain that while it
existed they would not believe. What that was is stated in the next
verse; and while that blindness of mind and that hardness of heart
existed, it was impossible that they should believe, for the two things
were incompatible. But this determines nothing about their power of
removing that blindness, or of yielding their heart to the gospel. It
simply affirms that while one exists the other cannot follow. Chrysostom
and Augustine understand this of a moral inability, and not of any
natural want. of power. "They could not, because they would not"
(Chrysostom in loco). So on [Jer
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023), "Can the Ethiopian change his
skin," etc., he says, "he does not say if is impossible for a wicked man
to do well, but, because "they will not, therefore they cannot."
Augustine says on this place: "If I be asked why they could not believe,
I answer without hesitation, because they would not: because God foresaw
their evil will, and he announced it beforehand by the prophet."

Said again - [Isa 6:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009).

[John 12:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">joh 12:40</span></span>

He hath blinded their eyes - The expression in Isaiah is, "Go, make the
heart of this people fat, and shut their eyes." That is, go and proclaim
truth to them truth that will result in blinding their eyes. Go and
proclaim the law and the will of God, and the effect will be, owing to
the hardness of their heart, that their eyes will be blinded and their
hearts hardened. As God knew that this would be the result - as it was
to be the effect of the message, his commanding Isaiah to go and
proclaim it was the same in effect, or in the result, as if he had
commanded him to blind their eyes and harden their hearts. It is this
effect or result to which the evangelist refers in this place. He states
that God did it, that is, he did it in the manner mentioned in Isaiah,
for we are limited to that in our interpretation of the passage. In that
case it is clear that the mode specified is not a direct agency on the
part of God in blinding the mind - which we cannot reconcile with any
just notions of the divine character - but "in suffering the truth to
produce a regular effect on sinful minds, without putting forth any
positive supernatural influence to prevent it." The effect of truth on
such minds is to irritate, to enrage, and to harden, unless counteracted
by the grace of God. See [Rom 7:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008),
[Rom 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#011); [Co2
2:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015). And as God knew this, and,
knowing it, still sent the message, and suffered it to produce the
regular effect, the Evangelist says "he hath blinded their minds," thus
retaining the substance of the passage in Isaiah without quoting the
precise language; but in proclaiming the truth there was nothing wrong
on the part of God or of Isaiah, nor is there any indication that God
was unwilling that they should believe and be saved.

That they should not see ... - This does not mean that it was the design
of God that they should not be converted, but that it was the effect of
their rejecting the message. See the notes at [Mat
13:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#014).

[John 12:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 12:41</span></span>

When he saw his glory - [Isa 6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001).
Isaiah saw the Lord (in Hebrew, יהוה Yahweh) sitting on a throne and
surrounded with the seraphim. This is perhaps the only instance in the
Bible in which Yahweh is said to have been seen by man, and for this the
Jews affirm that Isaiah was put to death. God had said [Exo
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020), "No man shall see me and live;"
and as Isaiah affirmed that he had seen Yahweh, the Jews, for that and
other reasons, put him to death by sawing him asunder. See Introduction
to Isaiah, Section 2. In the prophecy Isaiah is said expressly to have
seen Yahweh [Joh 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001); and in [Joh
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#005), "Mine eyes have seen the King
Yahweh of hosts." By his glory is meant the manifestation of him - the
Shechinah, or visible cloud that was a representation of God, and that
rested over the mercy-seat. This was regarded as equivalent to seeing
God, and John here expressly applies this to the Lord Jesus Christ; for
he is nor affirming that the people did not believe in God, but is
assigning the reason why they believed not on Jesus Christ as the
Messiah. The whole discourse has respect to the Lord Jesus, and the
natural construction of the passage requires us to refer it to him. John
affirms that it was the glory of the Messiah that Isaiah saw, and yet
Isaiah affirms that it was Yahweh; and from this the inference is
irresistible that John regarded Jesus as the Yahweh whom Isaiah saw. The
name Yahweh is never, in the Scriptures, applied to a man, or an angel,
or to any creature. It is the unique, incommunicable name of God. So
great was the reverence of the Jews for that name that they would not
even pronounce it. This passage is therefore conclusive proof that
Christ is equal with the Father.

Spake of him - Of the Messiah. The connection requires this
interpretation.

[John 12:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">joh 12:42</span></span>

The chief rulers - Members of the Sanhedrin - Nicodemus, Joseph, and
others like them.

Because of the Pharisees - The Pharisees were a majority of the council.

Did not confess him - Did not openly avow their belief that he was the
Messiah. Two of them, however, did afterward evince their attachment to
him. These were Joseph and Nicodemus, [Joh
19:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#038). That Joseph was one of them
appears from [Mar 15:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#043); [Luk
23:50-51](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#050).

Put out of the synagogue - Excommunicated. See the notes at [Joh
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#022).

[John 12:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">joh 12:43</span></span>

The praise of men - The approval of human beings. It does not appear
that they had a living, active faith, but that they were convinced in
their understanding that he was the Messiah. They had that kind of faith
which is so common among people - a speculative acknowledgment that
religion is true, but an acknowledgment which leads to no self-denial,
which shrinks from the active duties of piety, and fears man more than
God. True faith is active. It overcomes the fear of man; it prompts to
self-denying duties, Heb. 11. Nevertheless, it was no unimportant proof
that Jesus was the Messiah, that any part of the great council of the
Jews were even speculatively convinced of it: and it shows that the
evidence could not have been slight when it overcame their prejudices
and pride, and constrained them to admit that the lowly and poor man of
Nazareth was the long expected Messiah of their nation.

[John 12:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">joh 12:44</span></span>

Jesus cried and said - John does not say where or when this was; it is
probable, however, that it was a continuation of the discourse recorded
in [Joh 12:30-36](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#030). Jesus saw their
unbelief, and proceeded to state the consequence of believing on him,
and of rejecting him and his message.

Believeth not on me - That is, not on me alone, or his faith does not
terminate on me. Compare [Mat 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#020);
[Mar 9:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#037). It involves, also, belief
in him that sent me. Jesus uniformly represents the union between
himself and God as so intimate that there could not be faith in him
unless there was also faith in God. He did the same works [Joh
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017), [Joh
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#020), [Joh
5:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#036); [Joh
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#025), [Joh
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#037), and taught the very doctrine
which God had commissioned him to do, [Joh
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#038); [Joh
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#030), [Joh
5:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#020).

[John 12:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">joh 12:45</span></span>

Seeth me ... - This verse is a strong confirmation of his equality with
God. In no other way can it be true that he who saw Jesus saw him that
sent him, unless he were the same in essence. Of no man could it be
affirmed that he who saw him saw God. To say this of Paul or Isaiah
would have been blasphemy. And yet Jesus uses this language familiarly
and constantly. It shows that he had a consciousness that he was divine,
and that it was the natural and proper way of speaking when speaking of
himself. Compare [Joh 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017).

[John 12:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">joh 12:46</span></span>

A light into the world - [Joh 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012);
[Joh 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009); [Joh
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#019).

Walk in darkness - In gross and dangerous errors. Darkness is put for
error as well as for sin, [Joh 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#019);
[Jo1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005). It is also used to denote
the state when the comforts of religion are withdrawn from the soul,
[Isa 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#022); [Joe
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#002); [Isa
59:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#009); [Joh
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012).

[John 12:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">joh 12:47</span></span>

I judge him not ... - [Joh 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#015). It
was not his present purpose to condemn men. He would come to condemn the
guilty at a future time. At present he came to save them. Hence he did
not now even pronounce decisively on the condition of those who rejected
him, but still gave them an opportunity to be saved.

[John 12:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">joh 12:48</span></span>

He that rejecteth me - [Luk 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016). The
word "reject" means to despise, or to refuse to receive him.

Hath one - That is, he needs not my voice to condemn him. He will carry
his own condemnation with him, even should I be silent. His own
conscience will condemn him. The words which I have spoken will be
remembered and will condemn him, if there were nothing further. From
this we learn:

1\. that a guilty conscience needs no accuser.

2\. that the words of Christ, and the messages of mercy which the sinner
has rejected, will be remembered by him.

3\. that this will be the source of his condemnation. This will make him
miserable, and there will be no possibility of his being happy.

4\. that the conscience of the sinner will concur with the sentence of
Christ in the great day, and that he will go to eternity self-condemned.
It is this which will make the pains of hell so intolerable to the
sinner.

5\. The word that Christ has spoken, the doctrines of his gospel, and
the messages of mercy, will be that by which the sinner will be judged
in the last day. Every person will be judged by that message, and the
sinner will be punished according to the frequency and clearness with
which the rejected message has been presented to his mind, [Mat
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#041).

[John 12:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">joh 12:49</span></span>

Of myself - [Joh 7:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#016).

[John 12:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">joh 12:50</span></span>

Is life everlasting - Is the cause or source of everlasting life. He
that obeys the commandment of God shall obtain everlasting life; and
this is his commandment, that we believe in the name of his
only-begotten Son, [Jo1 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#022). We see
here the reason of the earnestness and fidelity of the Lord Jesus. It
was because he saw that eternal life depended on the faithful preaching
of the message of God. He therefore proclaimed it in the face of all
opposition, contempt, and persecution. And we see also:

1\. That every minister of religion should have a deep and abiding
conviction that he delivers a message that is to be connected with the
eternal welfare of his hearers. And,

2\. Under the influence of this belief, he should fearlessly deliver his
message in the face of bonds, poverty, contempt, persecution, and death.

It may not be improper to remark here that this is the close of the
public preaching of Christ. The rest of his ministry was employed in the
private instruction of his apostles, and in preparing them for his
approaching death. It is such a close as all his ministers should desire
to make a solemn, deliberate, firm exhibition of the truth of God, under
a belief that on it was depending the eternal salvation of his hearers,
and uttering without fear the solemn message of the Most High to a lost
world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 13](joh013)

</div>
