<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh009)  [Next](joh011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001.md)

[John 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 10:1</span></span>

Verily, verily - See the notes at [Joh
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003.md).

I say unto you - Some have supposed that what follows here was delivered
on some other occasion than the one mentioned in the last chapter; but
the expression verily, verily, is one which is not used at the
commencement of a discourse, and the discourse itself seems to be a
continuation of what was said before. The Pharisees professed to be the
guides or shepherds of the people. Jesus, in the close of the last
chapter, had charged them with being blind, and of course of being
unqualified to lead the people. He proceeds here to state the character
of a true shepherd, to show what was a hireling, and to declare that he
was the true shepherd and guide of his people. This is called [Joh
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#006.md) a parable, and it is an eminently
beautiful illustration of the office of the Messiah, drawn from an
employment well known in Judea. The Messiah was predicted under the
image of a shepherd. [Eze 34:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023.md); [Eze
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#024.md); [Zac
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007.md). Hence, at the close of the
discourse they asked him whether he were the Messiah, [Joh
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#024.md).

Into the sheepfold - The sheepfold was an inclosure made in fields where
the sheep were collected by night to defend them from robbers, wolves,
etc. It was not commonly covered, as the seasons in Judea were mild. By
the figure here we are to understand the Jewish people, or the church of
God, which is often likened to a flock, Ezek. 34:1-19; [Jer
23:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#001.md); [Zac
13:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001.md). By the door, here, is meant
the Lord Jesus Christ, [Joh 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#007.md), [Joh
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#009.md). He is "the way, the truth, and
the life," [Joh 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006.md). And, as the only
proper way of entering the fold was by the door, so the only way of
entering the church of God is by believing on him and obeying his
commandments. The particular application of this place, however, is to
religious teachers, who cannot enter properly on the duties of teaching
and guarding the flock except by the Lord Jesus that is, in the way
which he has appointed. The Pharisees claimed to be pastors, but not
under his appointment. They entered some other way. The true pastors of
the church are those who enter by the influences of the Spirit of Jesus,
and in the manner which he has appointed.

Some other way - Either at a window or over the wall.

A thief - One who silently and secretly takes away the property of
another.

A robber - One who does it by violence or bloodshed. Jesus here
designates those pastors or ministers of religion who are influenced not
by love to him, but who seek the office from ambition, or the love of
power, or wealth, or ease; who come, not to promote the welfare of the
church, but to promote their own interests. Alas! in all churches there
have been many - many who for no better ends have sought the pastoral
office. To all such Jesus gives the names of thieves and robbers.

[John 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 10:2</span></span>

He that entereth by the door - This was the way in which a shepherd had
access to his flock. In [Joh 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#007.md)
Jesus says he is the door. In this place he refers to those who by him -
that is, in accordance with his spirit and law become ministers of
religion.

Is the shepherd of the sheep - Christ does not here refer to himself,
for he is the way or door by which others enter; but he refers to all
the ministers of the gospel who have access to the church by him. In the
original, the article "the" is missing before the word shepherd - "is a
shepherd." By his entering in this manner he shows that he is a shepherd
one who cares for his flock, and does not come to kill and destroy.

[John 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 10:3</span></span>

To him the porter openeth - The porter is the doorkeeper. It seems that
the more wealthy Jews who owned flocks employed some person to take
charge of the flock. At first all shepherds attended their flocks
personally by day and by night, and this continued to be commonly the
practice, but not always.

The sheep hear his voice - The voice of the shepherd. A flock will
readily discern the well-known voice of one who is accustomed to attend
them. The meaning is, that the people of God will be found disposed to
listen to the instructions of those who are appointed by Christ, who
preach his pure doctrines, and who show a real love for the church of
God. There is scarcely any better test of fidelity in the pastoral
office than the approbation of the humble and obscure people of God,
when they discern in the preacher the very manner and spirit of the
doctrines of the Bible.

He calleth his own sheep by name - It was customary, and is still, we
are told by travelers, for shepherds to give particular names to their
sheep, by which they soon learned to regard the voice of the shepherd.
By this our Saviour indicates, doubtless, that it is the duty of a
minister of religion to seek an intimate and personal acquaintance with
the people of his charge; to feel an interest in them as individuals,
and not merely to address them together; to learn their private needs;
to meet them in their individual trials, and to administer to them
personally the consolations of the gospel.

Leadeth them out - He leads them from the fold to pasture or to water.
Perhaps there is here intended the care of a faithful pastor to provide
suitable instruction for the people of his charge, and to feed them with
the bread of life. See a beautiful and touching description of the care
of the Great Shepherd in [Psa 23:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001.md).

[John 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 10:4</span></span>

He putteth forth - Or leads them out of the fold.

He goeth before them - He leads them, and guides them, and does not
leave them. A shepherd spent his time with his flocks. He went before
them to seek the best pastures and watering-places, and to defend them
from danger. In this is beautifully represented the tender care of him
who watches for souls as one that must give account.

[John 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 10:5</span></span>

A stranger ... - This was literally true of a flock. Accustomed to the
voice and presence of a kind shepherd, they would not regard the command
of a stranger. It is also true spiritually. Jesus by this indicates that
the true people of God will not follow false teachers - those who are
proud, haughty, and self-seeking, as were the Pharisees. Many may follow
such, but humble and devoted Christians seek those who have the mild and
self-denying spirit of their Master and Great Shepherd. It is also true
in reference to those who are pastors in the churches. They have an
influence which no stranger or wandering minister can have. A church
learns to put confidence in a pastor; he knows the wants of his people,
sees their danger, and can adapt his instructions to them. A stranger,
however eloquent, pious, or learned, can have few of these advantages;
and it is more absurd to commit the churches to the care of wandering
strangers, of those who have no permanent relation to the church, than
it would be for a flock to be committed to a foreigner who knew nothing
of it, and who had no particular interest in it.

The pastoral office is one of the wisest institutions of heaven. The
following extract from The Land and the Book (Thomson) will show how
strikingly this whole passage accords with what actually occurs at this
day in Palestine: "This is true to the letter. They are so tame and so
trained that they follow their keeper with the utmost docility. He leads
them forth from the fold, or from their houses in the villages, just
where he pleases. Since there are many flocks in such a place as this,
each one takes a different path, and it is his business to find pasture
for them. It is necessary, therefore, that they should be taught to
follow, and not to stray away into the unfenced fields of grain which
lie so temptingly on either side. Anyone that thus wanders is sure to
get into trouble. The shepherd calls sharply from time to time to remind
them of his presence. They know his voice and follow on; but if a
stranger call, they stop short, lift up their heads in alarm, and, if it
is repeated, they turn and flee, because they do not know the voice of a
stranger.

This is not the fanciful costume of a parable; it is simple fact. I have
made the experiment repeatedly. The shepherd goes before, not merely to
point out the way, but to see that it is practicable and safe. He is
armed in order to defend his charge, and in this he is very courageous.
Many adventures with wild beasts occur not unlike that recounted by
David, and in these very mountains; for, though there are now no lions
here, there are wolves in abundance; and leopards and panthers,
exceedingly fierce, prowl about these wild wadies. They not unfrequently
attack the flock in the very presence of the shepherd, and he must be
ready to do battle at a moment's warning. I have listened with intense
interest to their graphic descriptions of downright and desperate fights
with these savage beasts. And when the thief and the robber come (and
come they do), the faithful shepherd has often to put his life in his
hand to defend his flock. I have known more than one case in which he
had literally to lay it down in the contest. A poor faithful fellow last
spring, between Tiberias and Tabor, instead of fleeing, actually fought
three Bedouin robbers until he was hacked to pieces with their khanjars,
and died among the sheep he was defending."

[John 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 10:6</span></span>

This parable - See the notes at [Mat
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#003.md).

They understood not ... - They did not understand the meaning or design
of the illustration.

[John 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 10:7</span></span>

I am the door - I am the way by which ministers and people enter the
true church. It is by his merits, his intercession, his aid, and his
appointment that they enter.

Of the sheep - Of the church.

[John 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 10:8</span></span>

All that ever came before me - This does not refer to the prophets, but
to those who came pretending to be the pastors or guides of the people.
Some have supposed that he referred to those who pretended to be the
Messiah before him; but there is not evidence that any such person
appeared before the coming of Jesus. It is probable that he rather
refers to the scribes and Pharisees, who claimed to be instructors of
the people, who claimed the right to regulate the affairs of religion,
and whose only aim was to aggrandize themselves and to oppress the
people. See the notes at [Joh 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018.md).
When the Saviour says that "all" were thieves, he speaks in a popular
sense, using the word "all" as it is often used in the New Testament, to
denote the great mass or the majority.

Thieves and robbers - See [Joh 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001.md);
also [Jer 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#001.md); "Woe be unto the
pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture;" [Eze
34:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#002.md); "Woe be to the shepherds of
Israel that do feed themselves! Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with
the wool, ye kill them that are fed; but ye feed not the flock." This
had been the general character of the Pharisees and scribes. They sought
wealth, office, ease at the expense of the people, and thus deserved the
character of thieves and robbers. They insinuated themselves slyly as a
thief, and they oppressed and spared not, like a robber.

The sheep - The people of God - the pious and humble portion of the
Jewish nation. Though the great mass of the people were corrupted, yet
there were always some who were the humble and devoted people of God.
Compare [Rom 11:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#003.md). So it will be
always. Though the great mass of teachers may be corrupt, yet the true
friends of God will mourn in secret places, and refuse to "listen to the
instruction that causeth to err."

[John 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 10:9</span></span>

By me - By my instruction and merits.

Shall be saved - See [Joh 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024.md).

Shall go in and out ... - This is language applied, commonly to flocks.
It meant that he shall be well supplied, and defended, and led "beside
the still waters of salvation."

[John 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 10:10</span></span>

The thief cometh not ... - The thief has no other design in coming but
to plunder. So false teachers have no other end in view but to enrich or
aggrandize themselves.

I am come that they might have life - See the notes at [Joh
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024.md).

Might have it more abundantly - Literally, that they may have abundance,
or that which abounds. The word denotes that which is not absolutely
essential to life, but which is superadded to make life happy. They
shall not merely have life - simple, bare existence - but they shall
have all those superadded things which are needful to make that life
eminently blessed and happy. It would be vast mercy to keep men merely
from annihilation or hell; but Jesus will give them eternal joy, peace,
the society of the blessed, and all those exalted means of felicity
which are prepared for them in the world of glory.

[John 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 10:11</span></span>

The good shepherd - The faithful and true shepherd, willing to do all
that is necessary to defend and save the flock.

Giveth his life - A shepherd that regarded his flock would hazard his
own life to defend them. When the wolf comes, he would still remain to
protect them. To give his life, here, means the same as not to fly, or
to forsake his flock; to be willing to expose his life, if necessary, to
defend them. Compare [Jdg 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#003.md); "I put
my life in my hands and passed over," etc.; [Sa1
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#005.md); [Sa1
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#021.md). See [Joh
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#015.md). The Messiah was often predicted
under the character of a shepherd.

[John 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 10:12</span></span>

A hireling - A man employed to take care of the sheep, to whom wages is
paid. As he does not own the sheep, and guards them merely for pay,
rather than risk his life he would leave the flock to the ravages of
wild beasts. The word translated "hireling" is often employed in a good
sense; but here it denotes one who is unfaithful to his trust; and
especially those ministers who preach only for support, and who are
unwilling to encounter any danger or to practice any self-denial for the
welfare of the church of God. They are those who have no boldness in the
cause of their Master, but who, rather than lose their reputation or
place, would see the church corrupted and wasted by its spiritual foes.

Whose own the sheep are not - Who does not own the sheep.

[John 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 10:13</span></span>

Because he is a hireling - Because he regards only his wages. He feels
no special interest in the flock.

[John 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 10:14</span></span>

Know my sheep - Know my people, or my church. The word "know" here is
used in the sense of affectionate regard or love. It implies such a
knowledge of their wants, their dangers, and their characters, as to
result in a deep interest in their welfare. Thus the word "knoweth," in
[Joh 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#015.md), is in [Joh
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017.md) explained by the word "loveth."
Jesus knows the hearts, the dangers, and the wants of his people, and
his kindness as their shepherd prompts him to defend and aid them.

Am known of mine - That is, he is known and loved as their Saviour and
Friend. They have seen their sins, and dangers: and wants; they have
felt their need of a Saviour; they have come to him, and they have found
him and his doctrines to be such as they need, and they have loved him.
And as a flock follows and obeys its kind shepherd, so they follow and
obey him who leads them beside the still waters, and makes them to lie
down in green pastures.

[John 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 10:15</span></span>

As the Father knoweth me ... - See the [Mat
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027.md) note; also [Luk
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#022.md) note.

I lay down my life for the sheep - That is, I give my life as an atoning
sacrifice for their sins. I die in their place, to redeem them from sin,
and danger, and death. See [Joh
10:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017.md).

[John 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 10:16</span></span>

Other sheep - There are others who shall be members of my redeemed
church.

I have - This does not imply that they were then his friends, but that
they would be. There were others whom it was his purpose and intention
to call to the blessings of the gospel and salvation. The purpose was so
sure, and the fact that they would believe on him so certain, that he
could use the present tense as if they were already his own. This
purpose was in accordance with the promise [Isa
53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011.md), "He shall see of the travail of
his soul, and shall be satisfied." An instance of a parallel expression
occurs in [Act 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#010.md), "I have much
people in this city" (Corinth). That is, it was the purpose of God to
bless the preaching of Paul, and give him many souls as the seals of his
ministry. It was so certain that they would believe in the Saviour, that
it could be spoken of as if it were already done. This certainty could
have existed only in consequence of the intention of God that it should
be so. It did not consist in any disposition to embrace the gospel which
was foreseen, for they were the most corrupt and licentious people of
antiquity, and it must have been because God meant that it should be so.
Declarations like these are full proof that God has a plan in regard to
the salvation of men, and that the number is known and determined by
him. Learn:

1\. that it is not a question of chance or uncertainty whether men shall
be saved.

2\. that there is encouragement for preaching the gospel. There are
those whom God means to save, and if he intends to do it it will be
done.

Not of this fold - Not Jews. This is a distinct intimation that the
gospel was to be preached to the Gentiles a doctrine extremely offensive
to the Jews. This prediction of the Saviour has been strikingly
confirmed in the conversion of millions of the Gentiles to the gospel.

Them also I must bring - Bring into the church and kingdom of heaven.
This was to be done, not by his personal ministry, but by the labor of
his apostles and other ministers.

One fold - One church; there shall be no distinction, no special
national privileges. The partition between the Jews and the Gentiles
shall be broken down, and there shall be no pre-eminence of rank or
honor, [Eph 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014.md); "Christ hath broken
down the middle wall of partition between us;" [Rom
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#012.md); "There is no difference between
the Jew and the Greek."

One shepherd - That is, the Lord Jesus - the common Saviour, deliverer,
and friend of all true believers, in whatever land they were born and
whatever tongue they may speak. This shows that Christians of all
denominations and countries should feel that they are one redeemed by
the same blood, and going to the same eternal home. Compare [Co1
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#013.md); [Gal
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028.md); [Col
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#011.md); [Act
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026.md).

[John 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 10:17</span></span>

I lay down my life - I give myself to die for my people, in Jewish and
pagan lands. I offer myself a sacrifice to show the willingness of my
Father to save them; to provide an atonement, and thus to open the way
for their salvation. This proves that the salvation of man was an object
dear to God, and that it was a source of special gratification to him
that his Son was willing to lay down his life to accomplish his great
purposes of benevolence.

That I might take it again - Be raised up from the dead, and glorified,
and still carry on the work of redemption. See this same sentiment
sublimely expressed in [Phi 2:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#005.md).

[John 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 10:18</span></span>

No man taketh it from me - That is, no one could take it by force, or
unless I was willing to yield myself into his hands. He had power to
preserve his life, as he showed by so often escaping from the Pharisees;
he voluntarily went up to Jerusalem, knowing that he would die; he knew
the approach of Judas to betray him; and he expressly told Pilate at his
bar that he could have no power at all against him except it were given
him by his Father, [Joh 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#011.md). Jesus
had a right to lay down his life for the good of people. The patriot
dies for his country on the field of battle; the merchant exposes his
life for gain; and the Son of God had a right to put himself in the way
of danger and of death, when a dying world needed such an atoning
sacrifice. This shows the special love of Jesus. His death was
voluntary. His coming was voluntary - the fruit of love. His death was
the fruit of love. He was permitted to choose the time and mode of his
death. He did. He chose the most painful, lingering, ignominious manner
of death then known to man, and thus showed his love.

I have power - This word often means authority. It includes all
necessary power in the case, and the commission or authority of his
Father to do it.

Power to take it again - This shows that he was divine. A dead man has
no power to raise himself from the grave. And as Jesus had this power
after he was deceased, it proves that there was some other nature than
that which had expired, to which the term "I" might be still applied.
None but God can raise the dead; and as Jesus had this power over his
own body it proves that he was divine.

This commandment - My Father has appointed this, and commissioned me to
do it.

[John 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 10:20</span></span>

He hath a devil - [Joh 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#020.md).

Is mad - Is deranged, or a maniac. His words are incoherent and
unintelligible.

[John 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 10:21</span></span>

Not the words ... - His words are sober, grave, pious, full of wisdom.
The preaching of Jesus always produced effect. It made bitter enemies or
decided friends. So will all faithful preaching. It is not the fault of
the gospel that there are divisions, but of the unbelief and mad
passions of men.

[John 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 10:22</span></span>

The feast of the dedication - Literally, the feast of the renewing, or
of the renovation. This feast was instituted by Judas Maccabaeus, in the
year 164 b.c. The temple and city were taken by Antiochus Epiphanes in
the year 167 b.c. He killed 40,000 inhabitants, and sold 40,000 more as
slaves. In addition to this, he sacrificed a sow on the altar of
burnt-offerings, and a broth being made of this, he sprinkled it all
over the temple. The city and temple were recovered three years
afterward by Judas Maccabaeus, and the temple was purified with great
pomp and solemnity. The ceremony of purification continued through eight
days, during which Judas presented magnificent victims, and celebrated
the praise of God with hymns and psalms (Josephus, Ant., b. xii. ch.
11). "They decked, also, the forefront of the temple with crowns of gold
and with shields, and the gates and chambers they renewed and hanged
doors upon them:" 1 Macc. 4:52-59. On this account it was called the
feast of renovation or dedication. Josephus calls it the feast of
lights, because the city was illuminated, as expressive of joy. The
feast began on the 25th day of Chisleu, answering to the fifteenth day
of December. The festival continued for eight days, with continued
demonstrations of joy.

It was winter - The feast was celebrated in the winter. The word here
implies that it was cold and inclement, and it is given as a reason why
he walked in Solomon's porch.

[John 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 10:23</span></span>

Solomon's porch - The porch or covered way on the east of the temple.
See the notes at [Mat 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012.md).

[John 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 10:24</span></span>

Tell us plainly - The Messiah was predicted as a shepherd. Jesus had
applied that prediction to himself. They supposed that that was an
evidence that he claimed to be the Messiah. He also performed miracles,
which they considered as evidence that he was the Christ, [Joh
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#031.md). Yet the rulers made a
difficulty. They alleged that he was from Galilee, and that the Messiah
could not come from thence, [Joh 7:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#052.md).
He was poor and despised. He came contrary to the common expectation. A
splendid prince and conqueror had been expected. In this perplexity they
came to him for a plain and positive declaration that he was the
Messiah.

[John 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 10:25</span></span>

I told you - It is not recorded that Jesus had told them in so many
words that he was the Christ, but he had used expressions designed to
convey the same truth, and which many of them understood as claiming to
be the Messiah. See [Joh 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019.md); [Joh
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#036.md), [Joh
8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056.md); [Joh
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001.md). The expression "the Son of God"
they understood to be equivalent to the Messiah. This he had often used
of himself in a sense not to be mistaken.

The works - The miracles, such as restoring the blind, curing the sick,
etc.

In my Father's name - By the power and command of God. Jesus was either
the Messiah or an impostor. The Pharisees charged him with being the
latter [Mat 26:60-61](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#060.md); [Mat
27:63](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#063.md); [Joh
18:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#036.md); but God would not give such
power to an impostor. The power of working miracles is an attestation of
God to what is taught. See the notes at [Mat
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024.md).

[John 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 10:26</span></span>

Are not of my sheep - Are not my people, my followers. You do not
possess the spirit of meek and humble disciples. Were it not for pride,
and prejudice, and vainglory for your false notions of the Messiah, and
from a determination not to believe, you would have learned from my
declarations and works that I am the Christ.

As I said unto you - Compare [Joh
8:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#047.md).

[John 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 10:27</span></span>

My sheep - My church, my people, those who have the true spirit of my
followers. The name is given to his people because it was an
illustration which would be well understood in a country abounding in
flocks. There is also a striking resemblance, which he proceeds to
state, between them.

Hear my voice - See [Joh 10:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#003.md).
Applied to Christians, it means that they hear and obey his
commandments.

I know them - See [Joh 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#014.md).They
follow me - A flock follows its shepherd to pastures and streams, [Joh
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#003.md). Christians not only obey Christ,
but they imitate him; they go where his Spirit and providence lead them;
they yield themselves to his guidance, and seek to be led by him. When
Jesus was upon earth many of his disciples followed or attended him from
place to place. Hence, Christians are called his followers, and in [Rev
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004.md) they are described as "they that
follow the Lamb."

[John 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 10:28</span></span>

I give unto them eternal life - See [Joh
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024.md).

Shall never perish - To perish here means to be destroyed, or to be
punished in hell. [Mat 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028.md); "which
is able to destroy (the same word) both soul and body in hell." [Mat
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#014.md); "it is not the will of your
Father which is in heaven that one of these little ones should perish."
[Joh 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#015.md); "that whosoever believeth
in him should not perish" [Rom 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012.md);
They who have sinned without law shall also perish without law" [Joh
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012.md); [Co1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#018.md). In all these places the word
refers to future punishment, and the declaration of the Saviour is that
his followers, his true disciples, shall never be cast away. The
original is expressed with remarkable strength: "They shall not be
destroyed forever." Syriac: "They shall not perish to eternity." This is
spoken of all Christians - that is, of all who ever possess the
character of true followers of Christ, and who can be called his flock.

Shall any - The word "any" refers to any power that might attempt it. It
will apply either to men or to devils. It is an affirmation that no man,
however eloquent in error, or persuasive in infidelity, or cunning: in
argument, or mighty in rank; and that no devil with all his malice,
power, cunning, or allurements, shall be able to pluck them from his
hand,

Pluck them - In the original to rob; to seize and bear away as a robber
does his prey. Jesus holds them so secure and so certainly that no foe
can surprise him as a robber does, or overcome him by force.

My hand - The hand is that by which we hold or secure an object. It
means that Jesus has them safely in his own care and keeping. Compare
[Rom 8:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#038.md).

[John 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 10:29</span></span>

Which gave them me - See [Joh 6:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#037.md).

Is greater - Is more powerful.

Than all - Than all others - men, angels, devils. The word includes
everything - everything that could attempt to pluck them away from God;
in other words, it means that God is supreme. It implies, further, that
God will keep them, and will so control all other beings and things that
they shall be safe.

None is able - None has power to do it. In these two verses we are
taught the following important truths:

1\. that Christians are given by God the Father to Christ.

2\. that Jesus gives to them eternal life, or procures by his death and
intercession, and imparts to them by his Spirit, that religion which
shall result in eternal life.

3\. that both the Father and the Son are pledged to keep them so that
they shall never fall away and perish. It would be impossible for any
language to teach more explicitly that the saints will persevere.

4\. that there is no power in man or devils to defeat the purpose of the
Redeemer to save his people. We also see our safety, if we truly,
humbly, cordially, and daily commit ourselves to God the Saviour. In no
other way can we have evidence that we are his people than by such a
persevering resignation of ourselves to him, to obey his law, and to
follow him through evil report or good report. If we do that we are
safe. If we do not that we have no evidence of piety, and are not,
cannot be safe.

[John 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 10:30</span></span>

I and my Father are one - The word translated "one" is not in the
masculine, but in the neuter gender. It expresses union, but not the
precise nature of the union. It may express any union, and the
particular kind intended is to be inferred from the connection. In the
previous verse he had said that he and his Father were united in the
same object that is, in redeeming and preserving his people. It was this
that gave occasion for this remark. Many interpreters have understood
this as referring to union of design and of plan. The words may bear
this construction. In this way they were understood by Erasmus, Calvin,
Bucer, and others. Most of the Christian fathers understood them,
however, as referring to the oneness or unity of nature between the
Father and the Son; and that this was the design of Christ appears
probable from the following considerations:

1\. The question in debate was (not about his being united with the
Father in plan and counsel, but in power. He affirmed that he was able
to rescue and keep his people from all enemies, or that he had power
superior to men and devils that is, that he had supreme power over all
creation. He affirmed the same of his Father. In this, therefore, they
were united. But this was an attribute only of God, and they thus
understood him as claiming equality to God in regard to omnipotence.

2\. The Jews understood him as affirming his equality with God, for they
took up stones to punish him for blasphemy [Joh
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#031.md), [Joh
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#033.md), and they said to him that they
understood him as affirming that he was God, [Joh
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#033.md).

3\. Jesus did not deny that it was his intention to be so understood.
See the notes at [Joh 10:34-37](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034.md).

4\. He immediately made another declaration implying the same thing,
leaving the same impression, and which they attempted to punish in the
same manner, [Joh 10:37-39](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#037.md). If Jesus
had not intended so to be understood, it cannot be easily reconciled
with moral honesty that he did not distinctly disavow that such was his
intention. The Jews were well acquainted with their own language. They
understood him in this manner, and he left this impression on their
minds.

[John 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 10:31</span></span>

The Jews took up stones - Stoning was the punishment of a blasphemer,
[Lev 24:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#014.md). They considered him
guilty of blasphemy because he made himself equal with God, [Joh
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#033.md).

Again - They had before plotted against his life [Joh
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#016.md), [Joh
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#018.md), and once at least they had taken
up stones to destroy him, [Joh 8:59](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#059.md).

[John 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 10:32</span></span>

Many good works - Many miracles of benevolence healing the sick, etc.
His miracles were good works, as they tended to promote the happiness of
men, and were proofs of his benevolence. He had performed no other works
than those of benevolence; he knew that they could charge him with no
other, and he confidently appealed to them as witnesses of that. Happy
would it be if all, when they are opposed and persecuted, could appeal
even to their persecutors in proof of their own innocence.

[John 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 10:33</span></span>

For blasphemy - See the notes at [Mat
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#003.md).

Makest thyself God - See the notes at [Joh
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#018.md). This shows how they understood
what he had said.

Makest thyself - Dost claim to be God, or thy language implies this.

[John 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 10:34</span></span>

Jesus answered them - The answer of Jesus consists of two parts. The
first [Joh 10:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034.md) shows that they
ought not to object to his use of the word God, even if he were no more
than a man. The second [Joh 10:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#037.md)
repeats substantially what he had before said, left the same impression,
and in proof of it he appealed to his works.

[Joh 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034.md)

In your law - [Psa 82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006.md). The word
"law" here, is used to include the Old Testament.

I said - The Psalmist said, or God said by the Psalmist.

Ye are gods - This was said of magistrates on account of the dignity and
honor of their office, and it shows that the Hebrew word translated
"god," אלהים ̀elohiym, in that place might be applied to man. Such a use
of the word is, however, rare. See instances in [Exo
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001.md); [Exo
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#016.md).

[Joh 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#035.md)

Unto whom the word of God came - That is, who were his servants, or who
received their dignity and honor only because the law of God was
intrusted to them. "The Word of God" here means the command of God; his
commission to them to do justice.

The scripture cannot be broken - See [Mat
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#019.md). The authority of the Scripture
is final; it cannot be set aside. The meaning is, "If, therefore, the
Scripture uses the word "god" אלהים ̀elohiym as applied to magistrates,
it settles the question that it is right to apply the term to those in
office and authority. If applied to them, it may be to others in similar
offices. It cannot, therefore, be blasphemy to use this word as
applicable to a personage so much more exalted than mere magistrates as
the Messiah."

[Joh 10:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#036.md)

Whom the Father hath sanctified - The word "sanctify" with us means to
make holy; but this is not its meaning here, for the Son of God was
always holy. The original word means to set apart from a common to a
sacred use; to devote to a sacred purpose, and to designate or
consecrate to a holy office. This is the meaning here. God has
consecrated or appointed his Son to be his Messenger or Messiah to
mankind. See [Exo 28:41](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#041.md); [Exo
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#001.md), [Exo
29:44](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#044.md); [Lev
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#030.md).

And sent into the world - As the Messiah, an office far more exalted
than that of magistrates.

I am the Son of God - This the Jews evidently understood as the same as
saying that he was equal with God. This expression he had often applied
to himself. The meaning of this place may be thus expressed: "You charge
me with blasphemy. The foundation of that charge is the use of the name
God, or the Son of God, applied to myself; yet that same term is applied
in the Scriptures to magistrates. The use of it there shows that it is
right to apply it to those who sustain important offices (see the notes
of [Joh 10:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034).md). And especially you,
Jews, ought not to attempt to found a charge of blasphemy on the
application of a word to the Messiah which in your own Scriptures is
applied to all magistrates. And we may remark here:

1\. That Jesus did not deny that he meant to apply the term to himself.

2\. He did not deny that it was properly applied to him.

3\. He did not deny that it implied that he was God. He affirmed only
that they were inconsistent, and were not authorized to bring a charge
of blasphemy for the application of the name to himself.

[Joh 10:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#037.md)

The works of my Father - The very works that my Father does. See [Joh
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017.md); "My Father worketh hitherto, and
I work." See the note on that place. The works of his Father are those
which God only can do. As Jesus did them, it shows that the name "Son of
God," implying equality with God, was properly applied to him. This
shows conclusively that he meant to be understood as claiming to be
equal with God. So the Jews naturally understood him [Joh
10:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#039.md), and they were left with this
impression on their minds.

[Joh 10:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#038.md)

Believe the works - Though you do not credit me, yet consider my works,
for they prove that I came from God. No one could do them unless he was
sent of God.

Father is in me ... - Most intimately connected. See [Joh
5:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#036.md). This expression denotes most
intimate union - such as can exist in no other case. See [Mat
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027.md); Notes, [Joh
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021.md).

[John 10:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 10:39</span></span>

Sought again to take him - They evidently understood him as still
claiming equality with God, and under this impression Jesus left them.
Nor can it be doubted that he intended to leave them with this
impression; and if so, then he is divine.

He escaped - See [Joh 8:59](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#059.md).

[John 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">joh 10:40</span></span>

Where John at first baptized - At Bethabara, or Bethany, [Joh
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#028.md).

[John 10:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 10:41</span></span>

No miracle - He did not confirm his mission by working miracles, but he
showed that he was a prophet by foretelling the character and success of
Jesus. Either miracle or prophecy is conclusive proof of a divine
mission, for no man can foretell a future event, or work a miracle,
except by the special aid of God. It may be remarked that the people of
that place were properly prepared by the ministry of John for the
preaching of Jesus. The persecution of the Jews was the occasion of his
going there, and thus the wrath of man was made to praise him. It has
commonly happened that the opposition of the wicked has resulted in the
increased success of the cause which they have persecuted. God takes the
wise in their own craftiness, and brings glory to himself and salvation
to sinners out of the pride, and passions, and rage of wicked men.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 11](joh011.md)

</div>
