<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh016)  [Next](joh018.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001.md)

[John 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 17:1</span></span>

These words - The words addressed to them in the preceding chapters.
They were proceeding to the garden of Gethsemane. It adds much to the
interest of this prayer that it was offered in the stillness of the
night, in the open air, and in the especially tender circumstances in
which Jesus and his apostles were. It is the longest prayer recorded in
the New Testament. It was offered on the most tender and solemn occasion
that has ever occurred in our world, and it is perhaps the most sublime
composition to be found anywhere. Jesus was about to die. Having
expressed his love to his disciples, and made known to them his last
desires, he now commends them to the protection and blessing of the God
of grace. This prayer is moreover a specimen of the manner of his
intercession, and evinces the interest which he felt in behalf of all
who should become his followers in all ages of the world.

Lifted up his eyes - This was the common attitude of prayer. Compare
[Luk 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013.md).

The hour is come - That is, the appointed time for his sufferings and
death. Compare the notes at [Joh
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027.md).

Glorify thy Son - Honor thy Son. See [Joh
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#004.md). Give to the world demonstration
that I am thy Son. So sustain me, and so manifest thy power in my death,
resurrection, and ascension, as to afford indubitable evidence that I am
the Son of God.

That thy Son also may glorify thee - This refers clearly to the
manifestation of the honor of God which would be made by the spread of
the gospel among men, [Joh 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002.md). Jesus
prayed that God would so honor him in his death that striking proof
might be furnished that he was the Messiah, and men thus be brought to
honor God. By his death the law, the truth, and the mercy of God were
honored. By the spread of his gospel and the conversion of sinners; by
all that Christ will do, now that he is glorified, to spread his gospel,
God will be honored. The conversion of a single sinner honors God; a
revival of religion is an eminent means of promoting his honor; and the
spread of the gospel among all nations shall yet do more than all other
things to promote the honor of God among men. Whatever honors the
Saviour honors God. Just as he is exalted in view of the mind, so will
God be honored and obeyed.

[John 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 17:2</span></span>

As thou hast given him power - It was on the ground of this power given
to Christ that the apostles were commanded to go and teach all nations.
See the notes at [Mat 28:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018.md).

All flesh - All men, [Mat 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#022.md); [Luk
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#006.md).

That he should give eternal life - See the notes at [Joh
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024.md).

To as many as thou hast given him - See the notes at [Joh
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016.md); [Joh
6:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#037.md). To all on whom the Father has
purposed to bestow the blessings of redemption through his Son. God has
a plan in all he does, extending to men as well as to other objects. One
part of his plan was that the atonement of Christ should not be in vain.
Hence he promised him that he should see of the travail of his soul and
should be satisfied [Isa 53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011.md); and
hence the Saviour had the assurance that the Father had given him a
portion of the human family, and would apply this great work to them. It
is to be observed here that the Saviour in this prayer makes an
important distinction between "all flesh" and those who were "given to
him." He has power over all. He can control, direct, restrain them.
Wicked men are so far under his universal dominion, and so far
restrained by his power, that they will not be able to prevent his
bestowing redemption on those were given him that is, all who will
believe on him. Long ago, if they had been able, they would have
banished religion from the world; but they are under the power of
Christ, and it is his purpose that there shall be "a seed to serve him,"
and that "the gates of hell shall not prevail" against his church. Men
who oppose the gospel should therefore feel that they cannot prevent the
salvation of Christians, and should be alarmed lest they be found
"fighting against God."

[John 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 17:3</span></span>

This is life eternal - This is the source of eternal life; or it is in
this manner that it is to be obtained. The knowledge of God and of his
Son Jesus Christ is itself a source of unspeakable and eternal joy.
Compare [Joh 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025.md); [Joh
6:63](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#063.md); [Joh
12:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#050.md).

Might know thee - The word "know" here, as in other places, expresses
more than a mere speculative acquaintance with the character and
perfections of God. "It includes all the impressions on the mind and
life which a just view of God and of the Saviour is fitted to produce."
It includes, of course, love, reverence, obedience, honor, gratitude,
supreme affection. "To know God as he is" is to know and regard him as a
lawgiver, a sovereign, a parent, a friend. It is to yield the whole soul
to him, and strive to obey his law.

The only true God - The only God, in opposition to all false gods. What
is said here is in opposition to idols, not to Jesus himself, who, in
[Jo1 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020.md), is called "the true God and
eternal life."

And Jesus Christ - To know Jesus Christ is to have a practical
impression of him as he is - that is, to suffer his character and work
to make their due impression on the heart and life. Simply to have heard
that there is a Saviour is not to know it. To have been taught in
childhood and trained up in the belief of it is not to know it. To know
him is to have a just, practical view of him in all his perfections as
God and man; as a mediator; as a prophet, a priest, and a king. It is to
feel our need of such a Saviour, to see that we are sinners, and to
yield the whole soul to him, knowing that he is a Saviour suited to our
needs, and that in his hands our souls are safe. Compare [Eph
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#019.md); [Tit
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#016.md); [Phi
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010.md); [Jo1
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020.md). In this verse is contained the
sum and essence of the Christian religion, as it is distinguished from
all the schemes of idolatry and philosophy, and all the false plans on
which men have sought to obtain eternal life. The Gentiles worshipped
many gods; the Christian worships one - the living and the true God; the
Jew, the Deist, the Muslim, the Socinian, profess to acknowledge one
God, without any atoning sacrifice and Mediator; the true Christian
approaches him through the great Mediator, equal with the Father, who
for us became incarnate, and died that he might reconcile us to God.

[John 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 17:4</span></span>

Have glorified thee - In my instructions and life. See his discourses
everywhere, the whole tendency of which is to put honor on God.

I have finished the work - Compare [Joh
19:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#030.md). When he says "I have finished,"
he probably means to include also his death. All the preparations for
that death were made. He had preached to the Jews; he had given them
full proof that he was the Messiah; he had collected his disciples; he
had taught them the nature of his religion; he had given them his
parting counsel, and there was nothing remaining to be done but to
return to God. We see here that Jesus was careful that his great and
important work should be done before his dying hour. He did not postpone
it to be performed just as he was leaving the world. So completely had
he done his work, that even before his death he could I say, "I have
finished the work." How happy would it be if men would imitate his
example, and not leave their great work of life to be done on a dying
bed? Christians should have their work accomplished, and when that hour
approaches, have nothing to do but to die, and return to their Father in
heaven.

[John 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 17:5</span></span>

With thine own self - In heaven, granting me a participation of the same
honor which the Father has. He had just said that he had glorified God
on the earth, he now prays that God would glorify him in heaven.

With the glory - With the honor. This word also includes the notion of
happiness, or everything which could render the condition blessed.

Before the world was - There could not be a more distinct and clear
declaration of the pre-existence of Christ than this. It means before
the creation of the world; before there was any world. Of course, the
speaker here must have existed then, and this is equivalent to saying
that he existed from eternity. See [Joh
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md); [Joh
6:62](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#062.md); [Joh
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013.md); [Joh
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028.md). The glory which he had then was
that which was proper to the Son of God, represented by the expression
"being in the bosom of the Father" [Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018.md), denoting intimacy, friendship,
united felicity. The Son of God, by becoming incarnate, is represented
as "humbling himself" (Greek: he "emptied himself"), [Phi
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008.md). He laid aside for a time the
external aspect of honor, and consented to become despised, and to
assume the form of a servant. He now prays that God would raise him up
to the dignity and honor which he had before his incarnation. This is
the state to which he is now exalted, with the additional honor of
having made atonement for sin, and having opened the way to save a race
of rebels from eternal death. The lowest condition on earth is
frequently connected with the highest honors of heaven. Man looks on the
outward appearance. God looks to him that is humble and of a contrite
spirit.

[John 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 17:6</span></span>

Have manifested thy name - The word "name" here includes the attributes
or character of God. Jesus had made known his character, his law, his
will, his plan of mercy - or, in other words, he had revealed God to
them. The word "name" is often used to designate the person, [Joh
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#021.md); [Mat
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#022.md); [Rom
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#024.md); [Ti1
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#001.md).

Which thou gavest me - God gave them to him in his purpose. He gave them
by his providence. He so ordered affairs that they heard him preach and
saw his miracles; and he gave them by disposing them to follow him when
he called them.

Thine they were - All men are God's by creation and by preservation, and
he has a right to do with them as seemeth good in his sight. These men
he chose to designate to be the apostles of the Saviour; and he
committed them to him to be taught, and then commissioned them to carry
his gospel, though amid persecutions, to the ends of the world. God has
a right to the services of all; and he has a right to appoint us to any
labor, however humble, or hazardous, or wearisome, where we may promote
his glory and honor his name.

[John 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 17:7</span></span>

They have known - They have been taught that and have believed it.

Hast given me - This refers, doubtless, to the doctrine of Christ, [Joh
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#008.md). They are assured that all my
instructions are of God.

[John 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 17:8</span></span>

The words - The doctrines. Christ often represented himself as
instructed and sent to teach certain great truths to men. Those he
taught, and no others. See the notes at [Joh
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#030.md).

[John 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 17:9</span></span>

I pray for them - In view of their dangers and trials, he sought the
protection and blessing of God on them. His prayer was always answered.

Not for the world - The term world here, as elsewhere, refers to wicked,
rebellious, vicious men. The meaning of this expression here seems to be
this: Jesus is praying for his disciples. As a reason why God should
bless them, he says that they were not of the world; that they had been
taken out of the world; that they belonged unto God. The petition was
not offered for wicked, perverse, rebellious men, but for those who were
the friends of God and were disposed to receive his favors. This
passage, then, settles nothing about the question whether Christ prayed
for sinners. He then prayed for his disciples, who were not those who
hated him and disregarded his favors. He afterward extended the prayer
for all who should become Christians, [Joh
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#020.md). When on the cross he prayed for
his crucifiers and murderers, [Luk
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034.md).

For they are thine - This is urged as a reason why God should protect
and guide them. His honor was concerned in keeping them; and we may
always "fill our mouths with" such "arguments" when we come before God,
and plead that his honor will be advanced by keeping us from evil, and
granting us all needful grace.

I am glorified in them - I am honored by their preaching and lives. The
sense of this passage is, "Those who are my disciples are thine. That
which promotes my honor will also promote thine. I pray, therefore, that
they may have needful grace to honor my gospel, and to proclaim it among
men."

[John 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 17:11</span></span>

I am no more in the world - I have finished my work among men, and am
about to leave the world. See [Joh
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#004.md).

These are in the world - They will be among wicked men and malignant
foes. They will be subject to trials and persecutions. They will need
the same protection which I could give them if I were with them.

Keep - Preserve, defend, sustain them in trials, and save them from
apostasy.

Through thine own name - Our translators seem to have understood this
expression as meaning "keep by thy power," but this probably is not its
meaning. It is literally "keep in thy name." And if the term name be
taken to denote God himself and his perfections (see the note at [Joh
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#006).md), it means "keep in the knowledge
of thyself. Preserve them in obedience to thee and to thy cause. Suffer
them not to fall away from thee and to become apostates."

That they may be one - That they may be united.

As we are - This refers not to a union of nature, but of feeling, plan,
purpose. Any other union between Christians is impossible; but a union
of affection is what the Saviour sought, and this he desired might be so
strong as to be an illustration of the unchanging love between the
Father and the Son. See [Joh 17:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021.md).

[John 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 17:12</span></span>

While I was with them in the world - While I was engaged with them among
other men - surrounded by the people and the temptations of the world.
Jesus had now finished his work among the men of the world, and was
performing his last offices with his disciples.

I kept them - By my example, instructions, and miracles. I preserved
them from apostasy.

In thy name - In the knowledge and worship of thee. See [Joh
17:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#006.md).

Those that thou gavest me ... - The word "gavest" is evidently used by
the Saviour to denote not only to give to him to be his real followers,
but also as apostles. It is used here, probably, in the sense of giving
as apostles. God had so ordered it by his providence that they had been
given to him to be his apostles and followers; but the terms "thou
gavest me" do not of necessity prove that they were true believers. Of
Judas Jesus knew that he was a deceiver and a devil, [Joh
6:70](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#070.md); "Have not I chosen you twelve,
and one of you is a devil?" Judas is there represented as having been
chosen by the Saviour to the apostleship, and this is equivalent to
saying that he was given to him for this work; yet at the same time he
knew his character, and understood that he had never been renewed.

None of them - None of those chosen to the apostolic office.

But the son of perdition - See the notes at [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001.md). The term son was given by the
Hebrews to those who possessed the character described by the word or
name following. Thus, sons of Belial - those who possessed his
character; children of wisdom those who were wise, [Mat
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#019.md). Thus Judas is called a son of
perdition because he had the character of a destroyer. He was a traitor
and a murderer. And this shows that he who knew the heart regarded his
character as that of a wicked man one whose appropriate name was that of
a son of perdition.

That the scripture ... - See the notes at [Joh
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018.md). Compare [Psa
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#009.md).

[John 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 17:13</span></span>

My joy fulfilled ... - See the notes at [Joh
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#011.md). The expression "my joy here
probably refers to the joy of the apostles respecting the Saviour - the
joy which would result from his resurrection, ascension, and
intercession in heaven.

[John 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 17:14</span></span>

I have given them ... - See [Joh 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#008.md).

The world hath hated them ... - [Joh
15:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#018.md).

[John 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 17:15</span></span>

That thou shouldest take them out of the world - Though they were going
into trials and persecutions, yet Jesus did not pray that they might be
removed soon from them. It was better that they should endure them, and
thus spread abroad the knowledge of his name. It would be easy for God
to remove his people at once to heaven, but it is better for them to
remain, and show the power of religion in supporting the soul in the
midst of trial, and to spread his gospel among men.

Shouldest keep them from the evil - This may mean either from the evil
one that is, the devil, or from evil in general that is, from apostasy,
from sinking in temptation. Preserve them from that evil, or give them
such grace that they may endure all trials and be sustained amid them.
See the notes at [Mat 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#013.md). It matters
little how long we are in this world if we are kept in this manner.

[John 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 17:16</span></span>

See [Joh 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#019.md).

[John 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 17:17</span></span>

Sanctify them - This word means to render pure, or to cleanse from sins,
[Th1 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023.md); [Co1
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011.md). Sanctification in the heart of a
Christian is progressive. It consists in his becoming more like God and
less attached to the world; in his getting the ascendency over evil
thoughts, and passions, and impure desires; and in his becoming more and
more weaned from earthly objects, and attached to those things which are
unseen and eternal. The word also means "to consecrate, to set apart to
a holy office or purpose." See [Joh
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019.md); also the notes at [Joh
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#036.md). When Jesus prayed here that God
would sanctify them, he probably included both these ideas, that they
might be made personally more holy, and might be truly consecrated to
God as the ministers of his religion. Ministers of the gospel will be
really devoted to the service of God just in proportion as they are
personally pure.

Through thy truth - Truth is a representation of things as they are. The
Saviour prayed that through those just views of God and of themselves
they might be made holy. To see things as they are is to see God to be
infinitely lovely and pure; his commands to be reasonable and just;
heaven to be holy and desirable; his service to be easy, and religion
pleasant, and sin odious; to see that life is short, that death is near;
that the pride, pomp, pleasures, wealth, and honors of this world are of
little value, and that it is of infinite importance to be prepared to
enter on the eternal state of being. He that sees all this, or that
looks on things as they are, will desire to be holy. He will make it his
great object to live near to God and to glorify his name. In the
sanctification of the soul God makes use of all truth, or of everything
fitted to make a representation of things as they are to the mind. His
Word states that and no more; His Spirit and His Providence do it. The
earth and the heavens, the seasons, the sunshine and the rain, are all
fitted to teach us his goodness and power, and lead us to him. His daily
mercies tend to the same end, and afflictions have the same design. Our
own sickness teaches us that we are soon to die. The death of a friend
teaches us the instability of all earthly comforts, and the necessity of
seeking better joys. All these things are fitted to make just
representations to the mind, and thus to sanctify the soul. As the
Christian is constantly amid these objects, so he should be constantly
growing in grace, and daily and hourly gaining new and deeper
impressions of the great truths of religion.

Thy word is truth - All that thou hast spoken - that is, all that is
contained in the Bible. All the commands and promises of God; His
representations of His own character and that of man; His account of the
mission and death of His Son; of the grave, the resurrection, judgment,
and eternity, all tend to represent things as they are, and are thus
fitted to sanctify the soul. We have here also the testimony of the
Saviour that the revelation which God has given is true. All that God
has spoken is true, and the Christian should rejoice and the sinner
should tremble. See [Psa 19:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007.md).

[John 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 17:19</span></span>

I sanctify myself - I consecrate myself exclusively to the service of
God. The word "sanctify" does not refer here to personal sanctification,
for he had no sin, but to setting himself apart entirely to the work of
redemption.

That they also ... -

1\. That they might have an example of the proper manner of laboring in
the ministry, and might learn of me how to discharge its duties.
Ministers will understand their work best when they most faithfully
study the example of their great model, the Son of God.

2\. That they might be made pure by the effect of my sanctifying myself
- that is, that they might be made pure by the shedding of that blood
which cleanses from all sin. By this only can men be made holy; and it
was because the Saviour so sanctified himself, or set himself to this
work so unreservedly as to shed his own blood, that any soul can be made
pure and fit for the kingdom of God.

[John 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 17:20</span></span>

Neither pray I for these alone ... - Not for the apostles only, but for
all who shall be converted under the preaching of the gospel. They will
all need similar grace and be exposed to similar trials. It is a matter
of unspeakable joy that each Christian, however humble or unknown to men
however poor, unlearned, or despised, can reflect that he was remembered
in prayer by "him whom God heareth always." We value the prayers of
pious friends. How much more should we value this petition of the Son of
God! To that single prayer we who are Christians owe infinitely more
real benefits than the world can ever bestow; and in the midst of any
trials we may remember that the Son of God prayed for us, and that the
prayer was assuredly heard, and will be answered in reference to all who
truly believe.

All may be one - May be united as brethren. Christians are all redeemed
by the same blood, and are going to the same heaven. They have the same
wants, the same enemies, the same joys. Though they are divided into
different denominations, yet they will meet at last in the same homes of
glory. Hence they should feel that they belong to the same family, and
are children of the same God and Father. There are no ties so tender as
those which bind us in the gospel. There is no friendship so pure and
enduring as that which results from having the same attachment to the
Lord Jesus. Hence, Christians, in the New Testament, are represented as
being indissolubly united - parts of the same body, and members of the
same family, [Act 4:32-35](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032.md); 1Co.
12:4-31; [Eph 2:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020.md); [Rom
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#005.md). On the ground of this union they
are exhorted to love one another, to bear one another's burdens, and to
study the things that make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify
another, [Eph 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003.md); [Rom
12:5-16](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#005.md).

As thou, Father, art in me - See [Joh
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010.md). This does not affirm that the
union between Christians should be in all respects like that between the
Father and the Son, but only in the points in which they are capable of
being compared. It is not the union of nature which is referred to, but
the union of plan, of counsel, of purpose seeking the same objects, and
manifesting attachment to the same things, and a desire to promote the
same ends.

That they also may be one in us - To be in God and in Christ is to be
united to God and Christ. The expression is common in the New Testament.
The phrase used here denotes a union among all Christians founded on and
resulting from a union to the same God and Saviour.

That the world may believe ... - That the world, so full of animosities
and fightings, may see the power of Christian principle in overcoming
the sources of contention and producing love, and may thus see that a
religion that could produce this must be from heaven. See the notes at
[Joh 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034.md). This was done. Such was
the attachment of the early Christians to each other, that a pagan was
constrained to say, "See how these Christians love one another!"

[John 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 17:22</span></span>

And the glory ... - The honor which thou hast conferred on me by
admitting me to union with thee, the same honor I have conferred on them
by admitting them to like union with me.

May be one, even as we are one - Not in nature, or in the mode of
existence - for this was not the subject of discourse, and would be
impossible - but in feeling, in principle, in purpose. Evincing, as the
Father and the Son had always done, the same great aim and plan; not
pursuing different interests, or counteracting each other's purposes, or
forming parties, but seeking the same ends by the same means. This is
the union between the Father and the Son. Always, in the creation,
preservation, and redemption of the world, the Father and the Son have
sought the same object, and this is to be the model on which Christians
should act.

[John 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 17:23</span></span>

May be made perfect in one - That their union may be complete. That
there may be no jars, discords, or contentions. A machine is perfect or
complete when it has all its parts and is in good order when there is no
portion of it wanting. So the union of Christians, for which the Saviour
prayed, would be complete or perfect if there were no controversies, no
envyings, no contentions, and no heart-burnings and jealousies. It is
worthy of remark here how entirely the union of his people occupied the
mind of Jesus as he drew near to death. He saw the danger of strifes and
contentions in the church. He knew the imperfections of even the best of
men. He saw how prone they would be to passion and ambition; how ready
to mistake love of sect or party for zeal for pure religion; how selfish
and worldly men in the church might divide his followers, and produce
unholy feeling and contention; and he saw, also, how much this would do
to dishonor religion.

Hence, he took occasion, when he was about to die, to impress the
importance of union on his disciples. By solemn admonition, and by most
tender and affecting appeals to God in supplication, he showed his sense
of the value of this union. He used the most sublime and impressive
illustration; he adverted to the eternal union between the Father and
himself; he reminded them of his love, and of the effect that their
union would have on the world, to fix it more deeply in their hearts.
The effect has shown the infinite wisdom of the Saviour. The contentions
and strifes of Christians have shown his knowledge in foreseeing it. The
effect of all this on religion has shown that he understood the value of
union. Christians have contended long enough. It is time that they
should hear the parting admonitions of their Redeemer, and go unitedly
against their common foe. The world still lies in wickedness; and the
friends of Jesus, bound by the cords of eternal love, should advance
together against the common enemy, and spread the triumphs of the gospel
around the globe. All that is needful now, under the blessing of God, to
convince the world" that God sent the Lord Jesus, is that very union
among all Christians for which he prayed;" and when that union of
feeling, and purpose, and action shall take place, the task of sending
the gospel to all nations will be soon accomplished, and the morning of
the millennial glory will dawn upon the world.

[John 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 17:24</span></span>

I will - This expression, though it commonly denotes command, is here
only expressive of desire. It is used in prayer, and it was not the
custom of the Saviour to use language of command when addressing God. It
is often used to express strong and earnest desire, or a pressing and
importunate wish, such as we are exceedingly anxious should not be
denied, [Mar 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#025.md); [Mar
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#035.md); [Mat
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#038.md); [Mat
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#028.md).

Where I am - In heaven. The Son of God was still in the bosom of the
Father, [Joh 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018.md). See the notes at
[Joh 7:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#034.md). Probably the expression
here means where I shall be.

My glory - My honor and dignity when exalted to the right hand of God.
The word "behold" implies more than simply seeing; it means also to
participate, to enjoy. See the [Joh
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003.md) note; [Mat
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008.md) note.

Thou lovedst me ... - This is another of the numerous passages which
prove that the Lord Jesus existed before the creation of the world. It
is not possible to explain it on any other supposition.

[John 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 17:25</span></span>

Hath not known thee - See the notes at [Joh
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003.md).

[John 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 17:26</span></span>

Thy name - See the notes at [Joh 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#006.md).

And will declare it - After my resurrection, and by the influence of the
Holy Spirit, [Luk 24:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#045.md); [Act
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#003.md).

I in them - By my doctrines and the influences of my Spirit. That my
religion may show its power, and produce its proper fruits in their
minds, [Gal 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019.md).

The discourse in John 14; 15; 16 is the most tender and sublime that was
ever pronounced in our world. No composition can be found anywhere so
fitted to sustain the soul in trial or to support it in death. This
sublime and beautiful discourse is appropriately closed by a solemn and
most affecting prayer - a prayer at once expressive of the profoundest
reverence for God and the tenderest love for men - simple, grave,
tender, sublime, and full of consolation. It is the model for our
prayers, and with like reverence, faith, and love we should come before
God. This prayer for the church will yet be fully answered; and he who
loves the church and the world cannot but cast his eyes onward to that
time when all believers shall be one; when contentions, bigotry, strife,
and anger shall cease; and when, in perpetual union and love, Christians
shall show forth the power and purity of that holy gospel with which the
Saviour came to bless mankind. Soon may that happy day arise!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 18](joh018.md)

</div>
