<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh014)  [Next](joh016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001.md)

[John 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 15:1</span></span>

I am the true vine - Some have supposed that this discourse was
delivered in the room where the Lord's Supper was instituted, and that,
as they had made use of wine, Jesus took occasion from that to say that
he was the true vine, and to intimate that his blood was the real wine
that was to give strength to the soul. Others have supposed that it was
delivered in the temple, the entrance to which was adorned with a golden
vine (Josephus), and that Jesus took occasion thence to say that he was
the true vine; but it is most probable that it was spoken while they
were going from the paschal supper to the Mount of Olives. Whether it
was suggested by the sight of vines by the way, or by the wine of which
they had just partaken, cannot now be determined. The comparison was
frequent among the Jews, for Palestine abounded in vineyards, and the
illustration was very striking. Thus, the Jewish people are compared to
a vine which God had planted, [Isa
5:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001.md); [Psa
80:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008.md); [Joe
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#007.md); [Jer
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021.md); [Eze
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#010.md). When Jesus says he was the true
vine, perhaps allusion is had to [Jer
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021.md). The word "true," here, is used
in the sense of real, genuine. He really and truly gives what is
emblematically represented by a vine. The point of the comparison or the
meaning of the figure is this: A vine yields proper juice and
nourishment to all the branches, whether these are large or small. All
the nourishment of each branch and tendril passes through the main
stalk, or the vine, that springs from the earth. So Jesus is the source
of all real strength and grace to his disciples. He is their leader and
teacher, and imparts to them, as they need, grace and strength to bear
the fruits of holiness.

And my Father is the husbandman - The word "vine-dresser" more properly
expresses the sense of the original word than husbandman. It means one
who has the care of a vineyard; whose office it is to nurture, trim, and
defend the vine, and who of course feels a deep interest in its growth
and welfare. See the notes at [Mat
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#033.md). The figure means that God gave,
or appointed his Son to be, the source of blessings to man; that all
grace descends through him; and that God takes care of all the branches
of this vine - that is, of all who are by faith united to the Lord Jesus
Christ. In Jesus and all his church he feels the deepest interest, and
it is an object of great solicitude that his church should receive these
blessings and bear much fruit.

[John 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 15:2</span></span>

Every branch in me - Everyone that is a true follower of me, that is
united to me by faith, and that truly derives grace and strength from
me, as the branch does from the vine. The word "branch" includes all the
boughs, and the smallest tendrils that shoot out from the parent stalk.
Jesus here says that he sustains the same relation to his disciples that
a parent stalk does to the branches; but this does not denote any
physical or incomprehensible union. It is a union formed by believing on
him; resulting from our feeling our dependence on him and our need of
him; from embracing him as our Saviour, Redeemer, and Friend. We become
united to him in all our interests, and have common feelings, common
desires, and a common destiny with him. We seek the same objects, are
willing to encounter the same trials, contempt, persecution, and want,
and are desirous that his God shall be ours, and his eternal abode ours.
It is a union of friendship, of love, and of dependence; a union of
weakness with strength; of imperfection with perfection; of a dying
nature with a living Saviour; of a lost sinner with an unchanging Friend
and Redeemer. It is the most tender and interesting of all relations,
but not more mysterious or more physical than the union of parent and
child, of husband and wife [Eph 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#023.md),
or friend and friend.

That beareth not fruit - As the vinedresser will remove all branches
that are dead or that bear no fruit, so will God take from his church
all professed Christians who give no evidence by their lives that they
are truly united to the Lord Jesus. He here refers to such cases as that
of Judas, the apostatizing disciples, and all false and merely nominal
Christians (Dr. Adam Clarke).

He taketh away - The vine-dresser cuts it off. God removes such in
various ways:

1\. by the discipline of the church.

2\. by suffering them to fall into temptation.

3\. by persecution and tribulation, by the deceitfulness of riches, and
by the cares of the world [Mat
13:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#021.md); by suffering the man to be
placed in such circumstances as Judas, Achan, and Ananias were such as
to show what they were, to bring their characters fairly out, and to let
it be seen that they had no true love to God.

4\. by death, for God has power thus at any moment to remove
unprofitable branches from the church.

Every branch that beareth fruit - That is, all true Christians, for all
such bear fruit. To bear fruit is to show by our lives that we are under
the influence of the religion of Christ, and that that religion produces
in us its appropriate effects, [Gal
5:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022.md). Notes, [Mat
7:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016.md). It is also to live so as to
be useful to others, As a vineyard is worthless unless it bears fruit
that may promote the happiness or subsistence of man, so the Christian
principle would be worthless unless Christians should live so that
others may be made holy and happy by their example and labors, and so
that the world may be brought to the cross of the Saviour.

He purgeth it - Or rather he prunes it, or cleanses it by pruning. There
is a use of words here - a paronomasia - in the original which cannot be
retained in the translation. It may be imperfectly seen by retaining the
Greek words "Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away
αἴρει airei; every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it καθαίρει
kathairei; now ye are clean καθαροί katharoi," etc. The same Greek word
in different forms is still retained. God purifies all true Christians
so that they may be more useful. He takes away that which hindered their
usefulness; teaches them; quickens them; revives them; makes them more
pure in motive and in life. This he does by the regular influences of
his Spirit in sanctifying them, purifying their motives, teaching them
the beauty of holiness, and inducing them to devote themselves more to
him. He does it by taking away what opposes their usefulness, however
much they may be attached to it, or however painful to part with it; as
a vine-dresser will often feel himself compelled to lop off a branch
that is large, apparently thrifty, and handsome, but which bears no
fruit, and which shades or injures those which do. So God often takes
away the property of his people, their children, or other idols. He
removes the objects which bind their affections, and which render them
inactive. He takes away the things around man, as he did the valued
gourds of Jonah [Jon 4:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#005.md), so that
he may feel his dependence, and live more to the honor of God, and bring
forth more proof of humble and active piety.

[John 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 15:3</span></span>

Now ye are clean - Still keeping up the figure καθαροί katharoi. It does
not mean that they were perfect, but that they had been under a process
of purifying by his instructions all the time he had been with them. He
had removed their erroneous notions of the Messiah; he had gradually
reclaimed them from their fond and foolish views respecting earthly
honors; he had taught them to be willing to forsake all things; and he
had so trained and disciplined them that immediately after his death
they would be ready to go and bear fruit among all nations to the honor
of his name. In addition to this, Judas had been removed from their
number, and they were now all true followers of the Saviour. See the
notes at [Joh 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#010.md).

Through the word - By means of the teachings of Jesus while he had been
with them.

[John 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 15:4</span></span>

Abide in me - Remain united to me by a living faith. Live a life of
dependence on me, and obey my doctrines, imitate my example, and
constantly exercise faith in me.

And I in you - That is, if you remain attached to me, I will remain with
you, and will teach, guide, and comfort you. This he proceeds to
illustrate by a reference to the vine. If the branch should be cut off
an instant, it would die and be fruitless. As long as it is in the vine,
"from the nature of the case," the parent stock imparts its juices, and
furnishes a constant circulation of sap adapted to the growth and
fruitfulness of the branch. So our piety, if we should be separate from
Christ, or if we cease to feel our union to him and dependence on him,
withers and droops. While we are united to him by a living faith, from
the nature of the case, strength flows from him to us, and we receive
help as we need. Piety then, manifested in good works, in love, and
self-denial, is as natural, as easy, as unconstrained. and as lovely as
the vine covered with fruitful branches is at once useful and enticing.

[John 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 15:5</span></span>

I am the vine - [Joh 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001.md).

Without me ye can do nothing - The expression "without me" denotes the
same as separate from me. As the branches, if separated from the parent
stock, could produce no fruit, but would immediately wither and die, so
Christians, if separate from Christ, could do nothing. The expression is
one, therefore, strongly implying dependence. The Son of God was the
original source of life, [Joh 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004.md). He
also, by his work as Mediator, gives life to the world [Joh
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#033.md), and it is by the same grace and
agency that it is continued in the Christian. We see hence:

1\. that to him is due all the praise for all the good works the
Christian performs.

2\. that they will perform good works just in proportion as they feel
their dependence on him and look to him. And,

3\. that the reason why others fail of being holy is because they are
unwilling to look to him, and seek grace and strength from him who alone
is able to give it.

[John 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 15:6</span></span>

If a man, abide not in me - See [Joh
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#004.md). If a man is not truly united to
him by faith, and does not live with a continual sense of his dependence
on him. This doubtless refers to those who are professors of religion,
but who have never known anything of true and real connection with him.

Is cast forth - See the notes at [Joh
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#002.md). Also [Mat
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012.md); [Mat
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#013.md).

Is withered - Is dried up. A branch cut off withers. So of a soul
unconnected with Christ, however fair it may have appeared. and however
flourishing when a profession of religion was first made, yet when it is
tried, and it is seen that there was no true grace, everything withers
and dies. The zeal languishes, the professed love is gone, prayer is
neglected, the sanctuary is forsaken, and the soul becomes like a
withered branch reserved for the fire of the last great day. See a
beautiful illustration of this in [Eze
15:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#001.md).

Men gather them - The word "men" is not in the original, and should not
have been in the translation. The Greek is "they gather them," a form of
expression denoting simply they are gathered, without specifying by whom
it is done. From [Mat 13:40-42](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#040.md), it
seems that it will be done by the angels. The expression means, as the
withered and useless branches of trees are gathered for fuel, so shall
it be with all hypocrites and false professors of religion.

Are burned - See [Mat 13:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#042.md).

[John 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 15:7</span></span>

My words - My doctrine; my commandments.

Abide in you - Not only are remembered, but are suffered to remain in
you as a living principle, to regulate your affections and life.

Ye shall ask ... - See [Joh 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#013.md).
This promise had particular reference to the apostles. It is applicable
to other Christians only so far as they are in circumstances similar to
the apostles, and only so far as they possess their spirit. We learn
from it that it is only when we keep the commandments of Christ - only
when we live by faith in him, and his words are suffered to control our
conduct and affections, that our prayers will be heard. Were we perfect
in all things, he would always hear us, and we should be kept from
making an improper petition; but just so far as men regard iniquity in
their heart, the Lord will not hear them, [Psa
66:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#018.md).

[John 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 15:8</span></span>

Herein - In this - to wit, in your bearing much fruit.

Glorified - Honored.

Bear much fruit - Are fruitful in good works; are faithful, zealous,
humble, devoted, always abounding in the work of the Lord. This honors
God.

1\. Because it shows the excellence of his law which requires it.

2\. Because it shows the power of his gospel, and of that grace which
can overcome the evil propensities of the heart and produce it.

3\. Because the Christian is restored to the divine image, and it shows
how excellent is the character after which they are formed. They imitate
God, and the world sees that the whole tendency of the divine
administration and character is to make man holy; to produce in us that
which is lovely, and true, and honest, and of good report. Compare [Mat
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#020.md); [Phi
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008.md).

So - That is, in doing this.

Shall ye be my disciples - This is a true test of character. It is not
by profession, but it is by a holy life, that the character is tried.
This is a test which it is easy to apply, and one which decides the
case. It is worthy of remark that the Saviour says that those who bear
much fruit are they who are his disciples. The design and tendency of
his religion is to excite men to do much good, and to call forth all
their strength, and time, and talents in the work for which the Saviour
laid down his life. Nor should anyone take comfort in the belief that he
is a Christian who does not aim to do much good, and who does not devote
to God all that he has in an honest effort to glorify his name, and to
benefit a dying world. The apostles obeyed this command of the Saviour,
and went forth preaching the gospel everywhere, and aiming to bring all
men to the knowledge of the truth; and it is this spirit only,
manifested in a proper manner, which can constitute any certain evidence
of piety.

[John 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 15:9</span></span>

As the Father hath loved me - The love of the Father toward his
only-begotten Son is the highest affection of which we can conceive.
Compare [Mat 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017.md); [Mat
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005.md). It is the love of God toward his
coequal Son. who is like him in all things, who always pleased him, and
who was willing to endure the greatest sacrifices and toils to
accomplish his purpose of mercy. Yet this love is adduced to illustrate
the tender affection which the Lord Jesus has for all his friends.

So have I loved you - Not to the same degree, for this was impossible,
but with the same kind of love - deep, tender. unchanging; love
prompting to self-denials, toils, and sacrifices to secure their
welfare.

Continue ye - The reason which he gives for their doing this is the
strength of the love which he had shown for them. His love was so great
for them that he was about to lay down his life. This constitutes a
strong reason why we should continue in his love:

1\. Because the love which he shows for us is unchanging.

2\. It is the love of our best friend - love whose strength was
expressed by toils, and groans, and blood.

3\. As he is unchanging in the character and strength of his affection,
so should we be. Thus only can we properly express our gratitude; thus
only show that we are his true friends.

4\. Our happiness here and forever depends altogether on our continuing
in the love of Christ. We have no source of permanent joy but in that
love.

In my love - In love to me. Thus it is expressed in the Greek in the
next verse. The connection also demands that we understand it of our
love to him, and not of his love to us. The latter cannot be the subject
of a command; the former may. See also [Luk
11:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#042.md); [Jo1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#005.md); [Jde
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#021.md).

[John 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 15:10</span></span>

See [Joh 14:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023.md).

[John 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 15:11</span></span>

These things - The discourse in this and the previous chapter. This
discourse was designed to comfort them by the promise of the Holy Spirit
and of eternal life, and to direct them in the discharge of their duty.

My joy - This expression probably denotes the happiness which Jesus had,
and would continue to have, by their obedience, love, and fidelity.
Their obedience was to him a source of joy. It was that which he sought
and for which he had labored. He now clearly taught them the path of
duty, and encouraged them to persevere, notwithstanding he was about to
leave them. If they obeyed him, it would continue to him to be a source
of joy. Christ rejoices in the obedience of all his friends; and, though
his happiness is not dependent on them, yet their fidelity is an object
which he desires and in which he finds delight. The same sentiment is
expressed in [Joh 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#013.md).

Your joy might be full - That you might be delivered from your
despondency and grief at my departure; that you might see the reason why
I leave you, be comforted by the Holy Spirit, and be sustained in the
arduous trials of your ministry. See [Jo1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#004.md); [Jo2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#012.md). This promise of the Saviour was
abundantly fulfilled. The apostles with great frequency speak of the
fulness of their joy - joy produced in just the manner promised by the
Saviour - by the presence of the Holy Spirit. And it showed his great
love, that he promised such joy; his infinite knowledge, that, in the
midst of their many trials and persecutions, he knew that they would
possess it; and the glorious power and loveliness of his gospel, that it
could impart such joy amid so many tribulations. See instances of this
joy in [Act 13:52](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#052.md); [Rom
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017.md); [Co2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#003.md); [Gal
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022.md); [Th1
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#006.md); [Th1
2:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#019.md); [Th1
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#009.md); [Pe1
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#008.md); [Rom
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#011.md); [Co2
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#004.md).

[John 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 15:12</span></span>

This is my commandment - The special law of Christianity, called hence
"the new commandment." See the notes at [Joh
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034.md).

As I have loved you - That is, with the same tender affection, willing
to endure trials, to practice self-denials, and, if need be, to lay down
your lives for each other, [Jo1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#016.md).

[John 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 15:13</span></span>

Greater love hath ... - No higher expression of love could be given.
Life is the most valuable object we possess; and when a man is willing
to lay that down for his friends or his country, it shows the utmost
extent of love. Even this love for friends has been rarely witnessed. A
very few cases like that of Damon and Pythias have occurred where a man
was willing to save the life of his friend by giving his own. It greatly
enhances the love of Christ, that while the instances of those who have
been willing to die for friends have been so rare, he was willing to die
for enemies - bitter foes, who rejected his reign, persecuted him,
reviled him, scorned him, and sought his life, [Jo1
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#010.md); [Rom
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#006.md), [Rom
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010.md). It also shows us the extent of
his love that he gave himself up, not to common sufferings, but to the
most bitter, painful, and protracted sorrows, not for himself, not for
friends, but for a thoughtless and unbelieving world. "O Lamb of God,
was ever pain was ever love like thine!"

[John 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 15:15</span></span>

I call you not servants - This had been the common title by which he
addressed them [Mat 10:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#024.md); [Joh
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#026.md); [Joh
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#013.md); but he had also before this, on
one occasion, called them friends [Luk
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#004.md), and on one occasion after this
he called them servants, [Joh 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#020.md).
He here means that the ordinary title by which he would hence forth
address them would be that of friends.

The servant knoweth not ... - He receives the command of his master
without knowing the reason why this or that thing is ordered. It is one
of the conditions of slavery not to be let into the counsels and plans
of the master. It is the privilege of friendship to be made acquainted
with the plans wishes, and wants of the friend. This instance of
friendship Jesus had given them by making them acquainted with the
reasons why he was about to leave them, and with his secret wishes in
regard to them. As he had given their this proof of friendship, it was
proper that he should not withhold from them the title of friends.

His lord - His Master.

I have called you friends - I have given you the name of friends. He
does not mean that the usual appellation which he had given them had
been than of friends, but that such was the title which he had now given
them.

For all things ... - The reason why he called them friends was that he
had now treated them as friends. He had opened to them his mind; made
known his plans; acquainted them with the design of his coming, his
death, his resurrection, and ascension; and, having thus given them the
clearest proof of friendship, it was proper that he should give them the
name.

That I have heard ... - Jesus frequently represents himself as
commissioned or sent by God to accomplish an important work, and as
being instructed by him in regard to the nature of that work. See the
notes at [Joh 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#030.md). By what he had
heard of the Father, he doubtless refers to the design of God in his
coming and his death. This he had made known to them.

[John 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 15:16</span></span>

Ye have not chosen me - The word here translated "chosen" is that from
which is derived the word "elect," and means the same thing. It is
frequently thus translated, [Mar
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#020.md); [Mat
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#022.md), [Mat
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024.md), [Mat
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#031.md); [Col
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#012.md). It refers here, doubtless, to
his choosing or electing them to be apostles. He says that it was not
because they had chosen him to be their teacher and guide, but because
he had designated them to be his apostles. See [Joh
6:70](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#070.md); also [Mat
4:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#018.md). He thus shows them that his
love for them was pure and disinterested; that it commenced when they
had no affection for him; that it was not a matter of obligation on his
part, and that therefore it placed them under more tender and sacred
obligations to be entirely devoted to his service. The same may be said
of all who are endowed with talents of any kind, or raised to any office
in the church or the state. It is not that they have originated these
talents, or laid God under obligation. What they have they owe to his
sovereign goodness, and they are bound to devote all to his service.
Equally true is this of all Christians. It was not that by nature they
were more inclined than others to seek God, or that they had any native
goodness to recommend them to him, but it was because he graciously
inclined them by his Holy Spirit to seek him; because, in the language
of the Episcopal and Methodist articles of religion, "The grace of
Christ prevented them;" that is, went before them, commenced the work of
their personal salvation, and thus God in sovereign mercy chose them as
His own. Whatever Christians, then, possess, they owe to God, and by the
most tender and sacred ties they are bound to be his followers.

I have chosen you - To be apostles. Yet all whom he now addressed were
true disciples. Judas had left them; and when Jesus says he had chosen
them to bear fruit, it may mean, also, that he had "chosen them to
salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the
truth," [Th2 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#013.md).

Ordained you - Literally, I have placed you, appointed you, set you
apart. It does not mean that he had done this by any formal public act
of the imposition of hands, as we now use the word, but that he had
designated or appointed them to this work, [Luk
6:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#013.md); [Mat
10:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#002.md).

Bring forth fruit - That you should be rich in good works; faithful and
successful in spreading my gospel. This was the great business to which
they were set apart, and this they faithfully accomplished. It may be
added that this is the great end for which Christians are chosen. It is
not to be idle, or useless, or simply to seek enjoyment. It is to do
good, and to spread as far as possible the rich temporal and spiritual
blessings which the gospel is fitted to confer on mankind.

Your fruit should remain - This probably means,

1\. That the effect of their labors would be permanent on mankind. Their
efforts were not to be like those of false teachers. the result of whose
labors soon vanish away [Act 5:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#038.md),
but their gospel was to spread - was to take a deep and permanent hold
on people, and was ultimately to fill the world, [Mat
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018.md). The Saviour knew this, and
never was a prediction more cheering for man or more certain in its
fulfillment.

2\. There is included, also, in this declaration the idea that their
labors were to be unremitted. They were sent forth to be diligent in
their work, and untiring in their efforts to spread the gospel, until
the day of their death. Thus, their fruit, the continued product or
growth of religion in their souls, was to remain, or to be continually
produced, until God should call them from their work. The Christian, and
especially the Christian minister, is devoted to the Saviour for life.
He is to toil without intermission, and without being weary of his work,
until God shall call him home. The Saviour never called a disciple to
serve him merely for a part of his life, nor to feel himself at liberty
to relax his endeavors, nor to suppose himself to be a Christian when
his religion produced no fruit. He that enlists under the banners of the
Son of God does it for life. He that expects or desires to grow weary
and cease to serve him, has never yet put on the Christian armor, or
known anything of the grace of God. See [Luk
9:62](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#062.md).

That whatsoever ... - See [Joh 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#007.md).

[John 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 15:18</span></span>

If the world hate you - The friendship of the world they were not to
expect, but they were not to be deterred from their work by its hatred.
They had seen the example of Jesus. No opposition of the proud, the
wealthy, the learned, or the men of power, no persecution or gibes, had
deterred him from his work. Remembering this, and having his example
steadily in the eye, they were to labor not less because wicked men
should oppose and deride them. It is enough for the disciple to be as
his Master, and the servant as his Lord, [Mat
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#025.md).

[John 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 15:19</span></span>

If ye were of the world - If you were actuated by the principles of the
world. If, like them, you were vain, earthly, sensual, given to
pleasure, wealth, ambition, they would not oppose you.

Because ye are not of the world - Because you are influenced by
different principles from men of the world. You are actuated by the love
of God and holiness; they by the love of sin.

I have chosen you out of the world - I have, by choosing you to be my
followers, separated you from their society, and placed you under the
government of my holy laws.

Therefore ... - A Christian may esteem it as one evidence of his piety
that he is hated by wicked men. Often most decided evidence is given
that a man is the friend of God by the opposition excited against him by
the profane, by Sabbath-breakers, and by the dissolute, [Jo1
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#013.md); [Joh
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#007.md).

[John 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 15:20</span></span>

Remember the word that I said ... - At their first appointment to the
apostolic office. See [Mat 10:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#024.md).

[John 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 15:21</span></span>

My name's sake - On my account. Because you are my followers and possess
my spirit. See the notes at [Joh
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#013.md).

Because they know not him that sent me - They will not believe that God
has sent me. They do not so understand his character, his justice, or
his law, as to see that it was fit that he should send his Son to die.
They are so opposed to it, so filled with pride and opposition to a plan
of salvation that is so humbling to people, as to be resolved not to
believe it, and thus they persecute me, and will also you.

[John 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 15:22</span></span>

And spoken unto them - Declared unto them the will of God, and made
known his requirements. Jesus had not less certainly shown by his own
arguments that he was the Messiah than by his miracles. By both these
kinds of proof their guilt was to be measured. See [Joh
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026.md). No small part of the gospel of
John consists of arguments used by the Saviour to convince the Jews that
he came from God. He here says if he had not used these arguments, and
proved to them his divine mission, they had not had sin.

Had not had sin - This is evidently to be understood of the particular
sin of persecuting and rejecting him. Of this he was speaking; and
though, if he had not come, they would have been guilty of many other
sins, yet of this, their great crowning sin, they would not have been
guilty. We may understand this, then, as teaching:

1\. That they would not have been guilty of this kind of sin. They would
not have been chargeable with rejecting the signal grace of God if Jesus
had not come and made an offer of mercy to them.

2\. They would not have been guilty of the same degree of sin. The
rejection of the Messiah was the crowning act of rebellion which brought
down the vengeance of God, and led on their special national calamities.
By way of eminence, therefore, this might be called the sin - the
special sin of their age and nation. Compare [Mat
23:34-39](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#034.md); [Mat
27:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#025.md). And this shows us, what is so
often taught in the Scriptures, that our guilt will be in proportion to
the light that we possess and the mercies that we reject, [Mat
11:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#020.md); [Luk
12:47-48](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047.md). If it was such a crime to
reject the Saviour then, it is a crime now; and if the rejection of the
Son of God brought such calamities on the Jewish nation, the same
rejection will involve the sinner now in woe, and vengeance, and
despair.

No cloak - No covering, no excuse. The proof has been so clear that they
cannot plead ignorance; it has been so often presented that they cannot
allege that they had no opportunity of knowing it. It is still so with
all sinners.

[John 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 15:23</span></span>

He that hateth me ... - To show them that this was no slight crime, he
reminds them that a rejection of himself is also a rejection of God.
Such is the union between them, that no one can hate the one without
also hating the other. See [Joh
5:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019.md); [Joh
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#007.md), [Joh
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009.md).

[John 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 15:24</span></span>

The works which none other man did - The miracles of Jesus surpassed
those of Moses and the prophets:

1\. In their number. He healed great multitudes, and no small part of
his life was occupied in doing good by miraculous power.

2\. In their nature. They involved a greater exertion of power. He
healed all forms of disease. He showed that his power was superior to
all kinds of pain. He raised Lazarus after he had been four days dead.
He probably refers also to the fact that he had performed miracles of a
different kind from all the prophets.

3\. He did all this by his own power; Moses and the prophets by the
invoked power of God. Jesus spake and it was done, showing that he had
power of himself to do more than all the ancient prophets had done. It
may be added that his miracles were done in a short time. They were
constant, rapid, continued, in all places. Wherever he was, he showed
that he had this power, and in the short space of three years and a half
it is probable that he performed more miracles than are recorded of
Moses and Elijah, and all the prophets put together.

[John 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 15:25</span></span>

In their law - [Psa 35:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#019.md). All the Old
Testament was sometimes called the law. The meaning here is that the
same thing happened to him which did to the psalmist. The same words
which David used respecting his enemies would express, also, the conduct
of the Jews and their treatment of the Messiah. In both cases it was
without cause. Jesus had broken no law, he had done no injury to his
country or to any individual. It is still true that sinners hate him in
the same way. He injures no one, but, amid all their hatred, he seeks
their welfare; and, while they reject him in a manner for which they
"can give no reason in the day of judgment," he still follows them with
mercies and entreats them to return to him. Who has ever had any reason
to hate the Lord Jesus? What injury has he ever done to any one of the
human race? What evil has he ever said or thought of any one of them?
What cause or reason had the Jews for putting him to death? What reason
has the sinner for hating him now? What reason for neglecting him? No
one can give a reason for it that will satisfy his own conscience, none
that has the least show of plausibility. Yet no being on earth has ever
been more hated, despised, or neglected, and in every instance it has
been "without a cause." Reader, do you hate him? If so, I ask you why?
Wherein has he injured you? or why should you think or speak
reproachfully of the benevolent and pure Redeemer?

[John 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 15:27</span></span>

Ye also shall bear witness - You shall be witnesses to the world to urge
on them the evidences that the Lord Jesus is the Messiah.

Have been with me - They had for more than three years seen his works,
and were therefore qualified to bear witness of his character and
doctrines.

From the beginning - From his entrance on the public work of the
ministry, [Mat 4:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#017.md). Compare [Act
1:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#021.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 16](joh016.md)

</div>
