<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh010)  [Next](joh012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#001)

[John 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 11:1</span></span>

A certain man was sick - The resurrection of Lazarus has been recorded
only by John. Various reasons have been conjectured why the other
evangelists did not mention so signal a miracle. The most probable is,
that at the time they wrote Lazarus was still living. The miracle was
well known, and yet to have recorded it might have exposed Lazarus to
opposition and persecution from the Jews. See [Joh
12:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#010). Besides, John wrote for
Christians who were out of Palestine. The other gospels were written
chiefly for those who were in Judea. There was the more need, therefore,
that he should enter minutely into the account of the miracle, while the
others did not deem it necessary or proper to record an event so well
known.

Bethany - A village on the eastern declivity of the Mount of Olives. See
the notes at [Mat 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001).

The town of Mary - The place where she lived. At that place also lived
Simon the leper [Mat 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#006), and there
our Lord spent considerable part of his time when he was in Judea. The
transaction recorded in this chapter occurred nearly four months after
those mentioned in the previous chapter. Those occurred in December, and
these at the approach of the Passover in April.

[John 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 11:2</span></span>

It was that Mary ... - See the [Mat
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#006) note; [Luk
7:36-50](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#036) notes.

[John 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 11:3</span></span>

Whom thou lovest - [Joh 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#005). The
members of this family were among the few special and intimate friends
of our Lord. He was much with them, and showed them marks of special
friendship [Luk 10:38-42](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#038), and they
bestowed upon him special proofs of affection in return. This shows that
special attachments are lawful for Christians, and that those
friendships are especially lovely which are tempered and sweetened with
the spirit of Christ. Friendships should always be cemented by religion,
and one main end of those attachments should be to aid one another in
the great business of preparing to die.

Sent unto him - They believed that he had power to heal him [Joh
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#021), though they did not then seem
to suppose that he could raise him if he died. Perhaps there were two
reasons why they sent for him; one, because they supposed he would be
desirous of seeing his friend; the other, because they supposed he could
restore him. In sickness we should implore the aid and presence of
Jesus. He only can restore us and our friends; he only can perform for
us the office of a friend when all other friends fail; and he only can
cheer us with the hope of a blessed resurrection.

[John 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 11:4</span></span>

This sickness is not unto death - The word "death" here is equivalent to
remaining under death, [Rom 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023). "The
wages of sin is death" - permanent or unchanging death, opposed to
eternal life. Jesus evidently did not intend to deny that he would die.
The words which he immediately adds show that he would expire, and that
he would raise him up to show forth the power and glory of God. Compare
[Joh 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#011). Those words cannot be
understood on any other supposition than that he expected to raise him
up. The Saviour often used expressions similar to this to fix the
attention on what he was about to say in explanation. The sense may be
thus expressed: "His sickness is not fatal. It is not designed for his
death, but to furnish an opportunity for a signal display of the glory
of God, and to furnish a standing proof of the truth of religion. It is
intended to exhibit the power of the Son of God, and to be a proof at
once of the truth of his mission; of his friendship for this family; of
his mild, tender, special love as a man; of his power and glory as the
Messiah; and of the great doctrine that the dead will rise.

For the glory of God - That God may be honored. See [Joh
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#003).

That the Son of God ... - The glory of God and of his Son is the same.
That which promotes the one promotes also the other. Few things could do
it more than the miracle which follows, evincing at once the lovely and
tender character of Jesus as a man and a friend, and his power as the
equal with God.

[John 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 11:6</span></span>

He abode two days - Probably Lazarus died soon after the messengers left
him. Jesus knew that ([Joh 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#011)), and
did not hasten to Judea, but remained two days longer where he was, that
there might not be the possibility of doubt that he was dead, so that
when he came there he had been dead four days, [Joh
11:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039). This shows, moreover, that he
intended to raise him up. If he had not, it could hardly be reconciled
with friendship thus to remain, without any reason, away from an
afflicted family.

Where he was - At Bethabara [Joh 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#028);
[Joh 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#040), about 30 miles from
Bethany. This was about a day's journey, and it renders it probable that
Lazarus died soon after the message was sent. One day would be occupied
before the message came to him; two days he remained; one day would be
occupied by him in going to Bethany; so that Lazarus had been dead four
days [Joh 11:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039) when he arrived.

[John 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 11:8</span></span>

Of late - About four months before, [Joh
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#031).

[John 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 11:9</span></span>

Twelve hours - The Jews divided the day from sunrise to sunset into
twelve equal parts. A similar illustration our Saviour uses in [Joh
9:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#004). See the notes at that place.

If any man walk - If any man travels. The illustration here is taken
from a traveler. The conversation was respecting a journey into Judea,
and our Lord, as was his custom, took the illustration from the case
before him.

He stumbleth not - He is able, having light, to make his journey safely.
He sees the obstacles or dangers and can avoid them.

The light of this world - The light by which the world is illuminated
that is, the light of the sun.

In the night - In darkness he is unable to see danger or obstacles, and
to avoid them. His journey is unsafe and perilous, or, in other words,
it is not a proper time to travel.

No light in him - He sees no light. It is dark; his eyes admit no light
within him to direct his way. This description is figurative, and it is
difficult to fix the meaning. Probably the intention was the following:

1\. Jesus meant to say that there was an allotted or appointed time for
him to live and do his Father's will, represented here by the 12 hours
of the day.

2\. Though his life was nearly spent, yet it was not entirely; a remnant
of it was left.

3\. A traveler journeyed on until night. It was as proper for him to
travel the twelfth hour as any other.

4\. So it was proper for Jesus to labor until the close. It was the
proper time for him to work. The night of death was coming, and no work
could then be done.

5\. God would defend him in this until the appointed time of his death.
He had nothing to fear, therefore, in Judea from the Jews, until it was
the will of God that he should die. He was safe in his hand, and he went
fearlessly into the midst of his foes, trusting in him. This passage
teaches us that we should be diligent to the end of life: fearless of
enemies when we know that God requires us to labor, and confidently
committing ourselves to Him who is able to shield us, and in whose hand,
if we have a conscience void of offence, we are safe.

[John 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 11:11</span></span>

Lazarus sleepeth - Is dead. The word "sleep" is applied to death,

1\. Because of the resemblance between them, as sleep is the "kinsman of
death." In this sense it is often used by pagan writers.

2\. However, in the Scriptures it is used to intimate that death will
not be final: that there will be an awaking out of this sleep, or a
resurrection. It is a beautiful and tender expression, removing all that
is dreadful in death, and filling the mind with the idea of calm repose
after a life of toil, with a reference to a future resurrection in
increased vigor and renovated powers. In this sense it is applied in the
Scriptures usually to the saints, [Co1
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030); [Co1
15:51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051); [Th1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#014); [Th1
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#010); [Mat
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#024).

[John 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 11:12</span></span>

If the sleep, he shall do well - Sleep was regarded by the Jews, in
sickness, as a favorable symptom; hence it was said among them, "Sleep
in sickness is a sign of recovery, because it shows that the violence of
the disease has abated" (Lightfoot). This seems to have been the meaning
of the disciples. They intimated that if he had this symptom, there was
no need of his going into Judea to restore him.

[John 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 11:15</span></span>

I am glad ... - The meaning of this verse may be thus expressed: "If I
had been there during his sickness, the entreaties of his sisters and
friends would have prevailed with me to restore him to health. I could
not have refused them without appearing to be unkind. Though a
restoration to health would have been a miracle, and sufficient to
convince you, yet the miracle of raising him after being four days dead
will be far more impressive, and on that account I rejoice that an
opportunity is thus given so strikingly to confirm your faith."

To the intent - To furnish you evidence on which you might be
established in the belief that I am the Messiah.

[John 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 11:16</span></span>

Thomas, which is called Didymus - These names express the same thing.
One is Hebrew and the other Greek. The name means a twin.

Die with him - It has been much doubted by critics whether the word him
refers to Lazarus or to Jesus. They who refer it to Lazarus suppose this
to be the meaning: "Let us go and die, for what have we to hope for if
Jesus returns into Judea? Lately they attempted to stone him, and now
they will put him to death, and we also, like Lazarus, shall be dead."
This expression, is supposed to be added by John to show the slowness
with which Thomas believed, and his readiness to doubt without the
fullest evidence. See [Joh 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#025).
Others suppose, probably more correctly, that it refers to Jesus: "He is
about to throw himself into danger. The Jews lately sought his life, and
will again. They will put him to death. But let us not forsake him. Let
us attend him and die with him." It may be remarked that this, not less
than the other mode of interpretation, expresses the doubts of Thomas
about the miracle which Jesus was about to work.

[John 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 11:17</span></span>

In the grave - It was sometimes the custom to embalm the dead, but in
this case it does not seem to have been done. He was probably buried
soon after death.

[John 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 11:18</span></span>

Nigh unto Jerusalem - This is added to show that it was easy for many of
the Jews to come to the place. The news that Jesus was there, and the
account of the miracle, would also be easily carried to the Sanhedrin.

Fifteen furlongs - Nearly two miles. It was directly east from
Jerusalem. Dr. Thomson (The Land and the Book, vol. ii. p. 599) says of
Bethany: "It took half an hour to walk over Olivet to Bethany this
morning, and the distance from the city, therefore, must be about two
miles. This agrees with what John says: 'Now Bethany was nigh unto
Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off.' The village is small, and
appears never to have been large, but it is pleasantly situated near the
southeastern base of the mount, and has many fine trees about and above
it. We, of course, looked at the remains of those old edifices which may
have been built in the age of Constantine, and repaired or changed to a
convent in the time of the Crusades. By the dim light of a taper we also
descended very cautiously, by 25 slippery steps, to the reputed
sepulchre of Lazarus, or El Azariyeh, as both tomb and village are now
called. But I have no description of it to give, and no questions about
it to ask. It is a wretched cavern, every way unsatisfactory, and almost
disgusting."

[John 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 11:19</span></span>

Many of the Jews - Probably their distant relatives or their friends.

To comfort - These visits of consolation were commonly extended to seven
clays (Grotius; Lightfoot).

[John 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 11:20</span></span>

Then Martha ... - To Martha was intrusted the management of the affairs
of the family, [Luk 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#040). It is
probable that she first heard of his coming, and, without waiting to
inform her sister, went immediately out to meet him. See [Joh
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#028).

Sat still in the house - The word "still" is not in the original. It
means that she remained sitting in the house. The common posture of
grief among the Jews was that of sitting, [Job
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#008); [Eze
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#014). Often this grief was so
excessive as to fix the person in astonishment, and render him
immovable, or prevent his being affected by any external objects. It is
possible that the evangelist meant to intimate this of Mary's grief.
Compare [Ezr 9:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#003); [Neh
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#004); [Isa
47:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001).

[John 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 11:22</span></span>

Whatsoever thou wilt ask of God - Whatever is necessary to our
consolation that thou wilt ask, thou canst obtain. It is possible that
she meant gently to intimate that he could raise him up and restore him
again to them.

[John 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 11:23</span></span>

Thy brother shall rise again - Martha had spoken of the power of Jesus.
He said nothing of himself in reply. It was not customary for him to
speak of himself, unless it was demanded by necessity. It cannot be
doubted that by rising again, here, Jesus referred to the act which he
was about to perform; but as Martha understood it, referring to the
future resurrection, it was full of consolation. The idea that departed
friends shall rise to glory is one that fills the mind with joy, and one
which we owe only to the religion of Christ.

[John 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 11:24</span></span>

At the last day - The day of judgment. Of this Martha was fully
convinced; but this was not all which she desired. She in this manner
delicately hinted what she did not presume expressly to declare her wish
that Jesus might even now raise him up.

[John 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 11:25</span></span>

I am the resurrection - I am the author or the cause of the
resurrection. It so depends on my power and will, that it may be said
that I am the resurrection itself. This is a most expressive way of
saying that the whole doctrine of the resurrection came from him, and
the whole power to effect it was his. In a similar manner he is said to
be made of God unto us "wisdom and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption," [Co1 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030).

And the life - [Joh 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004). As the
resurrection of all depends on him, he intimated that it was not
indispensable that it should be deferred to the last day. He had power
to do it now as well as then.

Though he were dead - Faith does not save from temporal death; but
although the believer, as others, will die a temporal death, yet he will
hereafter have life. Even if he dies, he shall hereafter live.

Shall he live - Shall be restored to life in the resurrection.

[John 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 11:26</span></span>

Whosoever liveth - He had just spoken of the prospects of the pious
dead. He now says that the same prospects are before the living who have
like faith. Greek, "Every one living and believing on me."

Shall never die - As the dead, though dead, shall yet live, so the
living shall have the same kind of life. They shall never come into
eternal death. See [Joh 6:50-51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#050), [Joh
6:54](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#054), [Joh
6:58](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#058). Greek, "Shall by no means die
forever."

Believest thou this? - This question was doubtless asked because it
implied that he was then able to raise up Lazarus, and because it was a
proper time for her to test her own faith. The time of affliction is a
favorable period to try ourselves to ascertain whether we have faith. If
we still have confidence in God, if we look to him for comfort in such
seasons, it is good evidence that we are his friends. He that loves God
when he takes away his comforts, has the best evidence possible of true
attachment to him.

[John 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 11:27</span></span>

Yea, Lord - This was a noble confession. It showed her full confidence
in him as the Messiah, and her full belief that all that he said was
true. See [Mat 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016).

[John 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 11:28</span></span>

She went her way - Jesus probably directed her to go, though the
evangelist has not recorded it, for she said to Mary, The Master calleth
for thee.

Secretly - Privately. So that the others did not hear her. This was
done, perhaps, to avoid confusion, or because it was probable that if
they knew Jesus was coming they would have made opposition. Perhaps she
doubted whether Jesus desired it to be known that he had come.

The Master is come - This appears to have been the appellation by which
he was known to the family. It means, literally, teacher, and was a
title which he claimed for himself. "One is your Master, even Christ"
[Mat 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#008), [Mat
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#010). The Syriac has it, "Our
Master."

[John 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 11:31</span></span>

Saying, She goeth unto the grave - Syriac, "They thought that she went
to weep." They had not heard Martha call her. The first days of mourning
among the Jews were observed with great solemnity and many ceremonies of
grief.

[John 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 11:33</span></span>

He groaned in the spirit - The word rendered "groaned," here, commonly
denotes to be angry or indignant, or to reprove severely, denoting
violent agitation of mind. Here it also evidently denotes violent
agitation - not from anger, but from grief. He saw the sorrow of others,
and he was also moved with sympathy and love. The word "groan" usually,
with us, denotes an expression of internal sorrow by a special sound.
The word here, however, does not mean that utterance was given to the
internal emotion, but that it was deep and agitating, though internal.

In the spirit - In the mind. See [Act
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021). Paul purposed in the spirit
that is, in his mind, [Mat 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003).

Was troubled - Was affected with grief. Perhaps this expression denotes
that his countenance was troubled, or gave indications of sorrow
(Grotins).

[John 11:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 11:34</span></span>

Where have ye laid him? - Jesus spoke as a man. In all this transaction
he manifested the deep sympathies of a man; and though he who could
raise the dead man up could also know where he was, yet he chose to lead
them to the grave by inducing them to point the way, and hence, he asked
this question.

[John 11:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 11:35</span></span>

Jesus wept - It has been remarked that this is the shortest verse in the
Bible; but it is exceedingly important and tender. It shows the Lord
Jesus as a friend, a tender friend, and evinces his character as a man.
And from this we learn:

1\. That the most tender personal friendship is not inconsistent with
the most pure religion. Piety binds stronger the ties of friendship,
makes more tender the emotions of love, and seals and sanctifies the
affections of friends.

2\. It is right, it is natural, it is indispensable for the Christian to
sympathize with others in their afflictions. [Rom
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#015); "rejoice with them that do
rejoice, and weep with them that weep."

3\. Sorrow at the death of friends is not improper. It is right to weep.
It is the expression of nature and religion does not forbid or condemn
it. All that religion does in the case is to temper and chasten our
grief; to teach us to mourn with submission to God; to weep without
complaining, and to seek to banish tears, not by hardening the heart or
forgetting the friend, but by bringing the soul, made tender by grief,
to receive the sweet influences of religion, and to find calmness and
peace in the God of all consolation.

4\. We have here an instance of the tenderness of the character of
Jesus, The same Savior wept over Jerusalem, and felt deeply for poor
dying, sinners. To the same tender and compassionate Saviour Christians
may now come [Heb 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015); and to him the
penitent sinner may also come, knowing that he will not cast him away.

[John 11:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 11:38</span></span>

It was a cave - This was a common mode of burial. See the notes at [Mat
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#028).

A stone lay upon it - Over the mouth of the cave. See [Mat
27:60](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#060).

[John 11:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 11:39</span></span>

Four days - This proves that there could be no deception, for it could
not have been a case of suspended animation. All these circumstances are
mentioned to show that there was no imposture. Impostors do not mention
minute circumstances like these. They deal in generals only. Every part
of this narrative bears the marks of truth.

[John 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">joh 11:40</span></span>

Said I not unto thee - This was implied in what he had said about the
resurrection of her brother, [Joh
11:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#023). There would be a
manifestation of the glory of God in raising him up which she would be
permitted, with all others, to behold.

The glory of God - The power and goodness displayed in the resurrection.
It is probable that Martha did not really expect that Jesus would raise
him up, but supposed that he went there merely to see the corpse. Hence,
when he directed them to take away the stone, she suggested that by that
time the body was offensive.

[John 11:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 11:41</span></span>

Lifted up his eyes - In an attitude of prayer. See [Luk
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013); [Mat
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#019).

I thank thee that thou hast heard me - It is possible that John has
recorded only the sum or substance of the prayer on this occasion. The
thanks which Jesus renders here are evidently in view of the fact that
power had been committed to him to raise up Lazarus. On account of the
people, and the signal proof which would be furnished of the truth of
his mission, he expressed his thanks to God. In all his actions, he
recognized his union to the Father, and his dependence upon him as
Mediator.

[John 11:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">joh 11:42</span></span>

And I knew - "As for me. So far as I am concerned. I had no anxiety, no
doubt as to myself, that I should always be heard; but the particular
ground of gratitude is the benefit that will result to those who are
witnesses." Jesus never prayed in vain. He never attempted to work a
miracle in vain; and in all his miracles the ground of his joy was, not
that he was to be praised or honored, but that others were to be
benefited and God glorified.

[John 11:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">joh 11:43</span></span>

A loud voice - Greek, "A great voice." Syriac: "A high voice." This was
distinctly asserting his power. He uttered a distinct, audible voice,
that there might be no suspicion of charm or incantation. The ancient
magicians and jugglers performed their wonders by whispering and
muttering. See the notes at [Isa 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#019).
Jesus spake openly and audibly, and asserted thus his power. So, also,
in the day of judgment he will call the dead with a great sound of a
trumpet, [Mat 24:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#031); [Th1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016).

Lazarus, come forth! - Here we may remark:

1\. That Jesus did this by his own power.

2\. The power of raising the dead is the highest of which we can
conceive. The ancient pagan declared it to be even beyond the power of
God. It implies not merely giving life to the deceased body, but the
power of entering the world of spirits, of recalling the departed soul,
and of reuniting it with the body. He that could do this must be
omniscient as well as omnipotent; and if Jesus did it by his own power,
it proves that he was divine.

3\. This is a striking illustration of the general resurrection. In the
same manner Jesus will raise all the dead. This miracle shows that it is
possible; shows the way in which it will be done by the voice of the Son
of God; and demonstrates the certainty that he will do it. Oh how
important it is that we be prepared for that moment when his voice shall
be heard in our silent tombs, and he shall call us forth again to life!

[John 11:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">joh 11:44</span></span>

He that was dead - The same man, body and soul.

Bound hand and foot - It is not certain whether the whole body and limbs
were bound together, or each limb separately. When they embalmed a
person, the whole body and limbs were swathed or bound together by
strips of linen, involved around it to keep together the aromatics with
which the body was embalmed. This is the condition of Egyptian mummies.
See [Act 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#006). But it is not certain
that this was always the mode. Perhaps the body was simply involved in a
winding-sheet. The custom still exists in western Asia. No coffins being
used, the body itself is more carefully and elaborately wrapped and
swathed than is common or desirable where coffins are used. In this
method the body is stretched out and the arms laid straight by the
sides, after which the whole body, from head to foot, is wrapped round
tightly in many folds of linen or cotton cloth; or, to be more precise,
a great length of cloth is taken and rolled around the body until the
whole is enveloped, and every part is covered with several folds of the
cloth. The ends are then sewed, to keep the whole firm and compact; or
else a narrow bandage is wound over the whole, forming, ultimately, the
exterior surface. The body, when thus enfolded and swathed, retains the
profile of the human form; but, as in the Egyptian mummies, the legs are
not folded separately, but together; and the arms also are not
distinguished, but confined to the sides in the general envelope. Hence,
it would be clearly impossible for a person thus treated to move his
arms or legs, if restored to existence.

The word rendered "grave-clothes" denotes also the bands or clothes in
which new-born infants are involved. He went forth, but his walking was
impeded by the bands or clothes in which he was involved.

And his face ... - This was a common thing when they buried their dead.
See [Joh 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#007). It is not known whether
the whole face was covered in this manner, or only the forehead. In the
Egyptian mummies it is only the forehead that is thus bound.

Loose him - Remove the bandages, so that he may walk freely. The effect
of this miracle is said to have been that many believed on him. It may
be remarked in regard to it that there could not be a more striking
proof of the divine mission and power of Jesus. There could be here no
possibility of deception:

1\. The friends of Lazarus believed him to be dead. In this they could
not be deceived. There could have been among them no design to deceive.

2\. He was four days dead. It could not be a case, therefore, of
suspended animation.

3\. Jesus was at a distance at the time of his death. There was,
therefore, no agreement to attempt to impose on others.

4\. No higher power can be conceived than that of raising the dead.

5\. It was not possible to impose on his sisters, and to convince them
that he was restored to life, if it was not really so.

6\. There were many present who were convinced also. God had so ordered
it in his providence that to this miracle there should be many
witnesses. There was no concealment, no jugglery, no secrecy. It was
done publicly, in open day, and was witnessed by many who followed them
to the grave, [Joh 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#031).

7\. Others, who saw it, and did not believe that Jesus was the Messiah,
went and told it to the Pharisees. But they did not deny that Jesus had
raised up Lazarus. They could not deny it. The very ground of their
alarm - the very reason why they went - was that he had actually done
it. Nor did the Pharisees dare to call the fact in question. If they
could have done it, they would. But it was not possible; for,

8\. Lazarus was yet alive [Joh 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#010),
and the fact of his resurrection could not be denied. Every circumstance
in this account is plain, simple, consistent, bearing all the marks of
truth. But if Jesus performed this miracle his religion is true. God
would not give such power to an impostor; and unless it can be proved
that this account is false, the Christian religion must be from God.

[John 11:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">joh 11:46</span></span>

Some of them ... - We see here the different effect which the word and
works of God will have on different individuals. Some are converted and
others are hardened; yet the evidence of this miracle was as clear to
the one as the other. But they would not be convinced.

[John 11:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">joh 11:47</span></span>

A council - A meeting of the Sanhedrin, or Great Council of the nation.
See the notes at [Mat 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#004). They
claimed the right of regulating all the affairs of religion. See the
notes at [Joh 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#019).

What do we? - What measures are we taking to arrest the progress of his
sentiments?

For this man doeth many miracles - If they admitted that he performed
miracles, it was clear what they ought to do. They should have received
him as the Messiah. It may be asked, If they really believed that he
worked miracles, why did they not believe on him? To this it may be
replied that they did not doubt that impostors might work miracles. See
[Mat 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024). To this opinion they were
led, probably, by the wonders which the magicians performed in Egypt
Exo. 7; 8, and by the passage in [Deu
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001). As they regarded the tendency of
the doctrines of Jesus to draw off the people from the worship of God,
and from keeping his law [Joh 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#016),
they did not suppose themselves bound to follow him, even if he did work
miracles.

[John 11:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">joh 11:48</span></span>

All men - That is, all men among the Jews. The whole nation.

And the Romans shall come - They were then subject to the Romans -
tributary and dependent. Whatever privileges they had they held at the
will of the Roman emperor. They believed, or feigned to believe, that
Jesus was intending to set up a temporal kingdom. As he claimed to be
the Messiah, so they supposed, of course, that he designed to be a
temporal prince, and they professed to believe that this claim was, in
fact, hostility to the Roman emperor. They supposed that it would
involve the nation in war if he was not arrested, and that the effect
would be that they would be vanquished and destroyed. It was on this
charge that they at last arraigned him before Pilate, [Luk
23:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#002).

Will take away - This expression means to destroy, to ruin, to
overthrow, [Luk 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#012); [Act
6:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#013).

Our place - This probably refers to the temple, [Act
6:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#013). It was called "the place" by
way of eminence, as being the chief or principal place on earth - being
the seat of the special worship of God. This place was utterly destroyed
by the Romans. See the notes at Matt. 24.

And nation - The nation or people of the Jews.

[John 11:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">joh 11:49</span></span>

Caiaphas - See the notes at [Luk 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#002).

Being high-Priest that same year - It is probable that the office of
high priest was at first for life, if there was no conduct that rendered
the person unworthy the office. In that case the incumbent was removed.
Thus Abiathar was removed by Solomon, [Kg1
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#027). Subsequently the kings, and
especially the conquerors of Judea, claimed and exercised the right of
removing the high priest at pleasure, so that, in the time of the
Romans, the office was held but a short time. (See the Chronological
Table.) Caiaphas held the office for about 10 years.

Ye know nothing at all - That is, you know nothing respecting the
subject under consideration. You are fools to hesitate about so plain a
case. It is probable that there was a party, even in the Sanhedrin, that
was secretly in favor of Jesus as the Messiah. Of that party Nicodemus
was certainly one. See [Joh 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001); [Joh
7:50-51](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#050); [Joh
11:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#045); [Joh
12:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#042); "Among the chief rulers, also,
many believed on him," etc.

[John 11:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">joh 11:50</span></span>

It is expedient for us - It is better for us. Literally, "It is
profitable for us."

That one man should die - Jesus they regarded as promoting sedition, and
as exposing the nation, if he was successful, to the vengeance of the
Romans, [Joh 11:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#048). If he was put to
death they supposed the people would be safe. This is all, doubtless,
that he meant by his dying for the people. He did not himself intend to
speak of his dying as an atonement or a sacrifice; but his words might
also express that, and, though he was unconscious of it, he was
expressing a real truth. In the sense in which he intended it there was
no truth in the observation, nor occasion for it, but in the sense which
the words might convey there was real and most important truth. It was
expedient, it was infinitely desirable, that Jesus should die for that
people, and for all others, to save them from perishing.

[John 11:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">joh 11:51</span></span>

Not of himself - Though he uttered what proved to be a true prophecy,
yet it was accomplished in a way which he did not intend He had a wicked
design. He was plotting murder and crime. Yet, wicked as he was, and
little as he intended it, God so ordered it that he delivered a most
precious truth respecting the atonement. Remark:

1\. God may fulfill the words of the wicked in a manner which they do
not wish or intend.

2\. He may make even their malice and wicked plots the very means of
accomplishing his purposes. What they regard as the fulfillment of their
plans God may make the fulfillment of his, yet so as directly to
overthrow their designs, and prostrate them in ruin.

3\. Sinners should tremble and be afraid when they lay plans against
God, or seek to do unjustly to others.

Being high priest that year - It is not to be supposed that Caiaphas was
a true prophet, or was conscious of the meaning which John has affixed
to his words; but his words express the truth about the atonement of
Jesus, and John records it as a remarkable circumstance that the high
priest of the nation should unwittingly deliver a sentiment which turned
out to be the truth about the death of Jesus. Great importance was
attached to the opinion of the high priest by the Jews, because it was
by him that the judgment by Urim and Thummim was formerly declared in
cases of importance and difficulty, [Num
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#021). It is not certain or probable
that the high priest ever was endowed with the gift of prophecy; but he
sustained a high office, the authority of his name was great, and it was
thence remarkable that he uttered a declaration which the result showed
to be true, though not in the sense that he intended.

He prophesied - He uttered words which proved to be prophetic; or he
expressed at that time a sentiment which turned out to be true. It does
not mean that he was inspired, or that he deserved to be ranked among
the true prophets; but his words were such that they accurately
expressed a future event. The word "prophecy" is to be taken here not in
the strict sense, but in a sense which is not uncommon in the sacred
writers. [Act 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#009); "and the same man
had four daughters, virgins, which did prophesy." See the [Rom
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006) note; [Co1
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001) note; compare [Mat
26:68](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#068); [Luk
22:64](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#064).

That Jesus should die - Die in the place of men, or as an atonement for
sinners. This is evidently the meaning which John attaches to the words.

For that nation - For the Jews. As a sacrifice for their sins. In no
other sense whatever could it be said that he died for them. His death,
so far from saving them in the sense in which the high priest understood
it, was the very occasion of their destruction. They invoked the
vengeance of God when they said, "His blood be on us and on our
children" [Mat 27:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#025), and all these
calamities came upon them because they would not come to him and be
saved - that is, because they rejected him and put him to death, [Mat
23:37-39](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037).

[John 11:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">joh 11:52</span></span>

Should gather together in one - All his chosen among the Jews and
Gentiles. See [Joh 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016).

The children of God - This is spoken not of those who were then
Christians, but of all whom God should bring to him; all who would be,
in the mercy of God, called, chosen, sanctified among all nations, [Joh
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016).

[John 11:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">joh 11:53</span></span>

They took counsel - The judgment of the high priest silenced opposition,
and they began to devise measures to put him to death without exciting
tumult among the people. Compare [Mat
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#005).

[John 11:54](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">joh 11:54</span></span>

No more openly - No more publicly, in the cities and towns. Jesus never
exposed his life unnecessarily to hazard. Although the time of his death
was determined in the counsel of God, yet this did not prevent his using
proper means to preserve his life.

The wilderness - See the notes at [Mat
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001).

A city called Ephraim - This was probably a small town in the tribe of
Ephraim, about five miles west of Jericho.

[John 11:55](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">joh 11:55</span></span>

Jews' passover - See the notes at Mat. 26:2-17. Its being called the
Jews' Passover shows that John wrote this gospel among people who were
not Jews, and to whom it was necessary, therefore, to explain their
customs.

To purify themselves - This purifying consisted in preparing themselves
for the proper observation of the Passover, according to the commands of
the law. If any were defiled in any manner by contact with the dead or
by any other ceremonial uncleanness, they were required to take the
prescribed measures for purification, [Lev
22:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#001). For want of this, great
inconvenience was sometimes experienced. See [Ch2
30:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#017). Different periods were
necessary in order to be cleansed from ceremonial pollution. For
example, one who had been polluted by the touch of a dead body, of a
sepulchre, or by the bones of the dead, was sprinkled on the third and
seventh days, by a clean person, with hyssop dipped in water mixed in
the ashes of the red heifer. After washing his body and clothes he was
then clean. These persons who went up before the Passover were doubtless
those who had in some manner been ceremonially polluted.

[John 11:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">joh 11:56</span></span>

Will not come to the feast? - They doubted whether he would come. On the
one hand, it was required by law that all males should come. On the
other, his coming was attended with great danger. This was the cause of
their doubting. It was in this situation that our Saviour, like many of
his followers, was called to act. Danger was on the one hand, and duty
on the other. He chose, as all should, to do his duty, and leave the
event with God. He preferred to do it, though he knew that death was to
be the consequence; and we should not shrink, when we have reason to
apprehend danger, persecution, or death, from an honest attempt to
observe all the commandments of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 12](joh012)

</div>
