<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh007)  [Next](joh009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#001.md)

[John 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 8:1</span></span>

Mount of Olives - The mountain about a mile directly east of Jerusalem.
See the notes at [Mat 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001.md). This was
the place in which he probably often passed the night when attending the
feasts at Jerusalem. The Garden of Gethsemane, to which he was
accustomed to resort [Joh 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#002.md), was on
the western side of that mountain, and Bethany, the abode of Martha and
Mary, on its east side, [Joh 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#001.md).

[John 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 8:5</span></span>

Moses in the law ... - The punishment of adultery commanded by Moses was
death, [Lev 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#010.md); [Deu
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#022.md). The particular manner of the
death was not specified in the law. The Jews had themselves, in the time
of Christ, determined that it should be by stoning. See this described
in the notes at [Mat 21:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#035.md), [Mat
21:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#044.md). The punishment for adultery
varied. In some cases it was strangling. In the time of Ezekiel [Eze
16:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#038.md) it was stoning and being
thrust through with a sword. If the adulteress was the daughter of a
priest, the punishment was being burned to death.

[John 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 8:6</span></span>

Tempting him - Trying him, or laying a plan that they might have
occasion to accuse him. If he decided the case, they expected to be able
to bring an accusation against him; for if he decided that she ought to
die, they might accuse him of claiming power which belonged to the
Romans - the power of life and death. They might allege that it was not
the giving an opinion about an abstract case, but that she was formally
before him, that he decided her case judicially, and that without
authority or form of trial. If he decided otherwise, they would have
alleged that he denied the authority of the law, and that it was his
intention to abrogate it. They had had a controversy with him about the
authority of the Sabbath, and they perhaps supposed that he would decide
this case as he did that - against them. It may be further added that
they knew that Jesus admitted publicans and sinners to eat with him;
that one of their charges was that he was friendly to sinners (see [Luk
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#002).md); and they wished, doubtless, to
make it appear that he was gluttonous, and a winebibber, and a friend of
sinners, and disposed to relax all the laws of morality, even in the
case of adultery. Seldom was there a plan more artfully laid, and never
was more wisdom and knowledge of human nature displayed than in the
manner in which it was met.

Wrote on the ground - This took place in the temple. The "ground," here,
means the pavement, or the dust on the pavement. By this Jesus showed
them clearly that he was not solicitous to pronounce an opinion in the
case, and that it was not his wish or intention to intermeddle with the
civil affairs of the nation.

As though he heard them not - This is added by the translators. It is
not in the original, and should not have been added. There is no
intimation in the original, as it seems to be implied by this addition,
that the object was to convey the impression that he did not hear them.
What was his object is unknown, and conjecture is useless. The most
probable reason seems to be that he did not wish to intermeddle; that he
designed to show no solicitude to decide the case; and that he did not
mean to decide it unless he was constrained to.

[John 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 8:7</span></span>

They continued asking him - They pressed the question upon him. They
were determined to extort an answer from him, and showed a perseverance
in evil which has been unhappily often imitated.

Is without sin - That is, without this particular sin; he who has not
himself been guilty of this very crime - for in this place the
connection evidently demands this meaning.

Let him first cast a stone at her - In the punishment by death, one of
the witnesses threw the culprit from the scaffold, and the other threw
the first stone, or rolled down a stone to crush him. See [Deu
17:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#006.md). This was in order that the
witness might feel his responsibility in giving evidence, as he was also
to be the executioner. Jesus therefore put them to the test. Without
pronouncing on her case, he directed them, if any of them were innocent,
to perform the office of executioner. This was said, evidently, well
knowing their guilt, and well knowing that no one would dare to do it.

[John 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 8:9</span></span>

Beginning at the eldest - As being conscious of more sins, and,
therefore, being desirous to leave the Lord Jesus. The word "eldest"
here probably refers not to age, but to benefit - from those who were in
highest reputation to the lowest in rank. This consciousness of crime
showed that the state of the public morals was exceedingly corrupt, and
justified the declaration of Jesus that it was an adulterous and wicked
generation, [Mat 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#004.md).

Alone - Jesus only was left with the woman, etc.

In the midst - Her accusers had gone out, and left Jesus and the woman;
but it is by no means probable that the people had left them; and, as
this was in the temple on a public occasion, they were doubtless
surrounded still by many. This is evident from the fact that Jesus
immediately [Joh 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012.md) addressed a
discourse to the people present.

[John 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 8:10</span></span>

Hath no man condemned thee? - Jesus had directed them, if innocent, to
cast a stone, thus to condemn her, or to use the power which he gave
them to condemn her. No one of them had done that. They had accused her,
but they had not proceeded to the act expressive of judicial
condemnation.

[John 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 8:11</span></span>

Neither do I condemn thee - This is evidently to be taken in the sense
of judicial condemnation, or of passing sentence as a magistrate, for
this was what they had arraigned her for. It was not to obtain his
opinion about adultery, but to obtain the condemnation of the woman. As
he claimed no civil authority, he said that he did not exercise it, and
should not condemn her to die. In this sense the word is used in the
previous verse, and this is the only sense which the passage demands.
Besides, what follows shows that this was his meaning.

Go, and sin no more - You have sinned. You have been detected and
accused. The sin is great. But I do not claim power to condemn you to
die, and, as your accusers have left you, my direction to you is that
you sin no more. This passage therefore teaches us:

1\. that Jesus claimed no civil authority.

2\. that he regarded the action of which they accused her as sin.

3\. that he knew the hearts and lives of men.

4\. that men are often very zealous in accusing others of that of which
they themselves are guilty. And,

5\. that Jesus was endowed with wonderful wisdom in meeting the devices
of his enemies, and eluding their deep-laid plans to involve him in
ruin.

It should be added that this passage, together with the last verse of
the preceding chapter, has been by many critics thought to be spurious.
It is wanting in many of the ancient manuscripts and versions, and has
been rejected by Erasmus, Calvin, Beza, Grotius, Wetstein, Tittman,
Knapp, and many others. It is not easy to decide the question whether it
be a genuine part of the New Testament or not. Some have supposed that
it was not written by the evangelists, but was often related by them,
and that after a time it was recorded and introduced by Papias into the
sacred text.

[John 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 8:12</span></span>

I am the light of the world - See the notes at [Joh
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004.md), [Joh
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009.md).

[John 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 8:13</span></span>

Thou bearest record of thyself - Thou art a witness for thyself, or in
thy own case. See [Joh 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#031.md). The law
required two witnesses in a criminal case, and they alleged that as the
only evidence which Jesus had was his own assertion, it could not be
entitled to belief.

Is not true - Is not worthy of belief, or is not substantiated by
sufficient evidence.

[John 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 8:14</span></span>

Jesus answered ... - To this objection Jesus replied by saying, first,
that the case was such that his testimony alone ought to be received;
and, secondly, that he had the evidence given him by his Father. Though,
in common life, in courts, and in mere human transactions, it was true
that a man ought not to give evidence in his own case, yet in this
instance, such was the nature of the case that his word was worthy to be
believed.

My record - My evidence, my testimony.

Is true - Is worthy to be believed.

For I know whence I came ...but ye ... - I know by what authority I act;
I know by whom I am sent, and what commands were given me; but you
cannot determine this, for you do not know these unless I bear witness
of them to you. We are to remember that Jesus came not of himself [Joh
6:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#038.md); that he came not to do his own
will, but the will of his Father. He came as a witness of those things
which he had seen and known [Joh 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#011.md),
and no man could judge of those things for no man had seen them. As he
came from heaven; as he knew his Father's will; as he had seen the
eternal world, and known the counsels of his Father, so his testimony
was worthy of confidence. As they had not seen and known these things,
they were not qualified to judge. An ambassador from a foreign court
knows the will and purposes of the sovereign who sent him, and is
competent to bear witness of it. The court to which he is sent has no
way of judging but by his testimony, and he is therefore competent to
testify in the case. All that can be demanded is that he give his
credentials that he is appointed, and this Jesus had done both by the
nature of his doctrine and his miracles.

[John 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 8:15</span></span>

After the flesh - According to appearance; according to your carnal and
corrupt mode; not according to the spiritual nature of the doctrines. By
your preconceived opinions and prejudices you are determined not to
believe that I am the Messiah.

I judge no man - Jesus came not to condemn the world, [Joh
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#017.md). They were in the habit of
judging rashly and harshly of all; but this was not the purpose or
disposition of the Saviour. This expression is to be understood as
meaning that he judged no one after their manner; he did not come to
censure and condemn men after the appearance, or in a harsh, biased, and
unkind manner.

[John 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 8:16</span></span>

And yet, if I judge - If I should express my judgment of men or things.
He was not limited, nor forbidden to do it, nor restrained by any fear
that his judgment would be erroneous.

My judgment is true - Is worthy to be regarded.

For I am not alone - I concur with the Father who hath sent me. His
judgment you admit would be right, and my judgment would accord with
his. He was commissioned by his Father, and his judgment would coincide
with all that God had purposed or revealed. This was shown by the
evidence that God gave that he had sent him into the world.

[John 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 8:17</span></span>

In your law - [Deu 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#006.md); [Deu
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#015.md). Compare [Mat
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#016.md). This related to cases in which
the life of an individual was involved. Jesus says that if, in such a
case, the testimony of two men were sufficient to establish a fact, his
own testimony and that of his Father ought to be esteemed ample evidence
in the case of religious doctrine.

Two men - If two men could confirm a case, the evidence of Jesus and of
God ought not to be deemed insufficient.

Is true - In Deuteronomy, "established." This means the same thing. It
is confirmed; is worthy of belief.

[John 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 8:18</span></span>

I am one that bear witness of myself - In human courts a man is not
allowed to bear witness of himself, because he has a personal interest
in the case, and the court could have no proof of the impartiality of
the evidence; but in the case of Jesus it was otherwise. When one has no
party ends to serve; when he is willing to deny himself; when he makes
great sacrifices; and when, by his life, he gives every evidence of
sincerity, his own testimony may be admitted in evidence of his motives
and designs. This was the case with Jesus and his apostles. And though
in a legal or criminal case such testimony would not be admitted, yet,
in an argument on moral subjects, about the will and purpose of him who
sent him, it would not be right to reject the testimony of one who gave
so many proofs that he came from God.

The Father ...beareth witness of me - By the voice from heaven at his
baptism [Mat 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017.md), and by the miracles
which Jesus performed, as well as by the prophecies of the Old
Testament. We may here remark:

1\. that there is a distinction between the Father and the Son. They are
both represented as bearing testimony; yet,

2\. They are not divided. They are not different beings. They bear
testimony to the same thing, and are one in counsel, in plan, in
essence, and in glory.

[John 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 8:19</span></span>

Where is thy Father? - This question was asked, doubtless, in derision.
Jesus had often given them to understand that by his Father he meant
God, [Joh 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#006.md); They professed to be
ignorant of this, and probably looked round in contempt for his Father,
that he might adduce him as a witness in the case.

If ye had known me ... - If you had listened to my instructions, and had
received me as the Messiah, you would also, at the same time, have been
acquainted with God. We may here observe,

1\. The manner in which Jesus answered them. He gave no heed to their
cavil; he was not irritated by their contempt; he preserved his dignity,
and gave them an answer worthy of the Son of God.

2\. We should meet the cavils and sneers of sinners in the same manner.
We should not render railing for railing, but "in meekness instruct
those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them
repentance to the acknowledging of the truth," [Ti2
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#025.md).

3\. The way to know God is to know Jesus Christ. "No man hath seen God
at any time. The only-begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father,
he hath declared him," [Joh 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018.md). No
sinner can have just views of God but in Jesus Christ, [Co2
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006.md).

[John 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 8:20</span></span>

The treasury - See the notes at [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012.md).

His hour was not yet come - The time for him to die had not yet arrived,
and God restrained them, and kept his life. This proves that God has
power over wicked men to control them, and to make them accomplish his
own purposes.

[John 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 8:21</span></span>

I go my way - See the notes at [Joh
7:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#033.md).

Ye shall die in your sins - That is, you will seek the Messiah; you will
desire his coming, but the Messiah that you expect will not come; and,
as you have rejected me, and there is no other Saviour, you must die in
your sins. You will die unpardoned, and as you did not seek me where you
might find me, you cannot come where I shall be. Observe:

1\. All those who reject the Lord Jesus must die unforgiven. There is no
way of pardon but by him. See the notes at [Act
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#012.md).

2\. There will be a time when sinners will seek for a Saviour but will
find none. Often this is done too late, in a dying moment, and in the
future world they may seek a deliverer, but not be able to find one.

3\. Those who reject the Lord Jesus must perish. Where he is they cannot
come. Where he is is heaven. Where he is not, with his favor and mercy,
there is hell; and the sinner that has no Savior must be wretched
forever.

[John 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 8:22</span></span>

Will he kill himself? - It is difficult to know whether this question
was asked from ignorance or malice. Self-murder was esteemed then, as it
is now, as one of the greatest crimes; and it is not improbable that
they asked this question with mingled hatred and contempt. "He is a
deceiver; he has broken the law of Moses; he is mad, and it is probable
he will go on and kill himself." If this was their meaning, we see the
wonderful patience of Jesus in enduring the contradiction of sinners;
and as he bore contempt without rendering railing for railing, so should
we.

[John 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 8:23</span></span>

Ye are from beneath - The expression from bequeath, here, is opposed to
the phrase from above. It means, You are of the earth, or are influenced
by earthly, sensual, and corrupt passions. You are governed by the
lowest and vilest views and feelings, such as are opposed to heaven, and
such as have their origin in earth or in hell.

I am from above - From heaven. My views are heavenly, and my words
should have been so interpreted.

Ye are of this world - You think and act like the corrupt men of this
world.

I am not of this world - My views are above these earthly and corrupt
notions. The meaning of the verse is: "Your reference to self-murder
shows that you are earthly and corrupt in your views. You are governed
by the mad passions of men, and can think only of these." We see here
how difficult it is to excite wicked men to the contemplation of
heavenly things. They interpret all things in a low and corrupt sense,
and suppose all others to be governed as they are themselves.

[John 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 8:24</span></span>

That I am he - That I am the Messiah.

[John 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 8:25</span></span>

Who art thou? - As Jesus did not expressly say in the previous verse
that he was the Messiah, they professed still not to understand him. In
great contempt, therefore, they asked him who he was. As if they had
said, "Who art thou that undertakest to threaten us in this manner!"
When we remember that they regarded him as a mere pretender from
Galilee; that he was poor and without friends; and that he was
persecuted by those in authority, we cannot but admire the patience with
which all this was borne, and the coolness with which he answered them.

Even the same ... - What he had professed to them was that he was the
light of the world; that he was the bread that came down from heaven;
that he was sent by his Father, etc. From all this they might easily
gather that he claimed to be the Messiah. He assumed no new character;
he made no change in his professions; he is the same yesterday, today,
and forever; and as he had once professed to be the light of the world,
so, in the face of contempt, persecution, and death, he adhered to the
profession.

The beginning - From his first discourse with them, or uniformly.

[John 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 8:26</span></span>

I have many things to say - There are many things which I might say to
reprove and expose your pride and hypocrisy. By this he implied that he
understood well their character, and that he was able to expose it.
This, indeed, he had shown them in his conversations with them.

And to judge of you - To reprove in you. There are many things in you
which I might condemn.

But he that sent we is true - Is worthy to be believed, and his
declarations about men are to be credited. The meaning of this verse may
be thus expressed: "I have indeed many things to say blaming or
condemning you. I have already said many such things, and there are many
more that I might say; but I speak only those things which God has
commanded. I speak not of myself I come to execute his commission, and
he is worthy to be heard and feared. Let it not be thought, therefore,
that my judgment is rash or harsh. It is such as is commanded by God."

[John 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 8:27</span></span>

They understood not - They knew not, or they were unwilling to receive
him as a messenger from God. They doubtless understood that he meant to
speak of God, but they were unwilling to acknowledge that he really came
from God.

[John 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 8:28</span></span>

When ye have lifted up - When you have crucified. See [Joh
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014.md) note; also [Joh
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#032.md) note.

The Son of man - See the notes at [Mat
8:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#019.md).

Then shall ye know - Then shall you have evidence or proof.

That I am he - Am the Messiah, which I have professed to be.

And that I do nothing of myself - That is, you shall have proof that God
has sent me; that I am the Messiah; and that God concurs with me and
approves my doctrine. This proof was furnished by the miracles that
attended the death of Jesus - the earthquake and darkness; but chiefly
by his resurrection from the dead, which proved, beyond a doubt, that he
was what he affirmed he was - the Messiah.

[John 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 8:29</span></span>

Is with me - In working miracles, etc.

Hath not left me alone - Though men had forsaken and rejected him, yet
God attended him.

Those things that please him - See [Mat
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017.md); "This is my beloved Son, in whom
I am well pleased," [Phi 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008.md); [Isa
53:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010.md); [Pe2
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#017.md); [Luk
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#022.md); [Mat
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005.md). His undertaking the work of
redemption was pleasing to God, and he had the consciousness that in
executing it he did those things which God approved. It is a small
matter to have men opposed to us, if we have a conscience void of
offence, and evidence that we please God. Compare [Heb
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#005.md); "Enoch - before his translation
had this testimony that he pleased God." See also [Co1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#003.md).

[John 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 8:30</span></span>

Many believed on him - Such was the convincing nature and force of the
truths which he presented, that they believed he was the Messiah and
received his doctrine. While there were many that became more obstinate
and hardened under his preaching, there were many, also, who by the same
truth were made penitent and believing. "The same sun that hardens the
clay, softens the wax" (Clarke).

[John 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 8:31</span></span>

If ye continue in my word - If you continue to obey my commandments and
to receive my doctrines.

Then are ye ... - This is the true test of Christian character. [Joh
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021.md); "he that hath my commandments
and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me." See [Joh
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#004.md); [Joh
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#024.md); [Jo2
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#006.md). In this place Jesus cautions them
against too much confidence from their present feelings. They were just
converted - converted by a single sermon. They had had no time to test
their faith. Jesus assures them that if their faith should abide the
test, if it should produce obedience to his commandments and a truly
life, it would be proof that their faith was genuine, for the tree is
known by its fruit. So we may say to all new converts, Do not repress
your love or your joy, but do not be too confident. Your faith has not
yet been tried, and if it does not produce a holy life it is vain, [Jam
2:17-26](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#017.md).

[John 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 8:32</span></span>

Shall know the truth - See the notes at [Joh
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#017.md).

The truth shall make you free - The truth here means the Christian
religion. Compare [Gal 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001.md); [Col
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#006.md). The doctrines of the true
religion shall make you free - that is, it will free you from the
slavery of evil passions, corrupt propensities, and grovelling views.
The condition of a sinner is that of a captive or a slave to sin. He is
one who serves and obeys the dictates of an evil heart and the
promptings of an evil nature, [Rom
6:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#016.md); "Ye were the servants of
sin;" - [Rom 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019.md); "Ye have yielded
your members servants unto iniquity;" - [Rom
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#020.md); [Rom
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#006.md), [Rom
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008.md),[Rom
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#011.md); [Rom
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021.md); [Act
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#023.md); "Thou art in the - bond of
iniquity;" [Gal 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#003.md), [Gal
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009.md). The effect of the gospel is to
break this hard bondage to sin and to set the sinner free. We learn from
this that religion is not slavery or oppression. It is true freedom.

"He is the freeman whom the truth makes free,

And all are slaves beside." - Cowper.

The service of God is freedom from degrading vices and carnal
propensities; from the slavery of passion and inordinate desires. It is
a cheerful and delightful surrender of ourselves to Him whose yoke is
easy and whose burden is light.

[John 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 8:33</span></span>

They answered him - Not those who believed on him, but some who stood by
and heard him.

We be Abraham's seed - We are the children or descendants of Abraham.
Abraham was not a slave, and they pretended that they were his real
descendants, inheriting his freedom as well as his spirit. They meant
that they were the direct descendants of Abraham by Isaac, his heir.
Ishmael, also Abraham's son, was the son of a bondwoman [Gal
4:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#021.md), but they were descended in a
direct line from the acknowledged heir of Abraham.

Were never in bondage to any, man - This is a most remarkable
declaration, and one evidently false. Their fathers had been slaves in
Egypt; their nation had been enslaved in Babylon; it had repeatedly been
subject to the Assyrians; it was enslaved by Herod the Great; and was,
at the very time they spoke, groaning under the grievous and
insupportable bondage of the Romans. But we see here:

1\. That Jesus was right when he said [Joh
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044.md), "Ye are of your father the
devil; he is a liar, and the father of it."

2\. People will say anything, however false or ridiculous, to avoid and
oppose the truth.

3\. People groaning under the most oppressive bondage are often
unwilling to acknowledge it in any manner, and are indignant at being
charged with it. This is the case with all sinners.

4\. Sin, and the bondage to sin, produces passion, irritation, and a
troubled soul; and a person under the influence of passion regards
little what he says, and is often a liar.

5\. There is need of the gospel. That only can make people free, calm,
collected, meek, and lovers of truth; and since every person is by
nature the servant of sin, he should without delay seek an interest in
that gospel which can alone make him free.

[John 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 8:34</span></span>

Whosoever committeth sin ... - In this passage Jesus shows them that he
did not refer to political bondage, but to the slavery of the soul to
evil passions and desires.

Is the servant - Is the slave of sin. He is bound to it as a slave is to
his master.

[John 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 8:35</span></span>

The servant abideth not ... - The servant does not, of course, remain
forever, or until his death. with his master. If he is disobedient and
wicked, the master sells him or turns him away. He is not the heir, and
may at any time be expelled from the house of his master. But a son is
the heir. He cannot be in this manner cast off or sold. He is privileged
with the right of remaining in the family. This takes place in common
life. So said the Saviour to the Jews: "You, if you are disobedient and
rebellious, may at any time be rejected from being the people of God,
and be deprived of your special privileges as a nation. You are in the
condition of servants, and unless you are made free by the gospel, and
become entitled to the privilege of the sons of God, you will be cast
off like an unfaithful slave." Compare [Heb
3:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#005.md).

Abideth not - Remains not, or has not the legal right to remain. He may
at any time be rejected or sold.

In the house - In the family of his master.

For ever - During the whole time of his life.

The Son - The heir. He remains, and cannot be sold or cast off.

Ever - Continually. Till the day of his death. This is the privilege of
a son, to inherit and dispose of the property.

[John 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 8:36</span></span>

If the Son ... - The Son of God - heir of all things - who is forever
with God, and who has therefore the right and power to liberate men from
their thraldom.

Shall make you free - Shall deliver you from the bondage and dominion of
sin.

Free indeed - Truly and really free. You shall be blessed with the most
valuable freedom; not from the chains and oppressions of earthly masters
and monarchs, but from the bondage of sin.

[John 8:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 8:37</span></span>

I know ... - I admit that you are the descendants of Abraham. Jesus did
not wish to call that in question, but he endeavored to show them that
they might be his descendants and still lack entirely his spirit. See
the notes at [Mat 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009.md).

Ye seek to kill me - [Joh 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#016.md); [Joh
7:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#032.md).

Because my word - My doctrine; the principles of my religion. You have
not the spirit of my doctrine; you hate it, and you therefore seek to
kill me.

Hath no place - That is, you do not embrace my doctrine, or it exerts no
influence over you. The original word conveys the notion that there was
no room for his doctrine in their minds. It met with obstructions, and
did not penetrate into their hearts. They were so filled with pride, and
prejudice, and false notions, that they would not receive his truth; and
as they had not his truth or spirit, and could not bear it, they sought
to kill him.

[John 8:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 8:38</span></span>

I speak ... - [Joh 3:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#011.md).

My Father - God.

Your father - The devil. See [Joh
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044.md). To see here means to learn of.
They had learned of or been taught by the devil, and imitated him.

[John 8:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 8:39</span></span>

Abraham is our father - We are descended from Abraham. Of this the Jews
boasted much, as being descended from such an illustrious man. See the
notes at [Mat 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009.md). As Jesus did not
expressly say who he meant [Joh 8:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#038.md)
when he said they did the works of their father, they obstinately
persisted in pretending not to understand him, as if they had said, "We
acknowledge no other father but Abraham, and to charge us with being the
offspring of another is slander and calumny."

If ye were Abraham's children - The words "sons" and "children" are
often used to denote those who imitate another or who have his spirit.
See the notes at [Mat 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001.md). Here it
means, "if you were worthy to be called the children of Abraham, or if
you had his spirit."

[John 8:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">joh 8:40</span></span>

Ye seek to kill me - See [Joh 8:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#037.md).

This did not Abraham - Or such things Abraham did not do. There are two
things noted here in which they differed from Abraham:

1\. In seeking to kill him, or in possessing a murderous and bloody
purpose.

2\. In rejecting the truth as God revealed it. Abraham was distinguished
for love to man as well as God. He liberated the captives [Gen
14:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014.md); was distinguished for
hospitality to strangers [Gen 18:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001.md);
and received the revelations of God to him, however mysterious, or
however trying their observance, [Gen
12:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001.md); [Gen
15:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#004.md); 22. It was for these things
that he is so much commended in the New Testament [Rom
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#009.md); [Rom
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#009.md); [Gal
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#006.md); and, as the Jews sought to kill
Jesus instead of treating him hospitably and kindly, they showed that
they had none of the spirit of Abraham.

[John 8:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 8:41</span></span>

The deeds of your father - See [Joh
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#038.md). Jesus repeats the charge, and
yet repeats it as if unwilling to name Satan as their father. He chose
that they should infer whom he meant, rather than bring a charge so
direct and repelling. When the Saviour delivered an awful or an
offensive truth, he always approached the mind so that the truth might
make the deepest impression.

We be not born of fornication - The people still professed not to
understand him; and since Jesus had denied that they were the children
of Abraham, they affected to suppose that he meant they were a mixed,
spurious race; that they had no right to the covenant privileges of the
Jews; that they were not worshippers of the true God. Hence, they said,
We are not thus descended. We have the evidence of our genealogy. We are
worshippers of the true God, descended from those who acknowledged him,
and we acknowledge no other God and Father than him. To be children of
fornication is an expression denoting in the Scriptures idolatry, or the
worship of other gods than the true God, [Isa
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021.md); [Isa
57:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#003.md); [Heb
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002.md); [Heb
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#004.md). This they denied. They affirmed
that they acknowledged no God for their Father but the true God.

[John 8:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">joh 8:42</span></span>

If God were your Father - If you had the spirit of God, or love to him,
or were worthy to be called his children.

Ye would love me - Jesus was "the brightness of the Father's glory and
the express image of his person," [Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003.md). "Everyone that loveth him that
begat, loveth him also that is begotten of him," [Jo1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#001.md). From this we see:

1\. that all who truly love God, love his Son Jesus Christ.

2\. that men that pretend that they love God, and reject his Son, have
no evidence that they are the friends of God.

3\. that those who reject the Bible cannot be the friends of God. If
they loved God, they would love Him who came from him, and who bears his
image.

[John 8:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">joh 8:43</span></span>

Why do ye not ... - My meaning is clear, if you were disposed to
understand me.

Even because ye cannot hear my word - The word "hear" in this place is
to be understood in the sense of bear or tolerate, as in [Joh
6:60](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#060.md). His doctrine was offensive to
them. They hated it, and hence they perverted his meaning, and were
resolved not to understand him. Their pride, vanity, and wickedness
opposed it. The reason why sinners do not understand the Bible and its
doctrines is because they cannot bear them. They hate them, and their
hatred produces want of candor, a disposition to cavil and to pervert
the truth, and an obstinate purpose that it shall not be applied to
their case. Hence, they embrace every form of false doctrine, and choose
error rather than truth, and darkness rather than light. A disposition
to believe God is one of the best helps for understanding the Bible.

[John 8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">joh 8:44</span></span>

Ye are of your father the devil - That is, you have the temper,
disposition, or spirit of the devil. You are influenced by him, you
imitate him, and ought therefore to be called his children. See also
[Jo1 3:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#008.md); [Act
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#010.md); "Thou child of the devil."

The devil - See the notes at [Mat 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001.md).

The lusts - The desires or the wishes. You do what pleases him.

Ye will do - The word "will," here, is not an auxiliary verb. It does
not simply express futurity, or that such a thing will take place, but
it implies an act of volitions. This you will or choose to do. The same
mode of speech occurs in [Joh 5:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#040.md). In
what respects they showed that they were the children of the devil he
proceeds to state:

1\. in their murderous disposition;

2\. in rejecting the truth;

3\. in being favorable to falsehood and error.

He was a murderer from the beginning - That is, from the beginning of
the world, or in the first records of him he is thus represented. This
refers to the seduction of Adam and Eve. Death was denounced against
sin, [Gen 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#017.md). The devil deceived our
first parents, and they became subject to death, Gen. 3. As he was the
cause why death came into the world, he may be said to have been a
murderer in that act, or from the beginning. We see here that the
tempter mentioned in Gen. 3 was Satan or the devil, who is here declared
to have been the murderer. Compare [Rom
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012.md), and [Rev
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#009.md); "And the great dragon was cast
out, that old serpent called the devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the
whole world." Besides, Satan has in all ages deceived men, and been the
cause of their spiritual and eternal death. His work has been to
destroy, and in the worst sense of the word he may be said to have been
a murderer. It was by his instigation, also, that Cain killed his
brother, [Jo1 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#012.md); "Not as Cain, who
was of that wicked one, and slew his brother." As the Jews endeavored to
kill the Saviour, so they showed that they had the spirit of the devil.

Abode not in the truth - He departed from the truth, or was false and a
liar.

No truth in him - That is, he is a liar. It is his nature and his work
to deceive.

He speaketh of his own - The word "own" is in the plural number, and
means of the things that are appropriate to him, or that belong to his
nature. His speaking falsehood is originated by his own propensities or
disposition; he utters the expressions of his genuine character.

He is a liar - As when he deceived Adam, and in his deceiving, as far as
possible, the world, and dragging man down to perdition.

The father of it - The father or originator of falsehood. The word "it"
refers to lie or falsehood understood. From him falsehood first
proceeded, and all liars possess his spirit and are under his influence.
As the Jews refused to hear the truth which Jesus spoke, so they showed
that they were the children of the father of lies.

[John 8:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">joh 8:46</span></span>

Which of you convinceth me? - To convince, with us, means to satisfy a
man's own mind of the truth of anything; but this is not its meaning
here. It rather means to convict. Which of you can prove that I am
guilty of sin?

Of sin - The word "sin" here evidently means "error, falsehood, or
imposture." It stands opposed to truth. The argument of the Saviour is
this: A doctrine might be rejected if it could be proved that he that
delivered it was an impostor; but as you cannot prove this of me, you
are bound to receive my words.

[John 8:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">joh 8:47</span></span>

He that is of God - He that loves, fears, and honors God.

Heareth God's words - Listens to, or attends to the doctrines or
commandments of God, as a child who loves his parent will regard and
obey his commandments. This is an evidence of true piety. A willingness
to receive all that God teaches us and to obey all his commandments, is
an undoubted proof that we are his friends, [Joh
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021.md); [Jo1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#004.md); [Jo1
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#024.md). As the Jews did not show a
readiness to obey the commands of God, it proved that they were not of
him, and to this was owing their rejection of the Lord Jesus.

[John 8:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">joh 8:48</span></span>

Say we not well - Say we not truly.

Thou art a Samaritan - This was a term of contempt and reproach. See the
notes at [Joh 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#009.md). It had the force of
charging him with being a heretic or a schismatic, because the
Samaritans were regarded as such.

And hast a devil - See [Joh 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#020.md). This
charge they brought against him because he had said that they were not
of God or were not the friends of God. This they regarded as the same as
taking sides with the Samaritans, for the question between the Jews and
Samaritans was, which of them worshipped God aright, [Joh
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#020.md). As Jesus affirmed that the Jews
were not of God, and as he, contrary to all their views, had gone and
preached to the Samaritans John 4, they regarded it as a proof that he
was disposed to take part with them. They also regarded it as evidence
that he had a devil. The devil was an accuser or calumniator and as
Jesus charged them with being opposed to God, they considered it as
proof that he was influenced by such an evil spirit.

devil - In the original, demon. Not the prince or chief of the devils,
but an evil spirit.

[John 8:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#049.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">joh 8:49</span></span>

I have not a devil - To the first part of the charge, that he was a
Samaritan, he did not reply. To the other part he replied by saying that
he honored his Father. He taught the doctrines that tended to exalt God.
He taught that he was holy and true. He sought that men should love him
and obey him. All his teaching proved this. An evil spirit would not do
this, and this was sufficient proof that he was not influenced by such a
spirit.

[John 8:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#050.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">joh 8:50</span></span>

Mine own glory - My own praise or honor. In all his teaching this was
true. He did not seek to exalt or to vindicate himself. He was willing
to lie under reproach and to be despised. He regarded little, therefore,
their taunts and accusations; and even now, he says, he would not seek
to vindicate himself.

There is one that seeketh and judgeth - God will take care of my
reputation. He seeks my welfare and honor, and I may commit my cause
into his hands without attempting my own vindication. From these verses
[Joh 8:46-50](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#046.md) we may learn:

1\. That where men have no sound arguments, they attempt to overwhelm
their adversaries by calling odious and reproachful names. Accusations
of heresy and schism, and the use of reproachful terms, are commonly
proof that men are not only under the influence of unchristian feeling,
but that they have no sound reasons to support their cause.

2\. It is right to vindicate ourselves from such charges, but it should
not be done by rendering railing for railing. "In meekness we should
instruct those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give
them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth," [Ti2
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#025.md).

3\. We should not regard it as necessarily dishonorable if we lie under
reproach. If we have a good conscience, if we have examined for
ourselves, if we are conscious that we are seeking the glory of God, we
should be willing, as Jesus was, to bear reproach, believing that God
will in due time avenge us, and bring forth our righteousness as the
light, and our judgment as the noonday, [Psa
37:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#006.md).

[John 8:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#051.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">joh 8:51</span></span>

If a man keep my saying - If he believes on me and obeys my
commandments.

He shall never see death - To see death, or to taste of death, is the
same as to die, [Luk 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#026.md); [Mat
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#028.md); [Mar
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#001.md). The sense of this passage is, "He
shall obtain eternal life, or he shall be raised up to that life where
there shall be no death." See [Joh
6:49-50](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#049.md); [Joh
3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036.md); [Joh
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024.md); [Joh
11:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025.md).

[John 8:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#052.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">joh 8:52</span></span>

Hast a devil - Art deranged. Because he affirmed a thing which they
supposed to be contrary to all experience, and to be impossible.

[John 8:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#053.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">joh 8:53</span></span>

Whom makest thou thyself? - Or, who dost thou pretend to be? Although
the greatest of the prophets have died, yet thou a Nazarene, a
Samaritan, and a devil pretendest that thou canst keep thy followers
from dying! It would have been scarcely possible to ask a question
implying more contempt and scorn.

[John 8:54](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#054.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">joh 8:54</span></span>

If I honour myself - If I commend or praise myself. If I had no other
honor and sought no other honor than that which proceeds from a desire
to glorify myself.

My honour is nothing - My commendation or praise of myself would be of
no value. See the notes at [Joh 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#031.md).

[John 8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">joh 8:56</span></span>

Your father Abraham - The testimony of Abraham is adduced by Jesus
because the Jews considered it to be a signal honor to be his
descendants, [Joh 8:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#039.md). As they
regarded the sayings and deeds of Abraham as especially illustrious and
worthy of their imitation, so they were bound, in consistency, to listen
to what he had said of the Messiah.

Rejoiced - This word includes the notion of desire as well as rejoicing.
It denotes that act when, compelled with strong desire for an object, we
leap forward toward its attainment with joy; and it expresses:

1\. the fact that this was an object that filled the heart of Abraham
with joy; and,

2\. that he earnestly desired to see it.

We have no single word which expresses the meaning of the original. In
[Mat 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012.md) it is rendered "be exceeding
glad."

To see - Rather, he earnestly and joyfully desired that he might see. To
see here means to have a view or distinct conception of. It does not
imply that Abraham expected that the Messiah would appear during his
life, but that he might have a representation of, or a clear description
and foresight of the times of the Messiah.

My day - The, day of the Messiah. The word "day," here, is used to
denote the time, the appearance, the advent, and the manner of life of
the Messiah. [Luk 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#026.md); "as it was in
the days of Noah so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man." See
[Joh 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#004.md); [Mat
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012.md). The day of judgment is also
called the day of the Son of man, because it will be a remarkable time
of his manifestation. Or perhaps in both those cases it is called his
day because he will act the most conspicuous part; his person and work
will characterize the times; as we speak of the days of Noah, etc.,
because he was the most conspicuous person of the age.

He saw it - See [Heb 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013.md); "These all
died in faith, not having received (obtained the fulfillment of) the
promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them,"
etc. Though Abraham was not permitted to live to see the times of the
Messiah, yet he was permitted to have a prophetic view of him, and also
of the design of his coming; for,

1\. God foretold his advent clearly to him, [Gen
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003.md); [Gen
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#018.md). Compare [Gal
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016.md); "Now to Abraham and his seed
were the promises made. He saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as
of one, and to thy seed, which is Christ."

2\. Abraham was permitted to have a view of the death of the Messiah as
a sacrifice for sin, represented by the command to offer Isaac, [Gen
22:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001.md). Compare [Heb
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#019.md). The death of the Messiah as a
sacrifice for the sins of men was that which characterized his work -
which distinguished his times and his advent, and this was represented
to Abraham clearly by the command to offer his son. From this arose the
proverb among the Jews [Gen 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#014.md), "In
the mount of the Lord it shall be seen," or it shall be provided for; a
proverb evidently referring to the offering of the Messiah on the mount
for the sins of men. By this event Abraham was impressively told that a
parent would not be required to offer in sacrifice his sons for the sins
of his soul - a thing which has often been done by pagan; but that God
would provide a victim, and in due time an offering would be made for
the world.

Was glad - Was glad in view of the promise, and that he was permitted so
distinctly to see it represented. If the father of the faithful rejoiced
so much to see him afar off, how should we rejoice that he has come;
that we are not required to look into a distant futurity, but know that
he has appeared; that we may learn clearly the manner of his coming, his
doctrine, and the design of his death! Well might the eyes of a
patriarch rejoice to be permitted to look in any manner on the sublime
and glorious scene of the Son of God dying for the sins of men. And our
chief honor and happiness is to contemplate the amazing scene of man's
redemption, where the Saviour groaned and died to save a lost and ruined
race.

[John 8:57](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#057.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">joh 8:57</span></span>

Fifty years old - Jesus is supposed to have been at this time about the
age of 33. It is remarkable that when he was so young they should have
mentioned the number 50, but they probably designed to prevent the
possibility of a reply. Had they said 40 they might have apprehended a
reply, or could not be so certain that they were correct.

Hast thou seen Abraham? - It is remarkable, also, that they perverted
his words. His affirmation was not that he had seen Abraham, but that
Abraham had seen his day. The design of Jesus was to show that he was
greater than Abraham, [Joh 8:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#053.md). To do
this, he says that Abraham, great as he was, earnestly desired to see
his time, thus acknowledging his inferiority to the Messiah. The Jews
perverted this, and affirmed that it was impossible that he and Abraham
should have seen each other.

[John 8:58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">joh 8:58</span></span>

Verily, verily - This is an expression used only in John. It is a strong
affirmation denoting particularly the great importance of what was about
to be affirmed. See the notes at [Joh
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005.md).

Before Abraham was - Before Abraham lived.

I am - The expression I am, though in the present tense, is clearly
designed to refer to a past time. Thus, in [Psa
90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002.md), "From everlasting to everlasting
thou art God." Applied to God, it denotes continued existence without
respect to time, so far as he is concerned. We divide time into the
past, the present, and the future. The expression, applied to God,
denotes that he does not measure his existence in this manner, but that
the word by which we express the present denotes his continued and
unchanging existence. Hence, he assumes it as his name, "I AM," and "I
AM that I AM," [Exo 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014.md). Compare [Isa
44:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006.md); [Isa
47:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#008.md). There is a remarkable similarity
between the expression employed by Jesus in this place and that used in
Exodus to denote the name of God. The manner in which Jesus used it
would strikingly suggest the application of the same language to God.
The question here was about his pre-existence. The objection of the Jews
was that he was not 50 years old, and could not, therefore, have seen
Abraham. Jesus replied to that that he existed before Abraham. As in his
human nature he was not yet 50 years old, and could not, as a man, have
existed before Abraham, this declaration must be referred to another
nature; and the passage proves that, while he was a man, he was also
endowed with another nature existing before Abraham, and to which he
applied the term (familiar to the Jews as expressive of the existence of
God) I AM; and this declaration corresponds to the affirmation of John
[Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md), that he was in the beginning
with God, and was God. This affirmation of Jesus is one of the proofs on
which John relies to prove that he was the Messiah [Joh
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#031.md), to establish which was the
design of writing this book.

[John 8:59](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#059.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_059">joh 8:59</span></span>

Then took they up stones - It seems they understood him as blaspheming,
and proceeded, even without a form of trial, to stone him as such,
because this was the punishment prescribed in the law for blasphemy,
[Lev 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#016.md). See [Joh
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#031.md). The fact that the Jews
understood him in this sense is strong proof that his words naturally
conveyed the idea that he was divine. This was in the temple. Herod the
Great had not yet completed its repairs, and Dr. Lightfoot has remarked
that stones would be lying around the temple in repairing it, which the
people could easily use in their indignation.

Jesus hid himself - See [Luk 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#030.md).
That is, he either by a miracle rendered himself invisible, or he so
mixed with the multitude that he was concealed from them and escaped.
Which is the meaning cannot be determined.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 9](joh009.md)

</div>
