<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](luk024)  [Next](joh001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 0:0</span></span>

Preface to John

John, the writer of this Gospel, was the son of Zebedee and Salome;
compare [Mat 27:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#056) with [Mar
15:40-41](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#040). His father was a fisherman
of Galilee, though it would appear that he was not destitute of
property, and was not in the lowest condition of life. He had hired men
in his employ, [Mar 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#020). Salome is
described as one who attended our Saviour in his travels, and ministered
to his needs, [Mat 27:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#055); [Mar
15:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#041). Also, John was known to
Caiaphas, the high priest [Joh 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#015).
On the cross, Jesus commended his own mother (Mary) to John, and he took
her into his own home [Joh 19:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#026),
with whom, history informs us, she lived until her death, about 15 years
after the crucifixion of Christ. From all this it would seem not
improbable that John had some property, and was better known than any of
the other apostles.

John was the youngest of the apostles when called by Jesus, and John
lived to the greatest age; he is the only one who is supposed to have
died a peaceful death. He was called to be a follower of Jesus while
engaged with his father and his older brother James mending their nets
at Lake Tiberias, [Mat 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#021); [Mar
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#019); [Luk
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#010).

John was admitted by our Saviour to special favor and friendship. One of
the ancient fathers (Theophylact) says that he was related to him.
"Joseph," he says, "had seven children by a former wife, four sons and
three daughters, Martha, Esther, and Salome, whose son was John.
Therefore, Salome was reckoned our Lord's sister, and John was his
nephew." If this was the case, it may explain the reason why James and
John sought and expected the first places in his kingdom, [Mat
20:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#020). These may also possibly be
the persons who were called our Lord's "brethren" and "sisters," [Mat
13:55-56](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055). This may also explain the
reason why our Saviour committed his mother to the care of John on the
cross, [Joh 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#027).

The two brothers, James and John, with Peter, were admitted to peculiar
favors by our Lord several times. They were the only disciples who were
permitted to be present at the raising of the daughter of Jairus, [Mar
5:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#037); [Luk
8:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#051). Only they were permitted to
attend the Saviour to the mount where he was transfigured, [Mat
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001); [Mar
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#002). The same three were permitted to
be present at his sufferings in the garden of Gethsemane, [Mat
26:36-45](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#036); [Mar
14:32-42](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#032). And, it was to these
disciples, together with Andrew, to whom the Saviour specially addressed
himself when he made known the desolations that were coming upon
Jerusalem and Judea; compare [Mat
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012); [Mar
13:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#003). John was also admitted to
special friendship with the Lord Jesus. Hence, he is mentioned as "that
disciple whom Jesus loved" [Joh 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#026),
and he is represented [Joh 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#023) as
leaning upon his bosom at the institution of the Lord's Supper an
evidence of unusual friendship. See the notes on that. Though the
Redeemer was attached to all his disciples, yet there is no
improbability in supposing that his disposition was congenial with that
of the meek and amiable John - thus authorizing and settling the example
of special friendships among Christians.

To John was committed the care of Mary, the mother of Jesus. After the
ascension of Christ he remained some time at Jerusalem, [Act
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#014); [Act
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001); [Act
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013). John is also mentioned as having
been sent down to Samaria to preach the gospel there with Peter [Act
8:14-25](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#014); and from Acts 15 it appears
that he was present at the council at Jerusalem in 49 or 50 a.d. All
this agrees with what is said by Eusebius, that he lived at Jerusalem
until the death of Mary, 15 years after the crucifixion of Christ. Until
this time it is probable that he had not been engaged in preaching the
gospel among the Gentiles.

At what time he first went among the Gentiles to preach the gospel is
not certainly known. It has been commonly supposed that he resided in
Judea and the neighborhood until the war broke out with the Romans, and
that he came into Asia Minor about the year 69 or 70 a.d. It is clear
that he was not at Ephesus at the time that Paul visited those regions,
since in all the travels of Paul and Luke there is no mention made of
John.

Ecclesiastical history informs us that he spent the latter part of his
life in Asia Minor, and that he resided chiefly at Ephesus, the chief
city of that country. Of his residence in Ephesus little is known with
certainty. In the latter part of his life he was banished to Patmos, a
small desolate island in the Aegean Sea, about 20 miles in
circumference. This is commonly supposed to have been during the
persecution of Domitian, in the latter part of his reign. Domitian died
96 a.d. It is probable that he returned soon after that, in the reign of
the Emperor Trajan. On that island he wrote the Book of Revelation. See
the notes at [Rev 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009). After his
return from Patmos he lived peaceably at Ephesus until his death, which
is supposed to have occurred not long afterward. He was buried at
Ephesus; and it has been commonly thought that he was the only one of
the apostles who did not suffer martyrdom. It is evident that he lived
to a very advanced period of life. Indeed we do not know his age when
Christ called him to follow him, but we cannot suppose that it was less
than 25 or 30. If so, he must have been not far from 100 years old when
he died.

Many anecdotes are related of him while he remained at Ephesus, but
there is no sufficient evidence of their truth. Some have said that he
was taken to Rome in a time of persecution and thrown into a caldron of
boiling oil, and came out uninjured. It has been said also that, going
into a bath one day at Ephesus, he perceived the presence of Cerinthus,
who denied the divinity of the Saviour, and that he fled from him
hastily, to express his disapproval of Cerinthus' doctrine. It is also
said, and of this there can be no doubt, that during his latter years he
was not able to make a long discourse. He was carried to the assembly,
and was accustomed to say nothing but this: "Little children, love one
another." At length his disciples asked him why he always dwelt upon the
same thing. He replied, "Because it is the Lord's command; and if this
is done, it is sufficient"

Learned men have been much divided about the time when this Gospel was
written. Wetstein supposed that it was written just after our Saviour's
ascension; Mill and LeClerc, that it was written in 97 a.d.; Dr.
Lardner, that it was about the year 68 a.d., just before the destruction
of Jerusalem. The common opinion is that it was written at Ephesus after
his return from Patmos, and of course as late as the year 97 or 98 a.d.
Nothing can be determined with certainty on the subject, and it is a
matter of very little consequence.

There is no doubt that it was written by John. This is abundantly
confirmed by the ancient fathers, and was not questioned by Celsus,
Porphyry, or Julian, the most acute enemies of revelation in the early
ages. It has never been extensively questioned to have been the work of
John, and is one of the books of the New Testament whose canonical
authority was never disputed. See Lardner, or Paley's "Evidences."

The design of writing it is stated by John himself in [Joh
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#031). It was to show that Jesus was
the Christ, the Son of God, and that those who believed might have life
through his name. "This design is kept in view through the whole Gospel,
and should be remembered in our attempts to explain it." Various
attempts have been made to show that he wrote it to confute the
followers of Cerinthus and the Gnostics, but no satisfactory evidence of
such a design has been furnished.

As John wrote after the other evangelists, he has recorded many things
which they omitted. He dwells much more fully than they do on the divine
character of Jesus. John relates many things pertaining to the early
part of Jesus' ministry which they had omitted. He records many more of
Christ's discourses than they have done, and particularly the
interesting discourse at the institution of the Supper. See John 14-17.

It has been remarked that there are evidences in this Gospel that it was
not written for the Jews. The author explains words and customs which to
a Jew would have needed no explanation. See [Joh
1:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#038), [Joh
1:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#041); [Joh
5:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#001); [Joh
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#002); [Joh
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#009). The style in the Greek indicates
that he was an unlearned man. It is simple, plain, unpolished, such as
we should suppose would be used by one in his circumstances. At the same
time, it is dignified, containing pure and profound sentiments, and is
on many accounts the most difficult of all the books of the New
Testament to interpret. It contains more about Christ, his person,
design, and work, than any of the other Gospels. The other evangelists
were employed more in recording the miracles, and giving external
evidence of the divine mission of Jesus. John is employed chiefly in
telling us what Christ was, and what his unique doctrine was. His aim
was to show:

1\. that Jesus was the Messiah.

2\. to show, "from the words of Jesus himself," what the Messiah was.

The other evangelists only record Jesus' parables, his miracles, his
debates with the Scribes and Pharisees; John records chiefly Jesus'
discourses about himself. If anyone wishes to learn the true. doctrine
respecting the "Messiah, the Son of God," expressed in simple language,
but with most sublime conceptions; to learn the true nature and
character of God, and the way of approach to his mercy-seat; to see the
true nature of Christian piety, or the source and character of religious
consolation; to have perpetually before him the purest model of
character the world has seen, and to contemplate the purest precepts
that have ever been delivered to man, he cannot do it better than by a
prayerful study of the Gospel by John. It may be added that this Gospel
is of itself proof that cannot be overthrown of the truth of revelation.
John was a fisherman, unhonored and unlearned, [Act
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013). What man in that rank of life
now could compose a book like this? Can it be conceived that any man of
that rank, unless under the influence of inspiration, could conceive
notions of God so sublime, could present views of morals so pure and
could draw a character so inimitably lovely and pure as that of Jesus
Christ? To ask these questions is to answer them. And this Gospel will
stand to the end of time as an unanswerable demonstration that the
fisherman who wrote it was under a superhuman guidance, and was,
according to the promise that he has recorded ([Joh
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013); compare [Joh
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026)), "guided into all truth." It
will also remain as an unanswerable proof that the character which he
has described the character of the Lord Jesus - was real. It is a
perfect character. It does not have one flaw.

How has this happened? The attempt has often been made to draw a perfect
character - and as often, in every other instance, failed. How is it,
when Homer and Virgil, and the ancient historians, have all failed to
describe a perfect character, with the purest models before them, and
with all the aid of imagination, that in every instance they have
failed? How is it that this has at last been accomplished only by a
Jewish fisherman? The difficulty is vastly increased if another idea is
borne in mind. John describes one whom he believed to have a divine
nature, [Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001). It is an attempt to
describe "God in human nature," or to show how the Divine Being acts
when united with man, or when appearing in human form. And the
description is complete. There is not a word expressed by the Lord
Jesus, or an emotion ascribed to him that is inconsistent with such a
supposition. But this same attempt was often made, and as often failed.
Homer and Virgil, and all the ancient poets, have undertaken to show
what the gods would be if they came down and conversed with man. And
what were they? What were Jupiter, and Juno, and Venus, and Mars, and
Vulcan? Beings of lust, and envy, and contention, and blood. How has it
happened that the only successful account which has been given of the
divine nature united with the human, and of living and acting as became
such a union, has been given by a Jewish fisherman? How, unless the
character was real, and the writer under a guidance far superior to the
genius of Homer and the imagination of Virgil - the guidance of the Holy
Spirit?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 1](joh001)

</div>
