<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh006)  [Next](joh008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#001)

[John 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 7:1</span></span>

After these things - After the transactions which are recorded in the
last chapters had taken place, and after the offence he had given the
Jews. See [Joh 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#018).

Jesus walked - Or Jesus lived, or taught. He traveled around Galilee
teaching.

In Jewry - In Judea, the southern division of Palestine. Compare the
notes at [Joh 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#003).

The Jews sought - That is, the rulers of the Jews. It does not appear
that the common people ever attempted to take his life.

[John 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 7:2</span></span>

The Jews' feast of tabernacles - Or the feast of tents. This feast was
celebrated on the 15th day of the month Tisri, answering to the last
half of our month September and the first half of October, [Num
29:12](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#012); [Deu
16:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#013). It was so called from the
tents or tabernacles which on that occasion were erected in and about
Jerusalem, and was designed to commemorate their dwelling in tents in
the wilderness, [Neh 8:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#016). During
the continuance of this feast they dwelt in booths or tents, as their
fathers did in the wilderness, [Lev
23:42-43](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#042). The feast was continued
eight days, and the eighth or last day was the most distinguished, and
was called the great day of the feast, [Joh
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037); [Num
29:35](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#035). The Jews on this occasion not
only dwelt in booths, but they carried about the branches of palms;
willows, and other trees which bore a thick foliage, and also branches
of the olive-tree, myrtle, etc., [Neh
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#015). Many sacrifices were offered on
this occasion Num. 29:12-39; [Deu
16:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#014), and it was a time of general
joy. It is called by Josephus and Philo the greatest feast, and was one
of the three feasts which every male among the Jews was obliged to
attend.

[John 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 7:3</span></span>

His brethren - See the notes at [Mat
12:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#047).

Thy disciples - The disciples which he had made when he was before in
Judea, [Joh 4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#001).

The works - The miracles.

[John 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 7:4</span></span>

For there is no man ... - The brethren of Jesus supposed that he was
influenced as others are. As it is a common thing among men to seek
popularity, so they supposed that he would also seek it; and as a great
multitude would be assembled at Jerusalem at this feast, they supposed
it would be a favorable time to make himself known. What follows shows
that this was said, probably, not in sincerity, but in derision; and to
the other sufferings of our Lord was to be added, what is so common to
Christians, derision from his relatives and friends on account of his
pretensions. If our Saviour was derided, we also may expect to be by our
relatives; and, having his example, we should be content to bear it.

If thou do ... - It appears from this that they did not really believe
that he performed miracles; or, if they did believe it, they did not
suppose that he was the Christ. Yet it seems hardly credible that they
could suppose that his miracles were real, and yet not admit that he was
the Messiah. Besides, there is no evidence that these relatives had been
present at any of his miracles, and all that they knew of them might
have been from report. See the notes at [Mar
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#021). On the word brethren in [Joh
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#005), see the [Mat
13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055) note, and [Gal
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019) note.

[John 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 7:6</span></span>

My time ... - The proper time for my going up to the feast. We know not
why it was not yet a proper time for him to go. It might be because if
he went then, in their company, while multitudes were going, it would
have too much the appearance of parade and ostentation; it might excite
too much notice, and be more likely to expose him to the envy and
opposition of the rulers.

Your time ... - It makes no difference to you when you go up. Your going
will excite no tumult or opposition; it will not attract attention, and
will not endanger your lives. Jesus therefore chose to go up more
privately, and to remain until the multitude had gone. They commonly
traveled to those feasts in large companies, made up of most of the
families in the neighborhood. See the notes at [Luk
2:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#044).

[John 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 7:7</span></span>

The world cannot hate you - You profess no principles in opposition to
the world. You do not excite its envy, or rouse against you the civil
rulers. As you possess the same spirit and principles with the men of
the world, they cannot be expected to hate you.

I testify of it - I bear witness against it. This was the main cause of
the opposition which was made to him. He proclaimed that men were
depraved, and the result was that they hated him. We may expect that all
who preach faithfully against the wickedness of men will excite
opposition. Yet this is not to deter us from doing our duty, and, after
the example of Jesus, from proclaiming to men their sins, whatever may
be the result.

[John 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 7:8</span></span>

I go not up yet - Jesus remained until about the middle of the feast,
[Joh 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#014). That is, he remained about
four days after his brethren had departed, or until the mass of the
people had gone up, so that his going might excite no attention, and
that it might not be said he chose such a time to excite a tumult. We
have here a signal instance of our Lord's prudence and opposition to
parade. Though it would have been lawful for him to go up at that time,
and though it would have been a favorable period to make himself known,
yet he chose to forego these advantages rather than to afford an
occasion of envy and jealousy to the rulers, or to appear even to excite
a tumult among the people.

[John 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 7:12</span></span>

Murmuring - Contention, disputing.

He deceiveth the people - That is, he is deluding them, or drawing them
away by pretending to be the Messiah.

[John 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 7:13</span></span>

Spake openly of him - The word translated "openly," here, is commonly
rendered "boldly." This refers doubtless, to those who really believed
on him. His enemies were not silent; but his friends had not confidence
to speak of him openly or boldly that is, to speak what they really
thought. Many supposed that he was the Messiah, yet even this they did
not dare to profess. All that they could say in his favor was that he
was a good man. There are always many such friends of Jesus in the world
who are desirous of saying something good about him, but who, from fear
or shame, refuse to make a full acknowledgment of him. Many will praise
his morals, his precepts, and his holy life, while they are ashamed to
speak of his divinity or his atonement, and still more to acknowledge
that they are dependent on him for salvation.

[John 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 7:14</span></span>

About the midst - Or about the middle of the feast. It continued eight
days.

The temple - See the notes at [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012).

And taught - Great multitudes were assembled in and around the temple,
and it was a favorable time and place to make known his doctrine.

[John 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 7:15</span></span>

Knoweth this man letters - The Jewish letters or science consisted in
the knowledge of their Scriptures and traditions. Jesus exhibited in his
discourses such a profound acquaintance with the Old Testament as to
excite their amazement and admiration.

Having never learned - The Jews taught their law and tradition in
celebrated schools. As Jesus had not been instructed in those schools,
they were amazed at his learning. What early human teaching the Saviour
had we have no means of ascertaining, further than that it was customary
for the Jews to teach their children to read the Scriptures. [Ti2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015); "from a child thou (Timothy)
hast known the holy scriptures."

[John 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 7:16</span></span>

My doctrine - My teaching, or what I teach. This is the proper meaning
of the word "doctrine." It is what is taught us, and, as applied to
religion, it is what is taught us by God in the Holy Scriptures.

Is not wine - It is not originated by me. Though I have not learned in
your schools, yet you are not to infer that the doctrine which I teach
is devised or invented by me. I teach nothing that is contrary to the
will of God, and which he has not appointed me to teach.

His that sent me - God's. It is such as he approves, and such as he has
commissioned me to teach. The doctrine is divine in its origin and in
its nature.

[John 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 7:17</span></span>

If any man will do his will - Literally, if any man wills or is willing
to do the will of God. If there is a disposition in anyone to do that
will, though he should not be able perfectly to keep His commandments.
To do the will of God is to obey His commandments; to yield our hearts
and lives to His requirements. A disposition to do His will is a
readiness to yield our intellects, our feelings, and all that we have
entirely to Him, to be governed according to His pleasure.

He shall know - He shall have evidence, in the very attempt to do the
will of God, of the truth of the doctrine. This evidence is internal,
and to the individual it is satisfactory and conclusive. It is of two
kinds.

1\. He will find that the doctrines which Jesus taught are such as
commend themselves to his reason and conscience, and such as are
consistent with all that we know of the perfections of God. His
doctrines commend themselves to us as fitted to make us pure and happy,
and of course they are such as must be from God.

2\. An honest desire to obey God will lead a man to embrace the great
doctrines of the Bible. He will find that his heart is depraved and
inclined to evil, and he will see and feel the truth of the doctrine of
depravity; he will find that he is a sinner and needs to be born again;
he will learn his own weakness, and see his need of a Saviour, of an
atonement, and of pardoning mercy; he will feel that he is polluted, and
needs the purifying influence of the Holy Spirit.

Thus, we may learn:

1\. That an honest effort to obey God is the easiest way to become
acquainted with the doctrines of the Bible.

2\. Those who make such an effort will not cavil at any of the doctrines
of the Scriptures.

3\. This is evidence of the truth of revelation which every person can
apply to his own case.

4\. It is such evidence as to lead to certainty. No one who has ever
made an honest effort to live a pious life, and to do all the will of
God, has ever had any doubt of the truth of the Saviour's doctrines, or
any doubt that his religion is true and is suited to the nature of man.
They only doubt the truth of religion who wish to live in sin.

5\. We see the goodness of God in giving us evidence of his truth that
may be within every man's reach. It does not require great learning to
be a Christian, and to be convinced of the truth of the Bible. It
requires an honest heart, and a willingness to obey God.

Whether it be of God - Whether it be divine.

Or whether I speak of myself - Of myself without being commissioned or
directed by God.

[John 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 7:18</span></span>

That speaketh of himself - This does not mean about or concerning
himself, but he that speaks by his own authority, without being sent by
God, as mere human teachers do.

Seeketh his own glory - His own praise, or seeks for reputation and
applause. This is the case with mere human teachers, and as Jesus in his
discourses manifestly sought to honor God, they ought to have supposed
that he was sent by him.

No unrighteousness - This word here means, evidently, there is no
falsehood, no deception in him. He is not an impostor. It is used in the
same sense in [Th2 2:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010). It is true
that there was no unrighteousness, no sin in Jesus Christ, but that is
not the truth taught here. It is that he was not an impostor, and the
evidence of this was that he sought not his own glory, but the honor of
God. This evidence was furnished:

1\. in his retiring, unobtrusive disposition; in his not seeking the
applause of people;

2\. in his teaching such doctrines as tended to exalt God and humble
man;

3\. in his ascribing all glory and praise to God;

[John 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 7:19</span></span>

Did not Moses give you the law? - This they admitted, and on this they
prided themselves. Every violation of that law they considered as
deserving of death. They had accused Jesus of violating it because he
had healed a man on the Sabbath, and for that they had sought his life,
[Joh 5:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#010). He here recalls that
charge to their recollection, and shows them that, though they pretended
great reverence for that law, yet they were really its violators in
having sought his life.

None of you ... - None of you Jews. They had sought to kill him. This
was a pointed and severe charge, and shows the great faithfulness with
which he was accustomed to proclaim the truth.

Why go ye about to kill me? - Why do ye seek to kill me? See [Joh
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#016).

[John 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 7:20</span></span>

The people - Perhaps some of the people who were not aware of the
designs of the rulers.

Thou hast a devil - Thou art deranged or mad. See [Joh
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#020). As they saw no effort to kill
him, and as they were ignorant of the designs of the rulers, they
supposed that this was the effect of derangement.

[John 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 7:21</span></span>

One work - The healing of the man on the Sabbath, John 5.

Ye all marvel - You all wonder or are amazed, and particularly that it
was done on the Sabbath. This was the particular ground of astonishment,
that he should dare to do what they esteemed a violation of the Sabbath.

[John 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 7:22</span></span>

Moses therefore gave unto you circumcision - Moses commanded you to
circumcise your children, [Lev 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#003).
The word "therefore" in this place - literally "on account of this" -
means, "Moses on this account gave you circumcision, not because it is
of Moses, but of the fathers;" that is, the reason was not that he
himself appointed it as a new institution, but he found it already in
existence, and incorporated it in his institutions and laws.

Not because ... - Not that it is of Moses. Though Jesus spoke in
accordance with the custom of the Jews, who ascribed the appointment of
circumcision to Moses, yet he is careful to remind them that it was in
observance long before Moses. So, also, the Sabbath was kept before
Moses, and alike in the one case and the other they ought to keep in
mind the design of the appointment.

Of the fathers - Of the patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, [Gen
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#010).

Ye on the sabbath-day ... - The law required that the child should be
circumcised on the eighth day. If that day happened to be the Sabbath,
yet they held that he was to be circumcised, as there was a positive law
to that effect; and as this was commanded, they did not consider it a
breach of the Sabbath.

A man - Not an adult man, but a man-child. See [Joh
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#021); "She remembereth no more the
anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world."

[John 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 7:23</span></span>

That the law of Moses should not be broken - In order that the law
requiring it to be done at a specified time, though that might occur on
the Sabbath, should be kept.

Are ye angry ... - The argument of Jesus is this: "You yourselves, in
interpreting the law about the Sabbath, allow a work of necessity to be
done. You do that which is necessary as an ordinance of religion
denoting separation from other nations, or external purity. As you allow
this, you ought also, for the same reason, to allow that a man should be
completely restored to health - that a work of much more importance
should be done." We may learn here that it would be happy for all if
they would not condemn others in that thing which they allow. People
often accuse others of doing things which they themselves do in other
ways.

Every whit whole - Literally, "I have restored the whole man to health,"
implying that the man's whole body was diseased, and that he had been
entirely restored to health.

[John 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 7:24</span></span>

Judge not according to the appearance - Not as a thing first offers
itself to you, without reflection or candor. In appearance, to
circumcise a child on the Sabbath might be a violation of the law; yet
you do it, and it is right. So, to appearance, it might be a violation
of the Sabbath to heal a man, yet it is right to do works of necessity
and mercy.

Judge righteous judgment - Candidly; looking at the law, and inquiring
what its spirit really requires.

[John 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 7:26</span></span>

Do the rulers know indeed ... - It seems from this that they supposed
that the rulers had been convinced that Jesus was the Messiah, but that
from some cause they were not willing yet to make it known to the
people. The reasons of this opinion were these:

1\. They knew that they had attempted to kill him.

2\. They now saw him speaking boldly to the people without interruption
from the rulers.

They concluded, therefore, that some change had taken place in the
sentiments of the rulers in regard to him, though they had not yet made
it public.

The rulers - The members of the Sanhedrin, or great council of the
nation, who had charge of religious affairs.

Indeed - Truly; certainly. Have they certain evidence, as would appear
from their suffering him to speak without interruption?

The very Christ - Is truly or really the Messiah.

[John 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 7:27</span></span>

Howbeit - But. They proceeded to state a reason why they supposed that
he could not be the Messiah, whatever the rulers might think.

We know this man whence he is - We know the place of his birth and
residence.

No man knoweth whence he is - From [Mat
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#005), it appears that the common
expectation of the Jews was that the Messiah would be born at Bethlehem;
but they had also feigned that after his birth he would be hidden or
taken away in some mysterious manner, and appear again from some
unexpected quarter. We find allusions to this expectation in the New
Testament, where our Saviour corrects their common notions, [Mat
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#023); "Then if any man shall say unto
you, Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe it not." And again [Joh
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#026), "If they shall say unto you,
Behold, he is in the desert, go not forth; behold, he is in the secret
chambers, believe it not." The following extracts from Jewish writings
show that this was the common expectation: "The Redeemer shall manifest
himself, and afterward be hid. So it was in the redemption from Egypt.
Moses showed himself and then was hidden." So on the passage, [Sol
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#009) - "My beloved is like a roe or a
young hart" - they say: "A roe appears and then is hid; so the Redeemer
shall first appear and then be concealed, and then again be concealed
and then again appear." "So the Redeemer shall first appear and then be
hid, and then, at the end of 45 days, shall reappear, and cause manna to
descend." See Lightfoot. Whatever may have been the source of this
opinion, it explains this passage, and shows that the writer of this
gospel was well acquainted with the opinions of the Jews, however
improbable those opinions were.

[John 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 7:28</span></span>

Ye know whence I am - You have sufficient evidence of my divine mission,
and that I am the Messiah.

Is true - Is worthy to be believed. He has given evidence that I came
from him, and he is worthy to be believed. Many read this as a question
- Do ye know me, and know whence I am? I have not come from myself, etc.

[John 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 7:30</span></span>

Then they sought to take him - The rulers and their friends. They did
this:

1\. because of his reproof; and,

2\. for professing to be the Messiah.

His hour - The proper and the appointed time for his death. See [Mat
21:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#046).

[John 7:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 7:31</span></span>

Will he do more miracles? - It was a common expectation that the Messiah
would work many miracles. This opinion was founded on such passages as
[Isa 35:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#005), etc.: "Then the eyes of
the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped;
then shall the lame man leap as an hart," etc. Jesus had given abundant
evidence of his power to work such miracles, and they therefore believed
that he was the Messiah.

[John 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 7:32</span></span>

The people murmured such things - That is, that the question was
agitated whether he was the Messiah; that it excited debate and
contention; and that the consequence was, he made many friends. They
chose, therefore, if possible, to remove him from them.

[John 7:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 7:33</span></span>

Yet a little while am I with you - It will not be long before my death.
This is supposed to have been about six months before his death. This
speech of Jesus is full of tenderness. They were seeking his life. He
tells them that he is fully aware of it; that he will not be long with
them; and implies that they should be diligent to seek him while he was
yet with them. He was about to die, but they might now seek his favor
and find it. When we remember that this was said to his persecutors and
murderers; that it was said even while they were seeking his life, we
see the special tenderness of his love. Enmity, and hate, and
persecution did not prevent his offering salvation to them.

I go unto him that sent me - This is one of the intimations that he gave
that he would ascend to God. Compare [Joh
6:62](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#062).

[John 7:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 7:34</span></span>

Ye shall seek me - This probably means simply, Ye shall seek the
Messiah. Such will be your troubles, such the calamities that will come
on the nation, that you will earnestly desire the coming of the Messiah.
You will seek for a Deliverer, and will look for feign that he may bring
deliverance. This does not mean that they would seek for Jesus and not
be able to find him, but that they would desire the aid and comfort of
the Messiah, and would be disappointed. Jesus speaks of himself as the
Messiah, and his own name as synonymous with the Messiah. See the notes
at [Mat 23:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#039).

Shall not find me - Shall not find the Messiah. He will not come,
according to your expectations, to aid you. See the notes at Matt. 24.

Where I am - This whole clause is to be understood as future, though the
words AM and cannot are both in the present tense. The meaning is, Where
I shall be you will not be able to come. That is, he, the Messiah, would
be in heaven; and though they would earnestly desire his presence and
aid to save the city and nation from the Romans, yet they would not be
able to obtain it - represented here by their not being able to come to
him. This does not refer to their individual salvation, but to the
deliverance of their nation. It is not true of individual sinners that
they seek Christ in a proper manner and are not able to find him; but it
was true of the Jewish nation that they looked for the Messiah, and
sought his coming to deliver them, but he did not do it.

[John 7:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 7:35</span></span>

The dispersed among the Gentiles - To the Jews scattered among the
Gentiles, or living in distant parts of the earth. It is well known that
at that time there were Jews dwelling in almost every land. There were
multitudes in Egypt, in Asia Minor, in Greece, in Rome, etc., and in all
these places they had synagogues. The question which they asked was
whether he would leave an ungrateful country, and go into those distant
nations and teach them.

Gentiles - In the original, Greeks. All those who were not Jews were
called Greeks, because they were chiefly acquainted with those pagans
only who spake the Greek language. It is remarkable that Jesus returned
no answer to these inquiries. He rather chose to turn off their minds
from a speculation about the place to which he was going, to the great
affairs of their own personal salvation.

[John 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 7:37</span></span>

In the last day - The eighth day of the festival.

That great day - The day of the holy convocation or solemn assembly,
[Lev 23:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#036). This seems to have been
called the great day:

1\. because of the solemn assembly, and because it was the closing
scene.

2\. because, according to their traditions, on the previous days they
offered sacrifices for the pagan nations as well as for themselves, but
on this day for the Jews only (Lightfoot).

3\. because on this day they abstained from all servile labor [Lev
23:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#039), and regarded it as a holy day.

4\. On this day they finished the reading of the law, which they
commenced at the beginning of the feast.

5\. because on this day probably occurred the ceremony of drawing water
from the pool of Siloam.

On the last day of the feast it was customary to perform a solemn
ceremony in this manner: The priest filled a golden vial with water from
the fount of Siloam (see the notes at [Joh
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#007)), which was borne with great
solemnity, attended with the clangor of trumpets, through the gate of
the temple, and being mixed with wine, was poured on the sacrifice on
the altar. What was the origin of this custom is unknown. Some suppose,
and not improbably, that it arose from an improper understanding of the
passage in [Isa 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#003); "With joy shall
ye draw water out of the wells of salvation." It is certain that no such
ceremony is commanded by Moses. It is supposed to be probable that Jesus
stood and cried while they were performing this ceremony, that he might:

1\. illustrate the nature of his doctrine by this; and,

2\. call off their attention from a rite that was uncommanded, and that
could not confer eternal life.

Jesus stood - In the temple, in the midst of thousands of the people.

If any man thirst - Spiritually. If any man feels his need of salvation.
See [Joh 4:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#013); [Mat
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006); [Rev
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#017). The invitation is full and free
to all.

Let him come unto me ... - Instead of depending on this ceremony of
drawing water let him come to me, the Messiah, and he shall find an
ever-abundant supply for all the wants of his soul.

[John 7:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 7:38</span></span>

He that believeth on me - He that acknowledges me as the Messiah, and
trusts in me for salvation.

As the scripture hath said - This is a difficult expression, from the
fact that no such expression as follows is to be found literally in the
Old Testament. Some have proposed to connect it with what precedes - "He
that believeth on me, as the Old Testament has commanded or required" -
but to this there are many objections. The natural and obvious meaning
here is, doubtless, the true one; and Jesus probably intended to say,
not that there was any particular place in the Old Testament that
affirmed this in so many words, but that this was the substance of what
the Scriptures taught, or this was the spirit of their declarations.
Hence, the Syriac translates it in the plural - the Scriptures. Probably
there is a reference more particularly to [Isa
58:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#011), than to any other single
passage: "Thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of
water whose waters fail not." See also [Isa
44:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003); [Joe
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#018).

Out of his belly - Out of his midst, or out of his heart. The word
"belly" is often put for the midst of a thing, the center, and the
heart, [Mat 12:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#040). It means here that
from the man shall flow; that is, his piety shall be of such a nature
that it will extend its blessings to others. It shall be like a running
fountain - perhaps in allusion to statues or ornamented reservoirs in
gardens. in which pipes were placed from which water was continually
flowing. The Jews used the same figure: "His two reins are like
fountains of water, from which the law flows." And again: "When a man
turns himself to the Lord, he shall be as a fountain filled with living
water, and his streams shall flow to all the nations and tribes of men"
(Kuinoel).

Rivers - This word is used to express abundance, or a full supply. It
means here that those who are Christians shall diffuse large, and
liberal, and constant blessings on their fellow-men; or, as Jesus
immediately explains it, that they shall be the instruments by which the
Holy Spirit shall be poured down on the world.

Living water - Fountains, ever-flowing streams. That is, the gospel
shall be constant and life-giving in its blessings. We learn here:

1\. that it is the nature of Christian piety to be diffusive.

2\. that no man can believe on Jesus who does not desire that others
should also, and who will not seek it.

3\. that the desire is large and liberal - that the Christian desires
the salvation of all the world.

4\. that the faith of the believer is to be connected with the influence
of the Holy Spirit, and in that way Christians are to be like rivers of
living water.

[John 7:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 7:39</span></span>

Of the Spirit - Of the Holy Spirit, that should be sent down to attend
their preaching and to convert sinners.

For the Holy Ghost was not yet given - Was not given in such full and
large measures as should be after Jesus had ascended to heaven. Certain
measures of the influences of the Spirit had been always given in the
conversion and sanctification of the ancient saints and prophets; but
that abundant and full effusion which the apostles were permitted
afterward to behold had not yet been given. See Acts 2; [Act
10:44-45](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#044).

Jesus was not yet glorified - Jesus had not yet ascended to heaven - to
the glory and honor that awaited him there. It was a part of the
arrangement in the work of redemption that the influences of the Holy
Spirit should descend chiefly after the death of Jesus, as that death
was the procuring cause of this great blessing. Hence, he said [Joh
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007), "It is expedient for you that I
go away; for if I go not away the Comforter will not come unto you; but
if I depart I will send him unto you." See also [Joh
7:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#008); [Joh
14:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#015), [Joh
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026). Compare [Eph
4:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008).

[John 7:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">joh 7:40</span></span>

The Prophet - That is, the prophet whom they expected to precede the
coming of the Messiah - either Elijah or Jeremiah. See [Mat
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#014).

[John 7:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 7:41</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 2:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#004).

Where David was - [Sa1 16:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001).

[John 7:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">joh 7:45</span></span>

The officers - Those who had been appointed [Joh
7:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#032) to take him. It seems that Jesus
was in the midst of the people addressing them, and that they happened
to come at the very time when he was speaking. They were so impressed
and awed with what he said that they dared not take him. There have been
few instances of eloquence like this. His speaking had so much evidence
of truth, so much proof that he was from God, and was so impressive and
persuasive, that they were convinced of his innocence, and they dared
not touch him to execute their commission. We have here:

1\. A remarkable testimony to the commanding eloquence of Jesus.

2\. Wicked men may be awed and restrained by the presence of a good man,
and by the evidence that he speaks that which is true.

3\. God can preserve his friends. Here were men sent for a particular
purpose. They were armed with power. They were commissioned by the
highest authority of the nation. On the other hand, Jesus was without
arms or armies, and without external protection. Yet, in a manner which
the officers and the high priests would have little expected, he was
preserved. So, in ways which we little expect, God will defend and
deliver us when in the midst of danger.

4\. No prophet, apostle, or minister has ever spoken the truth with as
much power, grace, and beauty as Jesus. It should be ours, therefore, to
listen to his words, and to sit at his feet and learn heavenly wisdom.

[John 7:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">joh 7:47</span></span>

Are ye also deceived? - They set down the claims of Jesus as of course
an imposture. They did not examine, but were, like thousands, determined
to believe that he was a deceiver. Hence, they did not ask them whether
they were convinced, or had seen evidence that he was the Messiah; but,
with mingled contempt, envy, and anger, they asked if they were also
deluded. Thus many assume religion to be an imposture; and when one
becomes a Christian, they assume at once that he is deceived, that he is
the victim of foolish credulity or superstition, and treat him with
ridicule or scorn. Candor would require them to inquire whether such
changes were not proof of the power and truth of the gospel, as candor
in the case of the rulers required them to inquire whether Jesus had not
given them evidence that he was from God.

[John 7:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">joh 7:48</span></span>

The rulers - The members of the Sanhedrin, who were supposed to have
control over the religious rites and doctrines of the nation.

The Pharisees - The sect possessing wealth, and office, and power. The
name Pharisees sometimes denotes those who were high in honor and
authority.

Believed on him - Is there any instance in which those who are high in
rank or in office have embraced him as the Messiah? This shows the rule
by which they judged of religion:

1\. They claimed the right of regulating the doctrines and rites of
religion.

2\. They repressed the liberty of private judgment, stifled
investigation, assumed that a new doctrine must be heresy, and labored
to keep the people within inglorious bondage.

3\. They treated the new doctrine of Jesus with contempt, and thus
attempted to put it down, not by argument, but by contempt, and
especially because it was embraced by the common people. This is the way
in which doctrines contrary to the truth of God have been uniformly
supported in the world; this is the way in which new views of truth are
met; and this the way in which those in ecclesiastical power often
attempt to lord it over God's heritage, and to repress the investigation
of the Bible.

[John 7:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">joh 7:49</span></span>

This people - The word here translated "people" is the one commonly
rendered "the multitude." It is a word expressive of contempt, or, as we
would say, the rabble. It denotes the scorn which they felt that the
people should presume to judge for themselves in a case pertaining to
their own salvation.

Who knoweth not the law - Who have not been instructed in the schools of
the Pharisees, and been taught to interpret the Old Testament as they
had. They supposed that any who believed on the humble and despised
Jesus must be, of course, ignorant of the true doctrines of the Old
Testament, as they held that a very different Messiah from him was
foretold. Many instances are preserved in the writings of the Jews of
the great contempt in which the Pharisees held the common people. It may
here be remarked that Christianity is the only system of religion ever
presented to man that in a proper manner regards the poor, the ignorant,
and the needy. Philosophers and Pharisees, in all ages, have looked on
them with contempt.

Are cursed - Are execrable; are of no account; are worthy only of
contempt and perdition. Some suppose that there is reference here to
their being worthy to be cut off from the people for believing on him,
or worthy to be put out of the synagogue (see [Joh
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#022)); but it seems to be an
expression only of contempt; a declaration that they were a rabble,
ignorant, unworthy of notice, and going to ruin. Observe, however:

1\. That of this despised people were chosen most of those who became
Christians.

2\. That if the people were ignorant, it was the fault of the Pharisees
and rulers. It was their business to see that they were taught.

3\. There is no way so common of attempting to oppose Christianity as by
ridiculing its friends as poor, and ignorant, and weak, and credulous.
As well might food, and raiment, and friendship, and patriotism be held
in contempt because the poor need the one or possess the other.

[John 7:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">joh 7:50</span></span>

Nicodemus - See [Joh 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001).

One of them - That is, one of the great council or Sanhedrin. God often
places one or more pious men in legislative assemblies to vindicate his
honor and his law; and he often gives a man grace on such occasions
boldly to defend his cause; to put men upon their proof, and to confound
the proud and the domineering. We see in this case, also, that a man, at
one time timid and fearful (compare [Joh
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001)), may on other occasions be bold,
and fearlessly defend the truth as it is in Jesus. This example should
lead every man entrusted with authority or office fearlessly to defend
the truth of God, and, when the rich and the mighty are pouring contempt
on Jesus and his cause, to stand forth as its fearless defender.

[John 7:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">joh 7:51</span></span>

Doth our law ... - The law required justice to be done, and gave every
man the right to claim a fair and impartial trial, [Lev
19:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#015); [Exo
23:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#001); [Deu
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#015), [Deu
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#018). Their condemnation of Jesus was
a violation of every rule of right. He was not arraigned; he was not
heard in self-defense, and not a single witness was adduced. Nicodemus
demanded that justice should be done, and that he should, not be
condemned until he had had a fair trial. Every man should be presumed to
be innocent until he is proved to be guilty. This is a maxim of law, and
a most just and proper precept in our judgments in private life.

[John 7:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">joh 7:52</span></span>

Art thou also of Galilee? - Here is another expression of contempt. To
be a Galilean was a term of the highest reproach. They knew well that he
was not of Galilee, but they meant to ask whether he also had become a
follower of the despised Galilean. Ridicule is not argument, and there
is no demonstration in a gibe; but, unhappily, this is the only weapon
which the proud and haughty often use in opposing religion.

Ariseth no prophet - That is, there is no prediction that any prophet
should come out of Galilee, and especially no prophet that was to attend
or precede the Messiah. Compare [Joh
1:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#046). They assumed, therefore, that
Jesus could not be the Christ.

[John 7:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">joh 7:53</span></span>

And every man went unto his own house - There is every mark of confusion
and disorder in this breaking up of the Sanhedrin. It is possible that
some of the Sadducees might have joined Nicodemus in opposing the
Pharisees, and thus increased the disorder. It is a most instructive and
melancholy exhibition of the influence of pride, envy, contempt, and
anger, when brought to bear on an inquiry, and when they are manifestly
opposed to candor, to argument, and to truth. So wild and furious are
the passions of men when they oppose the person and claims of the Son of
God! It is remarkable, too, how God accomplishes his purposes. They
wished to destroy Jesus. God suffered their passions to be excited, a
tumult to ensue, the assembly thus to break up in disorder, and Jesus to
be safe, for his time had not yet come. "The wrath of man shall praise
thee; the remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain," [Psa
76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 8](joh008)

</div>
