<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh020)  [Next](act000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#001.md)

[John 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 21:1</span></span>

The sea of Tiberias - Called also the Sea of Galilee, being situated in
Galilee. See the notes at [Mat 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#018.md).
In this place Jesus had promised to meet them, [Mar
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#028.md); [Mar
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#007.md); [Mat
26:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#032.md); [Mat
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#010.md). This interview of Jesus is but
just mentioned by Matthew [Mat 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#016.md),
and is omitted by both Mark and Luke. This is the reason why John
relates so particularly what occurred there. Galilee was a retired place
where they would be free from danger, and was therefore a safe and
convenient situation for Jesus to meet them, in order to give them his
last instructions.

On this wise - Thus. In this manner.

[John 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 21:2</span></span>

There were together - Probably residing in the same place. While they
were waiting for the promise of the Holy Spirit, they still found it
proper to be usefully employed. Their Master had been taken away by
death, and the promised Spirit had not descended on them. In the
interval - before the promised Spirit was poured upon them - they chose
not to be idle, and therefore returned to their former employment. It is
to be remarked, also, that they had no other means of support. While
with Jesus, they were commonly supplied by the kindness of the people;
but now, when the Saviour had died, they were cut off from this means of
support, and returned to the honest labor of their early lives.
Moreover, they had been directed by the Saviour to repair to a mountain
in Galilee, where he would meet them, [Mat
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#010.md). This was probably not far from
Lake Galilee, so that, until he came to them, they would naturally be
engaged in their old employment. Ministers of the gospel should be
willing to labor, if necessary, for their own support, and should not
esteem such labor dishonorable. God has made employment indispensable to
man, and if the field of labor is not open in one way, they should seek
it in another. If at any time the people withhold the supply of their
needs, they should be able and willing to seek support in some other
honest occupation.

[John 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 21:3</span></span>

That night they caught nothing - This was so ordered in the providence
of God that the miracle which was performed might appear more
remarkable.

[John 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 21:4</span></span>

Knew not that it was Jesus - Probably it was yet twilight, and in the
distance they could not distinctly recognize him.

[John 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 21:5</span></span>

Children - A term of affection and friendship, [Jo1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018.md).

Any meat - This word (Greek) means anything eaten with bread. It was
used by the Greeks especially to denote fish (Schleusner).

[John 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 21:6</span></span>

On the right side - Why the right side is mentioned is not known.
Grotius supposes that it was the side nearest the shore, where there was
less probability of taking fish. It does not appear that they yet
recognized the Lord Jesus, but from some cause they had sufficient
confidence in him to make another trial. Perhaps they judged that he was
one skilled in that employment, and knew where there was the greatest
probability of success.

[John 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 21:7</span></span>

Therefore that disciple whom Jesus loved - John, [Joh
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#023.md).

It is the Lord - He was convinced, perhaps, by the apparent miracle, and
by looking more attentively on the person of one who had been the means
of such unexpected and remarkable success.

His fisher's coat - His upper or outer garment or tunic, in distinction
from the inner garment or tunic which was worn next the skin. In the
case of Peter it may have been made of coarse materials such as
fishermen commonly wore, or such as Peter usually wore when he was
engaged in this employment. Such garments are common with men of this
occupation. This outer garment he probably had laid aside.

He was naked - He was undressed, with nothing on but the undergarment or
tunic. The word does not require us to suppose a greater degree of
nakedness than this. See the [Mar
14:51](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#051.md) note; also [Sa1
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#024.md) note.

Did cast himself into the sea - With characteristic ardor, desirous of
meeting again his Lord, and showing his affection for him.

[John 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 21:8</span></span>

Two hundred cubits - About 350 feet, or a little more than 20 rods.

[John 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 21:9</span></span>

They saw a fire ... - We have no knowledge whence this was produced -
whether it was, as Grotius supposes, by a miracle, or whether it was a
place occupied by other fishermen, where they also might cook the fish
which they had caught. As no miracle is mentioned, however, there is no
reason for supposing that any existed in the case.

[John 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 21:11</span></span>

An hundred and fifty and three - The number is mentioned because it
seems to have been a very unusual draught, and it was particularly
gratifying and striking to them after they had spent the whole night and
had caught nothing. This convinced them that it was no other than the
same Saviour who had so often worked wonders before them that was now
with them.

[John 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 21:12</span></span>

Come and dine - The word in the original means the meal which is taken
in the morning, or breakfast.

[John 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 21:13</span></span>

Jesus then cometh, and taketh bread ... - It is not said that Jesus
himself ate with them, but he gave them food. The design of this
interview seems to have been to convince them that he had truly risen
from the dead. Hence, he performed a miracle before they suspected that
it was he, that there might be no room to say that they had ascribed to
him the power of the miracle through friendship and collusion with him.
The miracle was such as to satisfy them of its truth, and was, in
accordance with all his works, not for mere display, but for utility. He
remained with them, was with them at their meal, conversed with them,
and thus convinced them that he was the same Friend who had died.

[John 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 21:14</span></span>

The third time - See the "Harmony of the Accounts of the Resurrection of
Jesus."

[John 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 21:15</span></span>

Lovest thou me more than these? - There is a slight ambiguity here in
the original, as there is in our translation. The word these may be in
the neuter gender, and refer to these things his boat, his fishing
utensils, and his employments; or it may be in the masculine, and refer
to the apostles. In the former sense it would mean, "Lovest thou me more
than thou lovest these objects? Art thou now willing, from love to me,
to forsake all these, and go and preach my gospel to the nations of the
earth?" In the other sense, which is probably the true sense, it would
mean, "Lovest thou me more than these other apostles love me?" In this
question Jesus refers to the profession of superior attachment to him
which Peter had made before his death [Mat
26:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#033.md); "Though all men shall be
offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended." Compare [Joh
13:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#037.md). Jesus here slightly reproves
him for that confident assertion, reminds him of his sad and painful
denial, and now puts this direct and pointed question to him to know
what was the present state of his feelings. After all that Peter had had
to humble him, the Saviour inquired of him what had been the effect on
his mind, and whether it had tended to prepare him for the arduous toils
in which he was about to engage. This question we should all put to
ourselves. It is a matter of much importance that we should ourselves
know what is the effect of the dealings of divine Providence on our
hearts, and what is our present state of feeling toward the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Thou knowest that I love thee - Peter now made no pretensions to love
superior to his brethren. His sad denial had convinced him of the folly
of that claim; but still he could appeal to the Searcher of the heart,
and say that he knew that he loved him. Here is the expression of a
humbled soul - soul made sensible of its weakness and need of strength,
yet with evidence of true attachment to the Saviour. It is not the most
confident pretensions that constitute the highest proof of love to
Christ; and the happiest and best state of feeling is when we can with
humility, yet with confidence, look to the Lord Jesus and say, "Thou
knowest that I love thee."

Feed my lambs - The word here rendered "feed" means the care afforded by
furnishing nutriment for the flock. In the next verse there is a change
in the Greek, and the word rendered feed denotes rather the care,
guidance, and protection which a shepherd extends to his flock. By the
use of both these words, it is supposed that our Saviour intended that a
shepherd was both to offer the proper food for his flock and to govern
it; or, as we express it, to exercise the office of a pastor. The
expression is taken from the office of a shepherd, with which the office
of a minister of the gospel is frequently compared. It means, as a good
shepherd provides for the wants of his flock, so the pastor in the
church is to furnish food for the soul, or so to exhibit truth that the
faith of believers may be strengthened and their hope confirmed.

My lambs - The church is often compared to a flock. See John 10:1-16.
Here the expression my lambs undoubtedly refers to the tender and the
young in the Christian church; to those who are young in years and in
Christian experience. The Lord Jesus saw, what has been confirmed in the
experience of the church, that the success of the gospel among men
depended on the care which the ministry would extend to those in early
life. It is in obedience to this command that Sunday schools have been
established, and no means of fulfilling this command of the Saviour have
been found so effectual as to extend patronage to those schools. It is
not merely, therefore, the privilege, it is the solemn duty of ministers
of the gospel to countenance and patronize those schools.

[John 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 21:16</span></span>

Feed my sheep - The word here rendered "feed," as has been remarked, is
different from the word in the previous verse. It has the sense of
governing, caring for, guiding, protecting - the kind of faithful
vigilance which a shepherd uses to guide his flock, and to make
provision against their wants and dangers. It may be implied here that
the care needed for the young in the church is to instruct them, and for
those in advanced years both to instruct and govern them.

My sheep - This term commonly denotes the church in general, without
respect to age, John 10.

[John 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 21:17</span></span>

The third time - It is probable that Jesus proposed this question three
times because Peter had thrice denied him. Thus he tenderly admonished
him of his fault and reminded him of his sin, while he solemnly charged
him to be faithful and vigilant in the discharge of the duties of the
pastoral office. The reason why the Saviour addressed Peter in this
manner was doubtless because he had just denied him - had given a most
melancholy instance of the instability and weakness of his faith, and of
his liability to fall. As he had thus been prominent in forsaking him,
he took this occasion to give to him a special charge, and to secure his
future obedience. Hence, he so administered the charge as to remind him
of his fault; and he made him so prominent as to show the solicitude of
the Saviour that, henceforward, he might not be left to dishonor his
high calling. This same charge, in substance, he had on other occasions
given to the apostles [Mat 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018.md), and
there is not the slightest evidence here that Christ intended, as the
Papists pretend, to give Peter any special primacy or eminence in the
church. The charge to Peter arose, manifestly, from his prominent and
melancholy act in denying him, and was the kind and tender means used by
a faithful Saviour to keep him from similar acts in the future dangers
and trials of life. It is worthy of remark that the admonition was
effectual. Henceforward, Peter was one of the most firm and unwavering
of all the apostles, and thus fully justified the appellation of a rock,
which the Saviour by anticipation had given him. See the notes at [Joh
1:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#042.md).

[John 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 21:18</span></span>

When thou wast young - When in early life thou didst gird thyself, etc.
The Jews, in walking or running, girded their outer garments around
them, that they might not be impeded. See the notes at [Mat
5:38-41](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#038.md).

Thou girdedst - The expression here denotes freedom. He did as he
pleased - he girded himself or not he went or remained, as he chose.
Perhaps the expression refers rather to that time than to the previous
period of Peter's life. "Thou being now young or in the vigor of life,
hast just girded thyself and come freely to the shore." In either case
the Saviour intimates that at the end of his life he would not be thus
free.

When thou shalt be old - Ancient writers say that Peter was put to death
about thirty-four years after this. His precise age at that time is not
known.

Thou shalt stretch forth thy hands - When Peter was put to death, we are
told that he requested that he might be crucified with his head
downward, saying that he who had denied his Lord as he had done was not
worthy to die as he did. This expression of Christ may intimate the
readiness of Peter thus to die. Though he was not at liberty as when he
was young, though bound by others, yet he freely stretched out his hands
on the cross, and was ready to give up his life.

Another shall gird thee - Another shall bind thee. The limbs of persons
crucified were often bound instead of being nailed, and even the body
was sometimes girded to the cross. See the notes at [Mat
27:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#035.md).

Carry thee ... - Shall bear thee, or shall compel thee to go to prison
and to death. This is not said to intimate that Peter would be unwilling
to suffer martyrdom, but it stands opposed to the freedom of his early
life. Though willing when compelled to do it, yet he would not seek it;
and though he would not needlessly expose himself to it, yet he would
not shrink from it when it was the will of God.

[John 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 21:19</span></span>

By what death ... - In these words two things are implied:

1\. that Peter would die a violent death; and,

2\. that his death would be such as to honor God.

The ancients say that Peter was crucified at Rome, about 34 years after
this, with his head downward. Clemens says that he was led to the
crucifixion with his wife, and sustained her in her sufferings by
exhorting her to remember the example of her Lord. He also adds that he
died, not as the philosophers did, but with a firm hope of heaven, and
patiently endured the pangs of the cross (Strom. vii.). This declaration
of the Saviour was doubtless continually before the mind of Peter, and
to the hour of his death he maintained the utmost constancy and fidelity
in his cause, thus justifying the appellation which the Lord Jesus gave
him - a rock.

[John 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 21:20</span></span>

Which also leaned ... - See [Joh
13:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#024.md).

[John 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 21:21</span></span>

What shall this man do? - This question probably means, "What death
shall he die?" But it is impossible to ascertain certainly why Peter
asked this question. John was a favorite disciple, and perhaps Peter
suspected that he would have a happier lot, and not be put to death in
this manner. Peter was grieved at the question of Jesus; he was probably
deeply affected with the account of his own approaching sufferings; and,
with perhaps a mixture of grief and envy, he asked what would be his
lot. But it is possible, also, that it was from kindness to John - a
deep solicitude about him, and a wish that he might not die in the same
manner as one who had denied his Lord. Whatever the motive was, it was a
curiosity which the Lord Jesus did not choose to gratify.

[John 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 21:22</span></span>

That he tarry - That he live. The same word is used to express life in
[Phi 1:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#024.md); [Co1
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#006.md).

Till I come - Some have supposed this to refer to the destruction of
Jerusalem; others to the day of judgment; others to signify that he
would not die a violent death; but the plain meaning is, "If I will that
he should not die at all, it is nothing to thee." In this way the
apostles evidently understood it, and hence raised a report that he
would not die. It is remarkable that John was the last of the apostles;
that he lived to nearly the close of the first century, and then died a
peaceful death at Ephesus, being the only one, as is supposed, of the
apostles who did not suffer martyrdom. The testimony of antiquity is
clear on this point; and though there have been many idle conjectures
about this passage and about the fate of John, yet no fact of history is
better attested than that John died and was buried at Ephesus.

What is that to thee? - From this passage we learn:

1\. that our main business is to follow the Lord Jesus Christ.

2\. that there are many subjects of religion on which a vain and
impertinent curiosity is exercised. All such curiosity Jesus here
reproves.

3\. that Jesus will take care of all his true disciples, and that we
should not be unduly solicitous about them.

4\. that we should go forward to whatever he calls us to persecution or
death - not envying the lot of any other man, and anxious only to do the
will of God.

[John 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 21:23</span></span>

Then went this saying ... - This mistake arose very naturally:

1\. From the words of Jesus, which might be easily misunderstood to mean
that he should not die; and,

2\. It was probably confirmed when it was seen that John survived all
the other apostles, had escaped all the dangers of persecution, and was
leading a peaceful life at Ephesus. This mistake John deemed it proper
to correct before he died, and has thus left on record what Jesus said
and what he meant.

[John 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 21:24</span></span>

This is the disciple ... - This proves that the beloved disciple was
John.

We know - That is, it is known; it is universally admitted. It was so
decidedly his character that he always declared the truth, that it had
become known and was unquestioned, so that he himself might appeal to
the universal testimony in his behalf. In this case, therefore, we have
the testimony of a man whose character for nearly a century was that of
a man of truth - so much so that it had become, in a manner, proverbial,
and was put beyond a doubt. It is impossible to believe that such a man
would sit down deliberately to impose on mankind, or to write a book
which was false; and if not, then this book is true, and that is the
same as saying that Christianity is a religion from heaven.

[John 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 21:25</span></span>

Many other things - Many miracles, [Joh
20:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#030.md). Many discourses delivered, etc.

I suppose ... - This is evidently the figure of speech called a
hyperbole. It is a mode of speech where the words express more or less
than is literally true. It is common among all writers; and as the
sacred writers, in recording a revelation to men, used human language,
it was proper that they should express themselves as men ordinarily do
if they wished to be understood. This figure of speech is commonly the
effect of surprise, or having the mind full of some object, and not
having words to express the ideas: at the same time, the words convey no
falsehood. The statement is to be taken as it would be understood among
the persons to whom it is addressed; and as no one supposes that the
author means to be understood literally, so there is no deception in the
case, and consequently no impeachment of his veracity or inspiration.
Thus, when Longinus said of a man that "he was the owner of a piece of
ground not larger than a Lacedaemonian letter," no one understood him
literally. He meant, evidently, a very small piece of land, and no one
would be deceived. So Virgil says of a man, "he was so tall as to reach
the stars," and means only that he was very tall. So when John says that
the world could not contain the books that would be written if all the
deeds and sayings of Jesus were recorded, he clearly intends nothing
more than that a great many books would be required, or that it would be
extremely difficult to record them all; intimating that his life was
active, that his discourses were numerous, and that he had not pretended
to give them all, but only such as would go to establish the main point
for which he wrote that he was the Messiah, [Joh
20:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#030.md). The figure which John uses
here is not uncommon in the Scriptures, [Gen
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#004.md); [Gen
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005.md); [Num
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#033.md); [Dan
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#020.md).

This gospel contains in itself the clearest proof of inspiration. It is
the work of a fisherman of Galilee, without any proof that he had any
unusual advantages. It is a connected, clear, and satisfactory argument
to establish the great truth that Jesus was the Messiah. It was written
many years after the ascension of Jesus. It contains the record of the
Saviour's profoundest discourses, of his most convincing arguments with
the Jews, and of his declarations respecting himself and God. It
contains the purest and most elevated views of God to be found anywhere,
as far exceeding all the speculations of philosophers as the sun does
the blaze of a taper. It is in the highest degree absurd to suppose that
an unlettered fisherman could have originated this book. Anyone may be
convinced of this by comparing it with what would be the production of a
man in that rank of life now. But if John has preserved the record of
what has occurred so many years before, then it shows that he was under
the divine guidance, and is himself a proof, a full and standing proof,
of the fulfillment of the promise which he has recorded that the Holy
Spirit would guide the apostles into all truth, [Joh
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026.md). Of this book we may, in
conclusion, apply the words spoken by John respecting his vision of the
future events of the church: "Blessed is he that readeth and they that
hear the words of this" book, "and keep those things which are written
therein, for the time is at hand," [Rev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Introduction](act000.md)

</div>
