<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh001)  [Next](joh003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#001)

[John 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 2:1</span></span>

And the third day - On the third day after his conversation with
Nathanael.

Cana - This was a small town about 15 miles northwest of Tiberias and 6
miles northeast of Nazareth. It is now called Kerr Kenna, is under the
government of a Turkish officer, and contains perhaps 300 inhabitants,
chiefly Catholics. The natives still pretend to show the place where the
water was turned into wine, and even one of the large stone water-pots.
"A Greek church," says Professor Hackett ('Illustrations of Scripture,'
p. 322), "stands at the entrance of the town, deriving its special
sanctity, as I understood, from its being supposed to occupy the site of
the house in which the marriage was celebrated to which Jesus and his
friends were invited. A priest to whom we were referred as the custodian
soon arrived, in obedience to our call, and unlocked the doors of the
church. It is a low stone building, pair." "The houses," says Dr.
Thomson ('The Land and the Book,' vol. ii. p. 126), "were built of
limestone, cut and laid up after the fashion still common in this
region, and some of them may have been inhabited within the last fifty
years. There are many ancient cisterns about it, and fragments of
water-jars in abundance, and both reminded us of the 'beginning of
miracles.' Some of my companions gathered bits of these water-jars as
mementoes witnesses they could hardly be, for those of the narrative
were of 'stone,' while these were baked earth." The place is now quite
deserted. Dr. Thomson says: "There is not now a habitable house in the
humble village where our blessed Lord sanctioned, by his presence and
miraculous assistance, the all-important and world-wide institution of
marriage." It was called "Cana of Galilee" to distinguish it from
another Cana in the tribe of Ephraim, [Jos
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#009). This was the native place of
Nathanael, [Joh 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#002).

The mother of Jesus - Mary. It is not improbable that she was a relative
of the family where the marriage took place.

[John 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 2:2</span></span>

His disciples - Those that he had made when in Judea. These were Peter,
Andrew, Philip, and Nathanael. They were not yet called to be apostles,
but they believed that he was the Messiah. The miracle performed here
was doubtless to convince them more fully that he was the Christ.

[John 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 2:3</span></span>

When they wanted wine - A marriage feast among the Jews was commonly
observed for seven or eight days. It is not probable that there would be
a want of wine at the marriage itself, and it is possible, therefore,
that Jesus came there some time during the marriage feast.

They have no wine - It is not known why Mary told this to Jesus. It
would seem that she had a belief that he was able to supply it, though
he had as yet worked no miracle.

[John 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 2:4</span></span>

Woman - This term, as used here, seems to imply reproof, as if she was
interfering in that which did not properly concern her; but it is
evident that no such reproof or disrespect was intended by the use of
the term "woman" instead of "mother." It is the same term by which he
tenderly addressed Mary Magdalene after his resurrection [Joh
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#015), and his mother when he was on
the cross, [Joh 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#026). Compare also
[Mat 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#028); [Joh
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#021); [Co1
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#016).

What have I to do with thee? - See the notes at [Mat
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029). This expression is sometimes
used to denote indignation or contempt. See [Jdg
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#012); [Sa2
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#010); [Kg1
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#018). But it is not probable that it
denoted either in this place; if it did, it was a mild reproof of Mary
for attempting to control or direct him in his power of working
miracles. Most of the ancients supposed this to be the intention of
Jesus. The words sound to us harsh, but they might have been spoken in a
tender manner, and not have been intended as a reproof. It is clear that
he did not intend to refuse to provide wine, but only to delay it a
little; and the design was, therefore, to compose the anxiety of Mary,
and to prevent her being solicitous about it. It may, then, be thus
expressed: "My mother, be not anxious. To you and to me this should not
be a matter of solicitude. The proper time of my interfering has not yet
come. When that is come I will furnish a supply, and in the meantime
neither you nor I should be solicitous." Thus understood, it is so far
from being a "harsh reproof," that it was a mild exhortation for her to
dismiss her fears and to put proper trust in him.

Mine hour ... - My time. The proper time for my interposing. Perhaps the
wine was not yet entirely exhausted. The wine had begun to fail, but he
would not work a miracle until it was entirely gone, that the miracle
might be free-from all possibility of suspicion. It does not mean that
the proper time for his working a miracle, or entering. on his public
work had not come, but that the proper time for his interposing there
had not arrived.

[John 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 2:5</span></span>

His mother saith ... - It is evident from this verse that his mother did
not understand what he had said as a harsh reproof and repulse, but as
an indication of his willingness at the proper time to furnish wine. In
all this transaction he evinced the appropriate feelings of a son toward
a mother.

[John 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 2:6</span></span>

Six water-pots of stone - Made of stone; or, as we should say,
stoneware.

After the manner - After the usual custom.

Of the purifying - Of the "washings" or ablutions of the Jews. They were
for the purpose of washing the hands before and after eating [Mat
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#002), and for the formal washing of
vessels, and even articles of furniture, [Luk
11:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#039); [Mar
7:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#003).

Two or three firkins - It is not quite certain what is meant here by the
word "firkins." It is probable that the measure intended is the Hebrew
"bath," containing about 7 12 gallons.

[John 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 2:7</span></span>

With water - This was done by the servants employed at the feast. It was
done by "them," so that there might be no opportunity of saying that the
disciples of Jesus had filled them with wine to produce the "appearance"
of a miracle. In this case there could be no deception. The quantity was
very considerable. The servants would know whether the "wine" or "water"
had been put in these vessels. It could not be believed that they had
either the power or the disposition to impose on others in this manner,
and the way was therefore clear for the proof that Jesus had really
changed what was known to be water into wine.

To the brim - To the top. So full that no wine could be poured in to
give the appearance of a mixture. Further, vessels were used for this
miracle in which wine had not been kept. These pots were never used to
put wine in, but simply to keep "water" in for the various purposes of
ablution. A large number was used on this occasion, because there were
many guests.

[John 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 2:8</span></span>

Draw out now - This command was given to the servants. It showed that
the miracle had been performed immediately. As soon as they were filled
the servants were directed to take to the governor of the feast. Jesus
made no parade about it, and it does not even appear that he approached
the waterpots. He willed it, and it was done. This was a clear exertion
of divine power, and made in such a manner as to leave no doubt of its
reality.

The governor - One who presided on the occasion. The one who stood at
the "head" or upper end of the table. He had the charge of the
entertainment, provided the food, gave directions to the servants, etc.

[John 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 2:9</span></span>

And knew not whence it was - This is said, probably, to indicate that
his judgment was not biased by any favor, or any lack of favor, toward
Jesus. Had he known what was done, he would have been less likely to
have judged impartially. As it is, we have his testimony that this was
real wine, and of so fine a body and flavor as to surpass that which had
been provided for the occasion. Everything in this miracle shows that
there was no collusion or understanding between Jesus and any of the
persons at the feast.

[John 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 2:10</span></span>

Every man - It is customary, or it is generally done.

When men have well drunk - This word does not of necessity mean that
they were intoxicated, though it is usually employed in that sense. It
may mean when they have drunk sufficient, or to satiety; or have drunk
so much as to produce hilarity, and to destroy the keenness of their
taste, so that they could not readily distinguish the good from that
which was worse. But this cannot be adduced in favor of drunkenness,
even if it means to be intoxicated; for,

1\. It is not said of those who were present "at that feast," but of
what generally occurred. For anything that appears, at that feast all
were perfectly temperate and sober.

2\. It is not the saying of Jesus that is here recorded, but of the
governor of the feast, who is declaring what usually occurred as a fact.

3\. There is not any expression of opinion in regard to its "propriety,"
or in approval of it, even by that governor.

4\. It does not appear that our Saviour even heard the observation.

5\. Still less is there any evidence that he approved such a state of
things, or that he designed that it should take place here. Further, the
word translated "well drunk" cannot be shown to mean intoxication; but
it may mean when they had drunk as much as they judged proper or as they
desired. then the other was presented. It is clear that neither our
Saviour, nor the sacred writer, nor the speaker here expresses any
approval of intemperance, nor is there the least evidence that anything
of the kind occurred here. It is not proof that we approve of
intemperance when we mention, as this man did, what occurs usually among
men at feasts.

Is worse - Is of an inferior quality.

The good wine - This shows that this had all the qualities of real wine.
We should not be deceived by the phrase "good wine." We often use the
phrase to denote that it is good in proportion to its strength and its
power to intoxicate; but no such sense is to be attached to the word
here. Pliny, Plutarch, and Horace describe wine as "good," or mention
that as "the best wine," which was harmless or "innocent" - poculo vini
"innocentis." The most useful wine - "utilissimum vinum" - was that
which had little strength; and the most wholesome wine - "saluberrimum
vinum" - was that which had not been adulterated by "the addition of
anything to the 'must' or juice." Pliny expressly says that a good wine
was one that was destitute of spirit (lib. iv. c. 13). It should not be
assumed, therefore, that the "good wine" was "stronger" than the other:
it is rather to be presumed that it was milder.

The wine referred to here was doubtless such as was commonly drunk in
Palestine. That was the pure juice of the grape. It was not brandied
wine, nor drugged wine, nor wine compounded of various substances, such
as we drink in this land. The common wine drunk in Palestine was that
which was the simple juice of the grape. we use the word "wine" now to
denote the kind of liquid which passes under that name in this country -
always containing a considerable portion of alcohol not only the alcohol
produced by fermentation, but alcohol "added" to keep it or make it
stronger. But we have no right to take that sense of the word, and go
with it to the interpretation of the Scriptures. We should endeavor to
place ourselves in the exact circumstances of those times, ascertain
precisely what idea the word would convey to those who used it then, and
apply that sense to the word in the interpretation of the Bible; and
there is not the slightest evidence that the word so used would have
conveyed any idea but that of the pure juice of the grape, nor the
slightest circumstance mentioned in this account that would not be fully
met by such a supposition.

No man should adduce This instance in favor of drinking wine unless he
can prove that the wine made in the waterpots of Cana was just like the
wine which he proposes to drink. The Saviour's example may be always
pleaded just as it was; but it is a matter of obvious and simple justice
that we should find out exactly what the example was before we plead it.
There is, moreover, no evidence that any other part of the water was
converted into wine than that which was "drawn out" of the water-casks
for the use of the guests. On this supposition, certainly, all the
circumstances of the case are met, and the miracle would be more
striking. All that was needed was to furnish a "supply" when the wine
that had been prepared was nearly exhausted. The object was not to
furnish a large quantity for future use. The miracle, too, would in this
way be more apparent and impressive. On this supposition, the casks
would appear to be filled with water only; as it was drawn out, it was
pure wine. Who could doubt, then, that there was the exertion of
miraculous power? All, therefore, that has been said about the
Redeemer's furnishing a large quantity of wine for the newly-married
pair, and about his benevolence in doing it, is wholly gratuitous. There
is no evidence of it whatever; and it is not necessary to suppose it in
order to an explanation of the circumstances of the case.

[John 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 2:11</span></span>

This beginning of miracles - This his first public miracle. This is
declared by the sacred writer to be a "miracle" - that is, an exertion
of divine power, producing a change of the substance of water into wine,
which no human power could do.

Manifested forth - Showed; exhibited.

His glory - His power, and proper character as the Messiah; showed that
he had divine power, and that God had certainly commissioned him. This
is shown to be a real miracle by the following considerations:

1\. Real water was placed in the vessels. This the servants believed,
and there was no possibility of deception.

2\. The water was placed where it was not customary to keep wine. It
could not be pretended that it was merely a mixture of water and wine.

3\. It was judged to be wine without knowing whence it came. There was
no agreement between Jesus and the governor of the feast to impose on
the guests.

4\. It was a change which nothing but divine power could effect. He that
can change water into a substance like the juice of the grape must be
clothed with divine power.

Believed on him - This does not mean that they did not believe on him
beforehand, but that their faith was confirmed or strengthened. They saw
a miracle, and it satisfied them that he was the Messiah. "Before this"
they "believed" on the testimony of John, and from conversation with
Jesus John 1:35-51; now they saw that he was invested with almighty
power, and their faith was established.

From this narrative we may learn:

1\. That marriage is honorable, and that Jesus, if sought, will not
refuse his presence and blessing on such an occasion.

2\. On such an occasion the presence and approbation of Christ should be
sought. No compact formed on earth is more important; none enters so
deeply into our comfort in this world; perhaps none will so much affect
our destiny in the world to come. It should be entered into, then, in
the fear of God.

3\. On all such occasions, our conduct should be such that the presence
of Jesus would be no interruption or disturbance. He is holy. He is
always present in every place; and on all festival occasions our
deportment should be such as that we should welcome the presence of the
Lord Jesus Christ. "That is not a proper stale of feeling or employment
which would be interrupted by the presence of the Saviour."

4\. Jesus delighted to do good. In the very beginning of his ministry he
worked a miracle to show his benevolence. This was the appropriate
commencement of a life in which he was to go about doing good. He seized
every opportunity of doing it; and at a marriage feast, as well as among
the sick and poor, he showed the character which he always sustained -
that of a benefactor of mankind.

5\. An argument cannot be drawn from this instance in favor of
intemperate drinking. There is no evidence that any who were present on
that occasion drank too freely.

6\. Nor can an argument be drawn from this case in favor even of
drinking wine such as we have. The common wine of Judea was the pure
juice of the grape, without any mixture of alcohol, and was harmless. It
was the common drink of the people, and did not tend to produce
intoxication. "Our" wines are a "mixture" of the juice of the grape and
of brandy, and often of infusions of various substances to give it color
and taste, and the appearance of wine. Those wines are little less
injurious than brandy, and the habit of drinking them should be classed
with the drinking of all other liquid fires.

The following table will show the danger of drinking the "wines" that
are in common use:

Wine Alcohol Content Brandy has fifty-three parts and 39 hundredths in a
hundred of alcohol, or 5339 percent Rum 5368 percent Whisky Scotch..
5432 percent Holland Gin. 5160 percent Port Wine, highest kind 583
percent Port Wine, lowest kind 140 percent Madeira, highest kind 2942
percent Madeira, lowest kind 934 percent Lisbon 894 percent Malaga 726
percent Red Champagne 130 percent White 280 percent Currant Wine 2025
percent

It follows that a man who drinks two glasses of most of the wines used
has taken as much alcohol as if he had taken one glass of brandy or
whisky, and why should he not as well drink the alcohol in the brandy as
in the wine? What difference can it make in morals? What difference in
its effects on his system? The experience of the world has shown that
water, pure water, is the most wholesome, safe, and invigorating drink
for man.

[John 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 2:12</span></span>

To Capernaum - See the notes at [Mat
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013).

Not many days - The reason why he remained there no longer was that the
Passover was near, and they went up to Jerusalem to attend it.

[John 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 2:13</span></span>

The Jews' passover - The feast among the Jews called the Passover. See
the notes at Mat. 26:2-17.

And Jesus went up to Jerusalem - Every male among the Jews was required
to appear at this feast. Jesus, in obedience to the law, went up to
observe it. This is the first Passover on which he attended after he
entered on the work of the ministry. It is commonly supposed that he
observed three others one recorded [Luk
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#001); another [Joh
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#004), and the last one on the night
before he was crucified, [Joh 11:55](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#055).
As his baptism when he entered on his ministry had taken place some time
before this - probably not far from six months - it follows that the
period of his ministry was not far from three years and a half,
agreeably to the prophecy in [Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027).

[John 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 2:14</span></span>

Found in the temple ... - The transaction here recorded is in almost all
respects similar to that which has been explained in the notes at [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012). This took place at the
commencement of his public ministry; that at the close. On each occasion
he showed that his great regard was for the pure worship of his Father;
and one great design of his coming was to reform the abuses which had
crept into that worship, and to bring man to a proper regard for the
glory of God. If it be asked how it was that those engaged in this
traffic so readily yielded to Jesus of Nazareth, and that they left
their gains and their property, and fled from the temple at the command
of one so obscure as he was, it may be replied,

1\. That their consciences reproved them for their impiety, and they
could not set up the "appearance" of self-defense.

2\. It was customary in the nation to cherish a profound regard for the
authority of a prophet; and the appearance and manner of Jesus - so
fearless, so decided, so authoritative led them to suppose "he" was a
prophet, and they were afraid to resist him.

3\. Even then, Jesus had a wide reputation among the people, but it is
not improbable that many supposed him to be the Messiah.

4\. Jesus on all occasions had a most wonderful control over people.
None could resist him. There was something in his manner, as well as in
his doctrine, that awed men, and made them tremble at his presence.
Compare [Joh 18:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#005). On this occasion
he had the manner of a prophet, the authority of God, and the testimony
of their own consciences, and they could not, therefore, resist the
authority by which he spoke.

Though Jesus thus purified the temple at the commencement of his
ministry, yet in three years the same scene was to be repeated. See [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012). And from this we may learn:

1\. How soon people forget the most solemn reproofs, and return to evil
practices.

2\. That no sacredness of time or place will guard them from sin. In the
very temple, under the very eye of God, these people soon returned to
practices for which their consciences reproved them, and which they knew
that God disapproved.

3\. We see here how strong is the love of gain - the ruling passion of
mankind. Not even the sacredness of the temple, the presence of God, the
awful ceremonials of religion, deterred them from this unholy traffic.
So wicked men and hypocrites will always turn "religion," if possible,
into gain; and not even the sanctuary, the Sabbath, or the most awful
and sacred scenes, will deter them from schemes of gain. Compare [Amo
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#005). So strong is this grovelling
passion, and so deep is that depravity which fears not God, and regards
not his Sabbaths, his sanctuary, or his law.

[John 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 2:15</span></span>

A scourge - A whip.

Of small cords - This whip was made as an emblem of authority, and also
for the purpose of driving from the temple the cattle which had been
brought there for sale. There is no evidence that he used any violence
to the men engaged in that unhallowed traffic. The original word implies
that these "cords" were made of twisted "rushes" or "reeds" - probably
the ancient material for making ropes.

[John 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 2:17</span></span>

It was written ... - This is recorded in [Psa
69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009). Its meaning is, that he was
affected with great zeal or concern for the pure worship of God.

The zeal of thine house - "Zeal" is intense ardor in reference to any
object. The "zeal of thine house" means extraordinary concern for the
temple of God; intense solicitude that the worship there should be pure,
and such as God would approve.

Hath eaten me up - Hath absorbed me, or engaged my entire attention and
affection; hath surpassed all other feelings, so that it may be said to
be the one great absorbing affection and desire of the mind. Here is an
example set for ministers and for all Christians. In Jesus this was the
great commanding sentiment of his life. In us it should be also. In this
manifestation of zeal he began and ended his ministry. In this we should
begin and end our lives. We learn, also, that ministers of religion
should aim to purify the church of God. Wicked men, conscience-smitten,
will tremble when they see proper zeal in the ministers of Jesus Christ;
and there is no combination of wicked men, and no form of depravity,
that can stand before the faithful, zealous, pure preaching of the
gospel. The preaching of every minister should be such that wicked men
will feel that they must either become Christians or leave the house of
God, or spend their lives there in the consciousness of guilt and the
fear of hell.

[John 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 2:18</span></span>

What sign ... - What "miracle" dost thou work? He assumed the character
of a prophet. He was reforming, by his "authority," the temple. It was
natural to ask by what authority this was done; and as they had been
accustomed to miracles in the life of Moses, and Elijah, and the other
prophets, so they demanded evidence that he had authority thus to
cleanse the house of God.

Seeing that thou doest - Rather "by what title or authority thou doest
these things." Our translation is ambiguous. They wished to know "by
what miracle" he had shown, or could show, his right to do those things.

[John 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 2:19</span></span>

Destroy this temple - The evangelist informs us [Joh
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#021) that by "temple," here, he meant
his body. It is not improbable that he pointed with his finger to his
body as he spoke. The word "destroy," used here in the "imperative," has
rather the force of the "future." Its meaning may thus be expressed:
"You are now profaners of the temple of God. You have defiled the
sanctuary; you have made it a place of traffic. You have also despised
my authority, and been unmoved by the miracles which I have already
performed. But your wickedness will not end here. You will oppose me
more and more; you will reject and despise me, until in your wickedness
you will take my life and 'destroy' my body." Here was therefore a
distinct prediction both of his death and the cause of it. The word
"temple," or "dwelling," was not unfrequently used by the Jews to denote
the "body" as being the residence of the spirit, [Co2
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#001). Christians are not unfrequently
called the temple of God, as being those in whom the Holy Spirit dwells
on earth, [Co1 3:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016); [Co1
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019); [Co2
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#016). Our Saviour called his body a
temple in accordance with the common use of language, and more
particularly because "in him the fulness of the Godhead dwelt bodily,"
[Col 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009). The temple at Jerusalem was
the appropriate dwelling-place of God. His visible presence was there
especially manifested, [Ch2 36:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#015);
[Psa 76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002). As the Lord Jesus was
divine - as the fulness of the Godhead dwelt in him so his body might be
called a "temple."

In three days I will raise it up - The Jews had asked a "miracle" of him
in proof of his authority that is, a proof that he was the Messiah. He
tells them that a full and decided proof of that would be his
"resurrection from the dead." Though they would not be satisfied by any
other miracle, yet by this they ought to be convinced that he came from
heaven, and was the long-expected Messiah. To the same evidence that he
was the Christ he refers them on other occasions. See [Mat
12:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#038). Thus early did he foretell
his death and resurrection, for at the beginning of his work he had a
clear foresight of all that was to take place. This knowledge shows
clearly that he came from heaven, and it evinces, also, the extent of
his love that he was "willing" to come to save us, knowing clearly what
it would cost him. Had he come "without" such an expectation of
suffering, his love might have been far less; but when he fully knew all
that was before him, when he saw that it would involve him in contempt
and death, it shows compassion "worthy of a God" that he was willing to
endure the load of all our sorrows, and die to save us from death
everlasting. When Jesus says, "'I' will raise it up," it is proof, also,
of divine power. A mere "man" could not say this. No deceased "man" can
have such power over his body; and there must have been, therefore, in
the person of Jesus a nature superior to human to which the term "I"
could be applied, and which had power to raise the dead - that is, which
was divine.

[John 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 2:20</span></span>

Then said the Jews ... - The Jews, either from the ambiguity of his
language, or more probably from a design to cavil, understood him as
speaking of the temple at Jerusalem. What he said here is all the
evidence that they could adduce on his trial [Mat
26:61](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#061); [Mar
14:58](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#058), and they reproached him with it
when on the cross, [Mat 27:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#040). The
Jews frequently perverted our Saviour's meaning. The language which he
used was often that of parables or metaphor; and as they Sought to
misunderstand him and pervert his language, so he often left them to
their own delusions, as he himself says, "that seeing they might not
see, and hearing they might not understand," [Mat
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#013). This was a case which they
"might," if they had been disposed, have easily understood. They were in
the temple; the conversation was about the temple; and though he
probably pointed to his body, or designated it in some plain way, yet
they chose to understand him as referring to the temple itself; and as
it appeared so improbable that he could raise up that in three days,
they sought to pervert his words and pour ridicule on his pretensions.

Forty and six years ... - The temple in which they then were was that
which was commonly called "the second temple," built after the return of
the Jews from Babylon. See the notes at [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012). This temple Herod the Great
commenced repairing, or began to rebuild, in the eighteenth year of his
reign - that is, sixteen years before the birth of Christ (Jos. 'Ant.,'
b. xv. Section 1). The main body of the temple he completed in "nine
years and a half" (Jos. 'Ant.,' xv. 5, 6), yet the temple, with its
outbuildings, was not entirely complete in the time of our Saviour.
Herod continued to ornament it and to perfect it even until the time of
Agrippa (Jos. 'Ant.,' b. xx. chapter viii. Section 11). As Herod began
to rebuild the temple sixteen years before the birth of Jesus, and as
what is here mentioned happened in the thirtieth year of the age of
Jesus, so the time which had been occupied in it was "forty-six years."
This circumstance is one of the many in the New Testament which show the
accuracy of the evangelists, and which prove that they were well
acquainted with what they recorded. It demonstrates that their narration
is true. Impostors do not trouble themselves to be very accurate about
names and dates, and there is nothing in which they are more liable to
make mistakes.

Wilt thou ... - This is an expression of contempt. Herod, with all his
wealth and power, had been engaged in this work almost half a century.
Can you, an obscure and unknown Galilean, accomplish it in three days?
The thing, in their judgment, was ridiculous, and showed, as "they"
supposed, that he had no authority to do what he had done in the temple.

[John 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 2:22</span></span>

When he was risen from the dead ... - This saying of our Saviour at that
time seemed obscure and difficult. The disciples did not understand it,
but they treasured it up in their memory, and the event showed what was
its true meaning. Many prophecies are obscure when spoken which are
perfectly plain when the event takes place. We learn from this, also,
the importance of treasuring up the truths of the Bible now, though we
may not perfectly understand them. Hereafter they may be plain to us. It
is therefore important that "children," should learn the truths of the
sacred Scriptures. Treasured up in their memory, they may not be
understood "now," but hereafter they may be clear to them. Every one
engaged in teaching a Sunday school, therefore, may be imparting
instruction which may be understood, and may impart comfort, long after
the teacher has gone to eternity.

They believed - That is, "after" he rose from the dead.

The scripture - The Old Testament, which predicted his resurrection.
Reference here must be made to [Psa
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010); compare [Act
2:27-32](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#027); [Act
13:35-37](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#035); [Psa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007); compare [Act
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033). They understood those
Scriptures in a sense different from what they did before.

The word which Jesus had said - The prediction which he had made
respecting his resurrection in this place and on other occasions. See
[Mat 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#019); [Luk
18:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#032).

[John 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 2:23</span></span>

Feast-day - Feast. During the celebration of the Passover, which
continued eight days.

Miracles which he did - These miracles are not particularly recorded.
Jesus took occasion to work miracles, and to preach at that time, for a
great multitude were present from all parts of Judea. It was a favorable
opportunity for making known his doctrines and showing the evidence that
he was the Christ, and he embraced it. We should always seek and embrace
opportunities of doing good, and we should not be "deterred," but rather
"excited," by the multitude around us to make known our real sentiments
on the subject of religion.

[John 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 2:24</span></span>

Did not commit himself - The word translated "commit" here is the same
which in [Joh 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#023) is translated
"believed." It means to put "trust" or "confidence in." Jesus did not
put "trust" or "reliance" in them. He did not leave himself in their
hands. He acted cautiously and prudently. The proper time for him to die
had not come, and he secured his own safety. The reason why he did not
commit himself to them is "that he knew all men." He knew the
"inconstancy" and "fickleness" of the multitude. He knew how easily they
might be turned against him by the Jewish leaders, and how unsafe he
would be if they should be moved to sedition and tumult.

[John 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 2:25</span></span>

Should testify of man - Should give him the character of any man.

He knew what was in man - This he did because he had made all [Joh
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003), and because he was God, [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001). There can be no higher evidence
than this that he was omniscient, and was therefore divine. To search
the heart is the prerogative of God alone [Jer
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#010); and as Jesus knew what was in
"these disciples," and as it is expressly said that he knew what was in
man - that is, in "all people" - so it follows that he must be equal
with God. As he knows "all," he is acquainted with the false pretentions
and professions of hypocrites. None can deceive him. He also knows the
wants and desires of all his real friends. He hears their groans, he
sees their sighs, he counts their tears, and in the day of need will
come to their relief.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 3](joh003)

</div>
