<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Joshua Index](jos.md)  
  [Previous](deu034)  [Next](jos001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001.md)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Joshua

1\. This book like several others of the historical books of Scripture
derives its name from its contents. It takes up the history of the
chosen people at the death of Moses, and continues it in a systematic
and orderly narrative, through the leadership and government of his
successor. It records (almost exclusively) the acts of Joshua in
fulfillment of the commission laid upon him from God by the hand of
Moses (compare [Deu 31:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#007).md), and
terminates with Joshua's death and burial.

The contents group themselves into two divisions of nearly equal length.
The conquest of the land is described in twelve chapters, and then in
twelve other chapters the subsequent partition of it together with
Joshua's last acts and words.

The victories of Joshua described in the former of these portions were
accompanied by repeated and stupendous interferences of God. This
miraculous element has led some commentators to treat the book as
altogether unhistorical. But it must not be forgotten that the miracles
of the Book of Joshua do not stand alone. They grow, as it were,
naturally out of the divine interpositions on behalf of Israel in the
days of Moses, and are but the close of a series of extraordinary
providences began in Egypt, and described in Exodus and the books
following. No less do they stand intimately associated with the future
history and development of the Jewish Church and nation, and even with
the wider and more remote issues of God's counsels as manifested, or to
be manifested, in the Christian Church to the end of all things. Thus,
the conquest of Canaan by Joshua has other and vastly grander
significances than its mere dimensions as a fact in history seem at
first sight to suggest.

It is not to be regarded simply as the invasion of a little district
about as large as three average English counties by a tribe of nomads
from the Arabian deserts. It was also the accomplishment by God of a
purpose revealed of old; it was an essential element in the plan
ordained by Him for the preservation among men of His Law, Will, and
Word; it was designed to foreshadow in many important particulars His
future dealings with mankind at large. But for the special help of God,
the Israelites could not have effected the conquest at all, for they
were hardly superior to the Canaanites in numbers, and were destitute of
chariots and horses, and of all the more elaborate equipments for war,
above all of the appliances requisite for reducing the cities (compare
[Num 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#028.md); [Deu
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#028.md); [Deu
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#001).md) in which Canaan abounded. God's
promise was, however, pledged to their forefathers to give them this
land; whatever then might be necessary to give effect to this promise it
belonged to His faithfulness to accord; and the Book of Joshua
consequently is an essential sequel to the Pentateuch as declaring the
thorough fulfillment by God of the covenant made by Him through Moses
with Israel, and thus as illustrating His inviolable faithfuless.

But important as the theocratical and theological characteristics of the
Book of Joshua are, both in themselves and as (so to say) vindicating
the miraculous elements of the narrative, we must nevertheless not lose
sight of the internal evidences of common and historical fact which it
presents.

The invasion of Canaan by Joshua was evidently a carefully and
skillfully conducted enterprise. An army marching upon Canaan from the
south would find its path intercepted by range after range of heights,
each, in the days of Moses and Joshua, bristling with towns and
fortresses. The progress of such an army could be but slow, and at every
step would be met by better organized resistance from an increasing
number of enemies. When Israel, after 40 years' expiation of the revolt
at Kadesh, again arose at the command of God to resume the long deferred
enterprise on Canaan, the host was conducted round the whole southeast
corner of the land and directed upon its comparatively defenseless
eastern flank above the Dead Sea. The whole of the strong military
positions and fenced cities in the "south country" and the "hill
country" of what was subsequently the territory of Judah were thus taken
in reverse and rendered comparatively useless.

It is probable, too, that the southern Canaanites in particular were at
this time greatly weakened by the invasions of Thotmes III, who had
taken Gaza, apparently not many years previously, and no doubt had
overrun the whole adjoining district (see the note at [Jos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003).md). No less able were the measures
adopted by Joshua to execute the plan thus judiciously laid down. The
passage of the Jordan, by the special help of God, at a time of year
when his enemies no doubt deemed the river to be an almost
insurmountable obstacle to his advance (see the note at [Jos
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#015).md): the seizing Gilgal, to serve as
his foothold in the land: the capture and destruction of Jericho: the
fall of Ai: these events enabled him to throw the forces of Israel like
a wedge through the very midst of the land almost to the western sea,
and in its most vulnerable part, between the fastnesses of Judah on the
south and the mountain district of Ephraim on the north. The Amorites on
Joshua's left, cut off from the Hittites on his right by his whole army
interposing between the two, were overpowered before Gibeon. The whole
south was reduced into at least temporary subjection before the larger
multitudes of the north could be mustered. These in their turn shared
the fate of their brethren in the south; Joshua broke their vast host to
pieces on the shores of Lake Merom.

In these campaigns of Joshua it is impossible not to see the traces of
strategical skill no less conspicuously than that presence of immediate
and divine suggestion and succor which the narrative asserts.

2\. The leading trait in the character of Joshua is courage - the
courage of the warrior: this must have been already remarkable at the
time of the Exodus [Exo 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#009.md).
Subsequently, Joshua appears as in constant attendance on Moses [Exo
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#013.md); [Exo
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001.md); [Exo
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#011.md); he without doubt acquired on
Sinai, and in the precincts of the sanctuary, that unswerving
faithfulness of service and unshaken confidence in God which marked his
after career. He was naturally selected as one of the twelve "rulers"
sent by Moses [Num 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#002.md) to explore the
land before the invasion of it was undertaken; and the bold and truthful
report brought back by him and Caleb [Num
14:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#007.md), was no less characteristic
than was his undaunted bearing before the incensed people [Num
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#010.md). These qualities pointed him out
as the fitting captain over the Lord's people, who should overthrow
their enemies before them and put them in possession of the promised
inheritance. Accordingly, at the express command of God, he was solemnly
appointed to that office and duty by Moses before his death [Num
27:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#016.md); [Deu
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#023.md).

Joshua was not a prophet (Ecclesiasticus 46:1; compare [Num
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#021).md), but a divinely-inspired
leader. After the great and peculiar work of his life was accomplished,
he no longer held the same exclusive place at the head of Israel as
before. In making the arrangements for settling the people in their
homes, and establishing the theocracy on the lines laid down in the law
of Moses, he acted in conjunction with Eleazar, the high priest: and
with the heads of the tribes (compare [Jos
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#001.md); [Jos
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#004.md); [Jos
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#001).md). This was but natural. The
armies had done their work and were dispersed, or were ready to
disperse, to their several inheritances; and the military authority of
their general was consequently at an end. The latter years of his life
were probably passed in retirement at Timnath-serah, whence, he would
seem to have emerged in extreme old age to meet the princes and the
people in the great gathering at Shechem Josh. 23-24, and to employ once
more and finally his authority as the last survivor but one of a mighty
generation, and as the hero of Israel's greatest triumphs, in order to
engage his people more firmly and closely in their rightful allegiance
to God.

The courage which was the leading feature in the character of Joshua was
very distinctly and directly built upon faith [Jos
1:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#005.md). Joshua obeyed God's call
unhesitatingly and to the end, but it was because he trusted wholly in
the promise which accompanied it. Hence, along with his soldierly
qualities, were found others seldom present in the same man. He combined
justice as a magistrate with gentleness as a man [Jos
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#019.md); spirit as a ruler, with temper
and discretion in dealing with the arrogant and exacting [Jos
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#014.md); diligence and equity in
disposing of the fruits of victory with a complete unselfishness as
regarded himself [Jos 19:49-51](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#049.md).
Perhaps conspicuous above all was his humility. From first to last his
valor and his victories are referred to God as their giver. Of his own
personal work in the achievements of his life there is in his last
addresses scarcely one word.

3\. The chronological dates presented in this book are few:

a\. Comparing [Jos 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019.md) and [Jos
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#006.md), if the date of the Exodus be
assumed to be 1490 B.C., that of the invasion of Canaan will be 1450
B.C.

b\. The duration of Joshua's wars with the Canaanites is spoken of
loosely in [Jos 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#018.md) as "a long
time." The words of Caleb ([Jos 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#007.md),
[Jos 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#010.md) : compare [Num
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#017).md) - who was thirty-eight years
old when he passed through the Red Sea, and seventy-eight when he passed
through Jordan - help us to assign a period of seven years (in round
numbers) for the campaigns of Joshua.

c\. The duration of Joshua's rule, and consequently the number of years
covered by the record of this book, is far more uncertain. He died when
he was 110 [Jos 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#029.md). If (compare
[Exo 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#011).md) we suppose him to have
been about the same age as Caleb, he will have been about 78 years old
when he invaded Canaan, and have been at the head of Israel not much
less than thirty-two years altogether after the death of Moses,
surviving about twenty-five years after his retirement to Timnath-serah
(compare [Jos 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#001).md). Josephus,
however, states that Joshua's rule after the death of Moses lasted for
twenty-five years, and that he had previously been forty years
associated with him. This would fix Joshua's age at the time of the
Exodus at forty-five. On the whole, nothing more precise seems
attainable now than this: that Joshua governed Israel from twenty-five
to thirty years after the death of Moses, and that about the like number
of years contains the events recorded in the book which bears his name.

4\. No sufficient evidence exists to enable us with certainty to name
the author. That he was one of "the elders that overlived Joshua" [Jos
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#031.md) is probable, for the book
appears to have been written by one coeval with the events recorded,
and, indeed, an eye-witness of them. The spirit of the narrative in the
former or historical portion of the book, and the graphic yet
spontaneous rendering of details, which it everywhere presents, bespeak
one who saw what he describes. And the topographical information which
abounds in the latter portion of the book is of such a nature, and is
presented in such a form, as strongly to suggest the use of written, and
apparently contemporary documents. Some parts of this information are
minute and accurate (e. g. Josh. 15), other statements are far less
definite and complete. No doubt some of these imperfections are due to
disorder in the text, or to clauses having dropped out of it, but others
are mainly due to the fact that the writer's knowledge was itself
imperfect. These very anomalies of the writer's most valuable
description of Palestine, inconvenient as they often are, seem thus to
be attributable to the early date of his information. His documents were
written while Israel was still a stranger in the land of his
inheritance, and in parts of it still a foreign invader.

The hand of a writer contemporaneous with the events is indicated in
several expressions, e. g. in [Jos
5:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#006.md); [Jos
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#025.md); [Jos
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#002.md), a notice which plainly borrows
its terms from the state of things in Canaan at the time of the
invasion; and in the record of ancient Canaanite names of cities, though
disused after the Israelites occupied them, [Jos
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#015.md); [Jos
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#009.md), [Jos
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#015.md), [Jos
15:49](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#049.md), [Jos
15:60](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#060.md).

The book cannot, in its present form at least, be ascribed to Joshua
himself. The account of his death and that of Eleazar, with the few
supplementary verses at the end of the book, might have been attached by
another hand, as a conclusion to the historical work of Joshua, just as
a like addition was made to the work of Moses. But there are up and down
the book a number of historical notices, which point to a date clearly
beyond the death of Joshua (compare [Jos
15:13-20](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#013.md) and [Jdg
1:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001.md); 15:63, and [Jdg
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#008.md); [Jdg
15:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#013) and Judg. 18.md).

For these reasons the opinion of the rabbis and many moderns which names
Joshua as himself the sole writer of this book, must apparently be
abandoned. The evidence internal and external renders it likely that the
book was composed partly from personal observation and inquiry, partly
out of pre-existing and authentic documents, within a few years after
the death of Joshua, and probably from materials furnished in part by
Joshua himself.

5\. The book of Joshua is a work complete in itself, with an organic
unity and peculiar characteristics. This appears:

\(1\) From the definiteness of the writer's purpose, and the
thoroughness with which he executes it. He proposes to narrate the
conquest of Canaan, and to present that conquest as a proof of God's
fidelity to his covenant. But the writer does not limit himself to the
achievements of Joshua. Such additions to the main body of his story,
which belongs to the lifetime and leadership of Joshua, as are contained
in Josh. 13 and Josh. 15 are to be explained only by a reference to the
writer's distinct and special aim.

\(2\) from the tokens of connection and method apparent throughout. Not
only does the first part, which records the wars Josh. 1-12, evidently
lead up to the second part Josh. 13-24, which describes the partition of
the territory when subdued, but the contents of each part taken singly
are given in proper and chronological order, each transaction growing
out of the one preceding.

\(3\) from the style and phraseology. These are marked by distinctive
features, whether the book be compared with the Pentateuch or with the
other and later historical books. The difference of style, words, and
treatment in the historical chapters, as contrasted with the
topographical chapters is only what might be expected from the diverse
nature of the subjects, and from the self-evident fact that in much of
the latter part of his task the author was working from pre-existing
documents.

Certain discrepancies alleged to exist in the book do not seriously
impair its unity and independence. The difficulties, e. g. in the
account of the capture of Ai Josh. 8 arise solely out of the numbers,
and are far more probably due to a mistake in the numerals (see the note
at [Jos 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#003).md), which is by no means of
infrequent occurrence, than to the presence in the narrative of two or
three different versions of the events which the final editor omitted to
harmonize.

The contradiction said to exist between some passages which speak of the
land as completely subdued by Joshua, and of the Canaanites as utterly
extirpated ([Jos 11:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#016.md), [Jos
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#023.md); [Jos
12:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#007) etc..md), and others which allude
to "very much land," as still in possession of the native inhabitants
([Jos 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#001.md); [Jos
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#014.md) ff; [Jos
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#005), etc..md), is to be explained partly
by the theocratic view which the writer takes of his theme; a view which
leads him to regard the conquest as complete when it was so "ex parte
Dei," and when all was done that was needed to enable the Israelites to
realize fully the promises (compare [Jos
21:43-45](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#043).md); partly also by the fact
that territory was undoubtedly overrun by Joshua at the first onset,
which was afterward recovered by the Canaanites, and only again and
finally wrested from them at a subsequent, sometimes a long subsequent,
date. That the early campaigns of Joshua were in the nature of sudden
raids, overpowering for the moment, but not effectually subduing the
country, has probably much truth in it.

Thus then, the Book of Joshua, though based upon pre-existing materials
of various kinds, and sometimes incorporating them, appears to be a
separate and complete work produced as a whole from one original hand.
Its relation to the Pentateuch is that of an independent treatise by a
distinct author, who resumes a theme of which the first great and
important portion had been finished by a predecessor. The Pentateuch is
not to be looked upon as principally a historical work. It is the
statute book of the theocracy, and contains only such historical matter
as illustrates the origin and import of God's covenant with Israel.
Joshua records how the temporal promises of that covenant were
accomplished; and describes how the basis was laid for the future
development of the nation, under the special superintendence of God, by
its settlement in Canaan. Thus, regarded, this book is no more an
appendage to the Pentateuch than the books of Judges and Samuel are an
appendage to it.

There is, assuredly, an intimate connection among these writings
throughout, a connection which is expressly indicated by the connective
conjunctions used in the beginning of each book (see the note at [Jdg
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001).md). This is due to the fact that the
several authors were moved to write by one and the same Spirit, and that
their one purpose in successive ages was to record the dealings of God
with their nation. Hence, they have selected whatever declares or
illustrates the divine call of Israel; God's methods in educating that
people for its functions in His world; the preparations made through the
chequered history of Israel for future issues bearing on the salvation
of all mankind. We find at one time periods of considerable length, and
events of great importance to secular history cursorily alluded to,
while other occurrences, often of a biographical character, are dwelt
upon with anxious minuteness, because of their theocratic bearings.
Accordingly, the name "Earlier prophets," given to this and the
following books of Judges, Samuel, and Kings by the Jewish Church which
has handed them down to us as canonical, is appropriate. They were
written by inspired men, and treat their subject from the prophetical
point of view.

The Book of Joshua is repeatedly cited or referred to in the New
Testament: compare [Act 7:45](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#045.md); [Heb
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#005.md); [Heb
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#008.md); [Heb
11:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#030.md); [Jam
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#025.md).

6\. The land of Canaan was given as a free gift by God to the Israelites
- they took possession of it because He bade them do so - and He no less
bade them annihilate the Canaanite nations without mercy?

The question then occurs in unbroken force, all palliative explanations
being disallowed: Is this merciless treatment of the Canaanites
consistent with the attributes of the Deity, especially as those
attributes are illustrated for us in the New Testament?

The destruction of the Canaanites is always presented in Scripture as a
judgment of God sent on them because of their wickedness. They had not
only fallen into total apostasy from God, but into forms of idolatry of
the most degrading kind. Their false religion cannot be regarded as a
mere error of judgment; cruelty the most atrocious, and unnatural crimes
the most defiling were part and parcel of its observances. Moreover,
they had proved themselves to be incorrigible. They had had not only the
general warning of the deluge, as had other nations of the earth, but
the special one of the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah in the very midst
of them. They had had also the example and instruction of Abraham and
the patriarchs living for ages among them. Even after the miraculous
providence of God had brought the Israelites out of Egypt and across the
Jordan, and even when the sword was as it were hanging over their necks,
it was but in one or two isolated cases that signs of repentance and
recollection of God were manifested (compare [Jos
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001.md); [Jos
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#024).md). God had forborne for ages in
vain (compare [Gen 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016).md); in the days
of Joshua the time for mercy had passed, and that of judgment had come.
It is impossible to acknowledge God as the moral Governor of the earth,
and not to admit that it may be right or even necessary for Him to
remove such nations. The fact, therefore, that God is described as
having not only permitted, but even enjoined and caused the extirpation
of the Canaanite nations, depraved as they were, is not inconsistent
with His moral attributes. People, as was long ago pointed out by Dr.
Butler ('Anal.' ii. 3), have no right to either life or property, but
what arises solely from the grant of God. When this grant is revoked
they cease to have any right at all in either. And in the case before us
the forfeiture decreed by God was merited, and the execution of it was
therefore righteous.

God chose to inflict His righteous judgment by the hands of the
Israelites, and expressly commissioned them to be His executioners. If
it be objected that this is to represent God as sanctioning cruelty, the
answer is obvious: it is no sanction of cruelty to direct a lawful
sentence to be carried out by human agents (compare [Num
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#003).md). Nor would obedience to God's
command in this matter make the Israelites brutal and bloodthirsty. The
behavior of the Israelites, on many occasions, proves that they shrank
from a terrible duty of this sort when laid on them by God, and did it
only so far as they were compelled to do it. .

The slaughter of the Canaanites served various important purposes
besides the mere removal of them from the face of the earth. To make and
keep the Jewish people as much as possible isolated, was a marked and
vital principle of the Old Testament dispensation. No more effectual
means could have been adopted for inspiring God's people with an
abhorrence for Canaanite sins, to which they were not a little prone,
than to make them the ministers of divine vengeance for those sins.

They learned by experiment that God would certainly root out those who
fell away in apostasy from Him. They were warned also that if they fell
into the sins of the Canaanites they would themselves be the victims of
those same judgments of which they had been the reluctant executioners
(compare e. g. [Deu 28:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#025).md). And the
whole was so ordered as to exhibit a type, fearful no doubt yet
salutary, of what must be the fate of the impenitent and obdurate in the
upshot of God's righteous government.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 1](jos001.md)

</div>
