<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Joshua Index](jos.md)  
  [Previous](jos013)  [Next](jos015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#001.md)

[Joshua 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 14:2</span></span>

By lot - We are not told in what manner the lot was cast. Perhaps two
urns were employed, one containing a description of the several
districts to be allotted, the other the names of the tribes; and the
portion of each tribe would then be determined by a simultaneous drawing
from the two urns. Or a drawing might be made by some appointed person,
or by a delegate of each tribe from one urn containing the description
of the ten inheritances. The lot only determined in a general way the
position in the country of the particular tribe concerned, whether north
or south, etc.; the dimensions of each territory being left to be
adjusted subsequently, according to the numbers and wants of the tribe
to be provided for. Since the predilections and habits of two tribes and
a half were consulted in the apportionment to them of the trans-Jordanic
territory [Num 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001.md) there is no
objection to the supposition that something of the same kind may have
taken place, subject to the divine approval, in the distribution of the
lands to the nine and a half other tribes; and the lot would thus be
appealed to as finally deciding the matter and foreclosing jealousies
and disputes.

It is apparent that the casting of the ten lots did not take place
simultaneously. The tribe of Judah had precedence, whether by express
appointment or because its lot "came up" first, does not appear. It was,
as it seems, only after this tribe had settled upon its domains, that
further lots were drawn for Ephraim and the half tribe of Manasseh.
After this a pause, perhaps of some duration, appears to have occurred;
the camp was moved from Gilgal to Shiloh; and the further casting of
lots for the other seven tribes was proceeded with at the instigation of
Joshua (see [Jos 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#010).md).

[Joshua 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 14:6</span></span>

The children of Judah - No doubt, in particular, the kinsmen of Caleb,
and perhaps other leading men of the tribe. These came before Joshua,
with Caleb, in order to make it manifest that they supported his claim,
to be secured in the possessions promised him by Moses before the
general allotment should be made to the tribes (compare the marginal
references).

[Joshua 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 14:9</span></span>

Moses sware - i. e. God swore; and His promise, confirmed by an oath,
was communicated, of course, through Moses.

[Joshua 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 14:10</span></span>

Forty and five years - The word of God to Moses was spoken after the
return of the spies in the autumn of the second year after the Exodus
[Num 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#025.md); subsequently, 38 years
elapsed before the people reached the Jordan [Num
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001.md); after the passage of the Jordan
seven more years had passed, when Caleb claimed Hebron, before the
partition of the land among the nine tribes and a half. These seven
years then correspond to the "long time" [Jos
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#018.md) during which Joshua was making
war with the Canaanites. They are in the sequel of this verse added by
Caleb to the years of wandering, since during them the people had no
settled abodes.

[Joshua 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 14:12</span></span>

The Anakims had in the course of Joshua's campaigns in the south been
expelled from "this mountain," i. e. the mountain country round Hebron,
but they had only withdrawn to the neighboring cities of Philistia [Jos
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#022.md). Thence, they had, as must be
inferred from the text here, returned and reoccupied Hebron, probably
when Joshua and the main force of the Israelites had marched northward
to deal with Jabin and his confederates. Caleb finally drove out this
formidable race and occupied Hebron and its dependent towns and district
permanently. See [Jos 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#013.md) following.

[Joshua 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 14:15</span></span>

A great man - literally, the great man; i. e. the renowned ancestor of
the tribe, regarded as the founder of its greatness [Jos
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#013.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 15](jos015.md)

</div>
