<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev016)  [Next](lev018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#001)

[Leviticus 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 17:1</span></span>

This chapter, in its immediate bearing on the daily life of the
Israelites, stands as the first of four Lev. 17-20 which set forth
practical duties, directing the Israelites to walk, not in the way of
the pagan, but according to the ordinances of Yahweh.

[Leviticus 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 17:3</span></span>

Every domesticated animal that was slain for food was a sort of
peace-offering [Lev 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#005). This law
could only be kept as long as the children of Israel dwelt in their camp
in the wilderness. The restriction was removed before they settled in
the holy land, where their numbers and diffusion over the country would
have rendered its strict observance impossible. See [Deu
12:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#015), [Deu
12:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#020).

[Lev 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#004)

Blood shall be imputed unto that man - i. e. he has incurred guilt in
shedding blood in an unlawful manner.

Cut off - See [Exo 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#014) note.

[Lev 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#005)

Rather, May bring their beasts for slaughter, which they (now) slaughter
in the open field. even that they may bring them before Yahweh to the
entrance of the tent of meeting unto the priests, and slaughter them as
peace-offerings to Yahweh.

[Lev 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#007)

Devils - The word in the original is the "shaggy goat" of [Lev
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#023). But it is sometimes employed, as
here, to denote an object of pagan worship or a demon dwelling in the
deserts [Ch2 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#015); [Isa
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#021); [Isa
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#014). The worship of the goat,
accompanied by the foulest rites, prevailed in Lower Egypt; and the
Israelites may have been led into this snare while they dwelt in Egypt.

This law for the slaughtering of animals was not merely to exclude
idolatry from the chosen nation. It had a more positive and permanent
purpose. It bore witness to the sanctity of life: it served to remind
the people of the solemnity of the grant of the lives of all inferior
creatures made to Noah [Gen 9:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#002); it
purged and directed toward Yahweh the feelings in respect to animal food
which seem to be common to man's nature; and it connected a habit of
thanksgiving with the maintenance of our human life by means of daily
food. [Ti1 4:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#003). Having acknowledged
that the animal belonged to Yahweh the devout Hebrew received back its
flesh as Yahweh's gift.

[Leviticus 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 17:8</span></span>

The strangers which sojourn - The foreigners who dwell. See [Lev
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#029) note.

Or sacrifice - i. e., a slaughtered offering of any kind, generally a
peace-offering.

[Leviticus 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 17:10</span></span>

The prohibition to eat blood is repeated in seven places in the
Pentateuch, but in this passage two distinct grounds are given for the
prohibition: first, its own nature as the vital fluid; secondly, its
consecration in sacrificial worship.

[Lev 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011)

Rather, For the soul of the flesh is in the blood; and I have ordained
it for you upon the altar, to make atonement for your souls, for the
blood it is which makes atonement by means of the soul. In the Old
Testament there are three words relating to the constitution of man;

\(a\) "life" as opposed to death [Gen
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020); [Deu
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#015);

\(b\) the "soul" as distinguished from the body; the individual life
either in man or beast, whether united to the body during life, or
separated from the body after death (compare [Gen
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007));

\(c\) the "spirit" as opposed to the flesh [Rom
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#006), and as distinguished from the
life of the flesh; the highest element in man; that which, in its true
condition, holds communion with God. The soul has its abode in the blood
as long as life lasts. In [Lev 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#014),
the soul is identified with the blood, as it is in [Gen
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004); [Deu
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#023). That the blood is rightly thus
distinguished from all other constituents of the body is acknowledged by
the highest authorities in physiology.

"It is the fountain of life (says Harvey), the first to live, and the
last to die, and the primary seat of the animal soul; it lives and is
nourished of itself, and by no other part of the human body." John
Hunter inferred that it is the seat of life, because all the parts of
the frame are formed and nourished from it. "And if (says he) it has not
life previous to this operation, it must then acquire it in the act of
forming: for we all give our assent to the existence of life in the
parts when once formed." Milne Edwards observes that, "if an animal be
bled until it falls into a state of syncope, and the further loss of
blood is not prevented, all muscular motion quickly ceases, respiration
is suspended, the heart pauses from its action, life is no longer
manifested by any outward sign, and death soon becomes inevitable; but
if, in this state, the blood of another animal of the same species be
injected into the veins of the one to all appearance dead, we see with
amazement this inanimate body return to life, gaining accessions of
vitality with each new quantity of blood that is introduced, eventual
beginning to breathe freely, moving with ease, and finally walking as it
was wont to do, and recovering completely." More or less distinct traces
of the recognition of blood as the vehicle of life are found in Greek
and Roman writers. The knowledge of the ancients on the subject may
indeed have been based on the mere observation that an animal loses its
life when it loses its blood: but it may deepen our sense of the wisdom
and significance of the Law of Moses to know that the fact which it sets
forth so distinctly and consistently, and in such pregnant connection,
is so clearly recognized by modern scientific research.

[Lev 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#014)

Rather, For the soul of all flesh is its blood with its soul (i. e. its
blood and soul together): therefore spake I to the children of Israel,
Ye shall not eat the blood of any flesh, for the soul of all flesh is
its blood, etc.

[Leviticus 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 17:15</span></span>

This law appears to be grounded on the fact that the body of an animal
killed by a wild beast, or which has died of itself, still retains a
great portion of its blood. The importance ascribed to this law in later
times may be seen in [Sa1 14:32-35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#032);
[Eze 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#014); [Eze
44:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#031), and still more in the apostolic
decision regarding "things strangled," which are pointedly connected
with blood [Act 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 18](lev018)

</div>
