<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](luk006)  [Next](luk008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#001.md)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 7:0</span></span>

[Luk 7:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#001.md). See the notes at [Mat
8:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#005.md).

[Luke 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 7:1</span></span>

In the audience of the people - In the hearing of the people.

[Luke 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 7:2</span></span>

Who was dear unto him - That is, he was valuable, trusty, and honored.

[Luke 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 7:4</span></span>

They besought him instantly - Urgently or earnestly.

He was worthy - The centurion. He had showed favor to the Jews, and it
was not improper to show him a kindness.

[Luke 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 7:11</span></span>

A city called Nain - This city was in Galilee, in the boundaries of the
tribe of Issachar. It was about two miles south of Mount Tabor, and not
far from Capernaum; It is now a small village inhabited by Jews,
Muslims, and Christians. Dr. Thomson ("The Land and the Book," vol. ii.
p. 158) locates it on the northwest corner of a mount now called Jebel
ed Duhy, one hour's ride from the foot of Mount Tabor. Of this place he
says: "This mount is now called Jebel ed Duhy and that small hamlet on
the northwest corner of it is Nain, famous for the restoration of the
widow's son to life. It was once a place of considerable extent, but is
now little more than a cluster of ruins, among which dwell a few
families of fanatical Moslems. It is in keeping with the one historic
incident that renders it dear to the Christian, that its only
antiquities are tombs. These are situated mainly on the east of the
village, and it was in that direction, I presume, that the widow's son
was being carried on that memorable occasion. It took me just an hour to
ride from the foot of Tabor to Nain."

[Luke 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 7:12</span></span>

The gate of the city - Cities were surrounded by walls, to defend them
from their enemies. They were entered through "gates" placed at
convenient distances from each other. In most cities it was not allowed
to bury the dead within the walls; hence, they were carried to some
convenient burial-place in the vicinity of the city.

A dead man carried out - A funeral procession. Anciently no Jews were
buried within the walls of the city, except the kings and distinguished
persons, [Sa1 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#003.md); [Kg2
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#018.md). The custom of burying within
cities, and especially within the walls of churches or in their
vicinity, had its origin among Christians very early; yet perhaps few
customs are more deleterious to health than burials within large cities,
especially within the walls of frequented buildings. The effluvia from
dead bodies is excessively unwholesome. Burial-places should be in
situations of retirement, far from the tread of the happy and busy
world, where all the feelings may be still and calm, and where there can
be no injury to health from the mouldering bodies of the dead.

[Luke 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 7:16</span></span>

Came a fear on all - An "awe" or solemnity at the presence of one who
had power to raise the dead, and at the miracle which had been
performed.

Glorified God - Praised or honored God that he had sent such a prophet.

And, That God hath visited his people - Some said one thing and some
another, but all expressing their belief that God had showed special
favor to the people.

Hath visited - See [Luk 1:68](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#068.md).

The raising of this young man was one of the most decisive and
instructive of our Lord's miracles. There was no doubt that he was dead.
There could be no delusion, and no agreement to impose on the people. He
came near to the city with no reference to this young man; he met the
funeral procession, as it were, by accident, and by a word he restored
him to life. All those who had the best opportunity of judging - the
mother, the friends - believed him to be dead, and were about to bury
him. The evidence that he came to life was decisive. He sat up, he
spoke, and "all" were impressed with the full assurance that God had
raised him to life. Many witnesses were present, and none doubted that
Jesus "by a word" had restored him to his weeping mother.

The whole scene was affecting. Here was a widowed mother who was
following her only son, her stay and hope, to the grave. He was carried
along - one in the prime of life and the only comfort of his parent -
impressive proof that the young, the useful, the vigorous, and the
lovely may die. Jesus met them, apparently a stranger. He approached the
procession as if he had something important to say; he touched the bier
and the procession stood still. He was full of compassion for the
weeping parent, and by a word restored the youth, stretched upon the
bier, to life. He sat up, and spoke. Jesus therefore had power over the
dead. He also has power to raise sinners, dead in trespasses and sins,
to life. He can speak the word, and, though in their death of sin they
are borne along toward ruin, he can open their eyes, and raise them up,
and restore them revived to real life or to their friends. Often he
raises up children in this manner, and gives them, converted to God, to
their friends, imparting as real joy as he gave to the widow of Nain by
raising her son from the dead, And every child should remember, if he
has pious parents, that there is "no way" in which he can give so much
joy to them as by embracing Him who is the resurrection and the life,
and resolving to live to his glory.

[Luke 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 7:19</span></span>

See this passage explained in Mat. 11:2-19.

[Luk 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#029.md)

The people - The common people.

That heard him - That heard "John."

The publicans - The tax-gatherers, the worst kind of people, who had,
however, been converted.

Justified God - Considered God as "just" or "right" in the counsel which
he gave by John - to wit, in calling people to repentance, and in
denouncing future wrath on the impenitent. Compare [Mat
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#019.md).

Being baptized ... - They "showed" that they approved of the message of
God by submitting to the ordinance which he commanded - the ordinance of
baptism. This verse and the following are not to be considered as the
words of "Luke," but the continuation of the discourse of our Lord. He
is saying what took place in regard to John. Among the common people he
was approved and obeyed among the rich and learned he was despised.

[Luk 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#030.md)

But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected ... - It appears from [Mat
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007.md) that some of the Pharisees came to
John to be baptized; but still this is entirely consistent with the
supposition that the great mass of Pharisees and lawyers rejected him.

The counsel of God - The counsel of God toward them was the solemn
admonition by John to "repent" and be baptized, and be prepared to
receive the Messiah. This was the command or revealed will of God in
relation to them. When it is said that they "rejected" the counsel of
God, it does not mean that they could frustrate his purposes, but merely
that they violated his commands. Men cannot frustrate the "real"
purposes of God, but they can contemn his messages, they can violate his
commands, and thus they can reject the counsel which he gives them, and
treat with contempt the desire which he manifests for their welfare.

Against themselves - To their own hurt or detriment. God is wise and
good. He knows what is best for us. He, therefore, that rejects what God
commands, rejects it to his own injury. It "cannot" be well for any
mortal to despise what God commands him to do.

[Luk 7:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#031.md)

See this passage explained in the notes at [Mat
11:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#016.md). "And the Lord said." This
clause is wanting in almost all the manuscripts, and is omitted by the
best critics.

[Luke 7:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">luk 7:36</span></span>

One of the Pharisees - His name was Simon, [Luk
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#010.md). Nothing more is known of him. It
is not improbable, however, from what follows [Luk
7:40-47](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#040.md), that he had been healed by
the Saviour of some afflictive disease, and made this feast to show his
gratitude.

Sat down to meat - The original word here means only that he placed
himself or reclined at the table. The notion of "sitting" at meals is
taken from modern customs, and was not practiced by the Jews. See the
notes at [Mat 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#006.md).

Meat - Supper. Food of any kind. Sat down to eat.

[Luke 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 7:37</span></span>

In the city - What city is meant is unknown. Some have supposed it was
Nain; some Capernaum; some Magdala; and some Jerusalem.

Which was a sinner - Who was depraved or wicked. This woman, it seems,
was known to be a sinner - perhaps an abandoned woman or a prostitute.
It is certain that she had much to be forgiven, and she had probably
passed her life in crime. There is no evidence that this was the woman
commonly called Mary Magdalene.

An alabaster-box ... - See the notes at [Mar
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#003.md).

[Luke 7:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 7:38</span></span>

Stood at his feet behind him - They reclined, at their meals, on their
left side, and their feet, therefore, were extended from the table, so
that persons could easily approach them. See the notes at [Mat
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#006.md).

Began to wash his feet - The Jews wore sandals. These were taken off
when they entered a house. It was an act of hospitality and kindness to
wash the feet of a guest. "She" therefore began to show her love for the
Saviour, and at the same time her humility and penitence, by pouring
forth a flood of tears, and washing his feet in the manner of a servant.

Kissed his feet - The kiss was an emblem of love and affection. In this
manner she testified her love for the Lord Jesus, and at the same time
her humility and sense of sin by kissing his feet. There could be few
expressions of penitence more deep and tender than were these. A sense
of all her sins rushed over her mind; her heart burst at the remembrance
of them, and at the presence of the pure Redeemer; with deep sorrow she
humbled herself and sought forgiveness. She showed her love for him by a
kiss of affection; her humility, by bathing his feet; her veneration, by
breaking a costly box - perhaps procured by a guilty life - and
anointing his feet. In this way we should all come, embracing him as the
loved Redeemer, humbled at his feet, and offering all we have - all that
we have gained in lives of sin, in our professions, by merchandise and
toil, while we were sinners - offering "all" to his service. Thus shall
we show the sincerity of our repentance, and thus shall we hear his
gracious voice pronounce our sins forgiven.

[Luke 7:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 7:39</span></span>

He spake within himself - Thought.

If he were a prophet - The word "prophet" here means, not one who
predicts future events, but one who knows the hearts of people. If Jesus
had been sent from God as a prophet, he supposed that he would have
known the character of the woman and would have rebuked her.

Would have known ... - Because Jesus did not rebuke her and drive her
from his presence, he inferred that he could not be acquainted with her
character. The Pharisees considered it improper to hold communion with
those who were notorious sinners. They judged our Saviour by their own
rules, and supposed that "he" would act in the same way; and Simon
therefore concluded that he did not know her character and could not be
a prophet. Jesus did not refuse the society of the guilty. He came to
save the lost; and no person ever came to him so sure of finding a
"friend," as those who came conscious that they were deeply depraved,
and mourning on account of their crimes.

That toucheth him - The "touch" of a Gentile, or a person singularly
wicked, they supposed to be polluting, and the Pharisees avoided it. See
[Mat 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#011.md).

[Luke 7:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 7:41</span></span>

A certain creditor - A man who had lent money or sold property, the
payment for which was yet due.

Five hundred pence - About 69 dollars 26 cents, or 14 British pounds, 11
shilling, 8d. See the notes at [Mat
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#028.md).

Fifty - About 7 dollars, or 1 British pound, 9 shillings, and 2d.

[Luke 7:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">luk 7:42</span></span>

Frankly forgave - Freely forgave, or forgave entirely without any
compensation. This is not designed to express anything about the way in
which God forgives sinners. He forgives - forgives freely, but it is in
connection with the "atonement" made by the Lord Jesus. If it was a mere
"debt" which we owed to God, he might forgive, as this creditor did,
without an equivalent. But it is "crime" which he forgives. He pardons
as a moral governor. A parent might forgive a "debt" without any
equivalent; but he cannot pardon an offending child without regarding
his own "character" as a parent, the "truth" of his threatenings, the
good order of his house, and the maintenance of his authority. So our
sins against God, though they are called "debts," are called so
"figuratively." It is not an affair of "money," and God cannot forgive
us without maintaining his word, the honor of his government, and law -
in other words, without an "atonement." It is clear that by the creditor
here our Saviour meant to designate God, and by the "debtors," sinners
and the woman present. Simon, whose life had been comparatively upright,
was denoted by the one that owed "fifty" pence; the woman, who had been
an open and shameless sinner, was represented by the one that owed "five
hundred." Yet "neither" could pay. Both must be forgiven or perish. So,
however much difference there is among people, "all" need the pardoning
mercy of God, and "all," without that, must perish.

[Luke 7:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">luk 7:43</span></span>

I suppose ... - He saw not "the point" of our Lord's parable. By thus
saying, therefore, he condemned himself, and prepared the way for our
Lord's reproof.

[Luke 7:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">luk 7:44</span></span>

Seest thou this woman? - You see what this woman has done to me,
compared with what you have done. She has shown me expressions of regard
which you, in your own house, have not shown.

I entered into thine house - I came at your invitation, where I might
expect all the usual rites of hospitality.

Thou gavest me no water for my feet - Among Eastern people it was
customary, before eating, to wash the feet; and to do this, or to bring
water for it, was one of the rites of hospitality. See [Gen
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#004.md); [Jdg
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#021.md). The reasons for this were, that
they wore "sandals," which covered only the bottom of the feet, and that
when they ate they reclined on couches or sofas. It became therefore
necessary that the feet should be often washed.

[Luke 7:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">luk 7:45</span></span>

Thou gavest me no kiss - The kiss was a token of affection or a common
mode of salutation, and Simon had even neglected this mark of welcoming
him to his house. It was often used among "men" as a sign of salutation.
Compare [Gen 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#004.md); [Exo
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#007.md); [Mat
26:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#049.md).

Hath not ceased to kiss my feet - How striking the difference between
the conduct of Simon and this woman! He, with all the richness of a
splendid preparation, had omitted the common marks of regard and
affection. She, in humility, had bowed at his feet, had watered them
with tears, and had not ceased to kiss them. The most splendid
entertainments do not always express the greatest welcome. There may be
in such entertainments much insincerity - much seeking of popularity or
some other motive; but no such motive could have operated in inducing a
broken-hearted sinner to wash the Saviour's "feet" with tears.

[Luke 7:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">luk 7:46</span></span>

My head with oil - The custom of pouring oil upon the head was universal
among the Jews. The oil used was sweet oil or oil of olives, prepared in
such a way as to give an agreeable smell. It was also used to render the
hair more smooth and elegant. See [Rut
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#003.md); [Sa2
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#020.md); [Sa2
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#002.md); [Psa
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005.md).

With ointment - This "ointment" was a mixture of various aromatics, and
was therefore far more costly and precious than the "oil" commonly used
for anointing the head. Her conduct, compared with that of Simon, was
therefore more striking. "He" did not give even the common oil "for his
head" used on such occasions. "She" had applied to "his feet" a far more
precious and valuable "unguent." "He" therefore, showed comparatively
"little" love. "She" showed "much."

[Luke 7:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">luk 7:47</span></span>

Wherefore I say unto thee - As the result of this, or because she has
done this; meaning by this that she had given "evidence" that her sins
had been forgiven. The inquiry with Simon was whether it was proper for
Jesus to "touch her" or to allow her to touch him, because she was such
a sinner, [Luk 7:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#039.md). Jesus said, in
substance, to Simon, "Grant that she has been as great a sinner as you
affirm, and even grant that if she had "continued so" it might be
improper to suffer her to touch me, yet "her conduct" shows that her
sins have been forgiven. She has evinced so much love for me as to show
that she is no longer "such a sinner" as you suppose, and it is not,
therefore, "improper" that she should be suffered to come near me."

For she loved much - In our translation this would seem to be given as a
reason why her sins had been forgiven - that she had loved much "before"
they were pardoned; but this is clearly not the meaning. This would be
contrary to the whole New Testament, which supposes that love
"succeeds," not "precedes" forgiveness; and which nowhere supposes that
sins are forgiven "because" we love God. It would be also contrary to
the design of the Saviour here. It was not to show "why" her sins had
been forgiven, but to show that she had given evidence that they
actually "had" been, and that it was proper, therefore, that she should
come near to him and manifest this love. The meaning may be thus
expressed: "That her sins, so many and aggravated, have been forgiven -
that she is no longer such a sinner as you suppose, is manifest from her
conduct. She shows deep gratitude, penitence, love. Her conduct is the
"proper expression" of that love. While you have shown comparatively
little evidence that you felt that "your sins" were great, and
comparatively little love at their being forgiven, "she" has shown that
she "felt" hers to be great, and has loved much."

To whom little is forgiven - He who feels that little has been forgiven
- that his sins were not as great as those of others. A man's love to
God will be in proportion to the obligation he "feels" to him for
forgiveness. God is to be "loved" for his perfections, apart from what
he has "done" for us. But still it is proper that our love should be
increased by a consideration of his goodness; and they who feel - as
Christians do - that they are the "chief of sinners," will feel under
infinite obligation to love God and their Redeemer, and that no
"expression" of attachment to him can be "beyond" what is due.

[Luke 7:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">luk 7:48</span></span>

Thy sins are forgiven - What a gracious assurance to the weeping, loving
penitent! How that voice, spoken to the troubled sinner, stills his
anguish, allays his troubled feelings, and produces peace to the soul!
And how manifest is it that he that could say thus "must" be God! No man
has a "right" to forgive sin. No man "can" speak peace to the soul, and
give assurance that its transgressions are pardoned: Here, then, Jesus
gave indubitable proof that he was God as well as man; that he was Lord
of the conscience as well as the pitying friend; and that he was as able
to read the heart and give peace there, as he was to witness the
external expression of sorrow for sin.

[Luke 7:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#049.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">luk 7:49</span></span>

Who is this ... - A very pertinent question. Who could he be but God?
Man could not do it, and there is no wonder that they were amazed.

[Luke 7:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#050.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">luk 7:50</span></span>

Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace - See the notes at [Mar
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#034.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 8](luk008.md)

</div>
