<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk009)  [Next](luk011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001)

[Luke 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 10:1</span></span>

After these things - After the appointment of the twelve apostles, and
the transactions recorded in the previous chapters.

Other seventy - Seventy others besides the apostles. They were appointed
for a different purpose from the apostles. The apostles were to be with
him; to hear his instructions; to be witnesses of his miracles, his
sufferings, his death, his resurrection and ascension, that they might
"then" go and proclaim all these things to the world. The seventy were
sent out to preach immediately, and chiefly where he himself was about
to come. They were appointed for a temporary object. They were to go
into the villages and towns, and prepare the way for his coming. The
number "seventy" was a favorite number among the Jews. Thus, the family
of Jacob that came into Egypt consisted of seventy, [Gen
46:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#027). The number of elders that Moses
appointed to aid him was the same, [Num
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#016), [Num
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#025). The number which composed the
great Sanhedrin, or council of the nation. was the same. It is not
improbable that our Saviour appointed this number with reference to the
fact that it so often occurred among the Jews, or after the example of
Moses, who appointed seventy to aid him in his work; but it is evident
that the office was "temporary" - that it had a specific design - and of
course that it would be improper to attempt to find now a "continuation"
of it, or a parallel to it, in the Christian ministry.

Two and two - There was much wisdom in sending them in this manner. It
was done, doubtless, that they might aid one another by mutual counsel,
and that they might sustain and comfort one another in their
persecutions and trials. Our Lord in this showed the propriety of having
"a religious friend," who would be a confidant and help. Every
Christian, and especially every Christian minister, needs such a friend,
and should seek some one to whom he can unbosom himself, and with whom
he can mingle his feelings and prayers.

[Luke 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 10:2</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 9:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#036).

[Luke 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 10:3</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016).

[Luke 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 10:4</span></span>

Purse ...scrip ...shoes - See the notes at [Mat
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010).

Salute no man by the way - Salutations among the Orientals did not
consist, as among us, of a slight bow or an extension of the hand, but
was performed by many embraces and inclinations, and even prostrations
of the body on the ground. All this required much "time;" and as the
business on which the seventy were sent was urgent, they were required
not to "delay" their journey by long and formal salutations of the
persons whom they met. "If two Arabs of equal rank meet each other, they
extend to each other the right hand, and having clasped, they elevate
them as if to kiss them. Each one then draws back his hand and kisses it
instead of his friend's, and then places it upon his forehead. The
parties then continue the salutation by kissing each other's beard. They
gave thanks to God that they are once more permitted to see their friend
- they pray to the Almighty in his behalf. Sometimes they repeat not
less than ten times the ceremony of grasping hands and kissing."

It may also be added, in the language of Dr. Thomson ("The Land and the
Book," vol. i. p. 534), that "there is such an amount of insincerity,
flattery, and falsehood in the terms of salutation prescribed by
etiquette, that our Lord, who is truth itself, desired his
representatives to dispense with them as far as possible, perhaps
tacitly to rebuke them. These 'instructions' were also intended to
reprove another propensity which an Oriental can scarcely resist, no
matter how urgent his business. If he meets an acquaintance, he must
stop and make an endless number of inquiries and answer as many. If they
come upon people making a bargain or discussing any other matter, they
must pause and intrude their own ideas, and enter keenly into the
business, though it in no wise concerns them; and more especially, an
Oriental can never resist the temptation to assist "where accounts are
being settled or money counted out." The clink of coin has a positive
fascination to them. Now the command of our Saviour strictly forbade all
such loiterings. They would waste time, distract attention, and in many
ways hinder the prompt and faithful discharge of their important
mission." The salutation of friends, therefore, was a ceremony which
consumed much time; and it was on this account that our Lord on this
occasion forbade them to delay their journey to greet others. A similar
direction is found in [Kg2 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#029).

[Luke 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 10:5</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#013).

[Luke 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 10:6</span></span>

The son of peace - That is, if the "house" or "family" be "worthy," or
be disposed to receive you in "peace" and kindness. See [Mat
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#013). "The son of peace" means one
"disposed" to peace, or peaceful and kind in his disposition. Compare
[Mat 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001).

[Luke 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 10:7</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#011). On this
passage Dr. Thomson ("The Land and the Book," vol. i. p. 534) remarks:
"The reason (for the command, 'Go not from house to house') is very
obvious to one acquainted with Oriental customs. When a stranger arrives
in a village or an encampment, the neighbors, one after another, must
invite him to eat with them. There is a strict etiquette about it,
involving much ostentation and hypocrisy, and a failure in the due
observance of this system of hospitality is violently resented, and
often leads to alienations and feuds among neighbors; it also consumes
much time, causes unusual distraction of mind, leads to levity, and
every way counteracts the success of a spiritual mission."

[Luke 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 10:8</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 10:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#014).

[Luke 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 10:13</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 11:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#021).

[Luke 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 10:16</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040).

[Luke 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 10:17</span></span>

The devils are subject unto us - The devils obey us. We have been able
to cast them out.

Through thy name - When commanded in thy name to come out of those who
are possessed.

[Luke 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 10:18</span></span>

I beheld Satan ... - "Satan" here denotes evidently the prince of the
devils who had been cast out by the seventy disciples, for the discourse
was respecting their power over evil spirits. "Lightning" is an image of
"rapidity" or "quickness." I saw Satan fall "quickly" or rapidly - as
quick as lightning. The phrase "from heaven" is to be referred to the
lightning, and does not mean that he saw "Satan" fall "from heaven," but
that he fell as quick as lightning from heaven or from the clouds. The
whole expression then may mean, "I saw at your command devils
immediately depart, as quick as the flash of lightning. I gave you this
power - I saw it put forth - and I give also now, in addition to this,
the power to tread on serpents," etc.

[Luke 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 10:19</span></span>

To tread on serpents - Preservation from danger. If you tread on a
poisonous reptile that would otherwise injure you, I will keep you from
danger. If you go among bitter and malignant enemies that would seek
your life, I will preserve you. See the notes at [Mar
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018).

Scorpions - The scorpion is an animal with eight feet, eight eyes and a
long jointed tail, ending in a pointed weapon or sting. It is found in
tropical climates, and seldom exceeds 4 inches in length. Its sting is
extremely poisonous, and it is sometimes fatal to life. It is in
Scripture the emblem of malicious and crafty men. When rolled up it has
some resemblance to an egg, [Luk
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#012); [Eze
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#006). The annexed cut will give an idea
of its usual form and appearance.

The enemy - Satan. The meaning of this verse is, that Jesus would
preserve them from the power of Satan and all his emissaries - from all
wicked and crafty men; and this shows that he had divine power. He that
can control Satan and his hosts that can be present to guard from all
their machinations, see all their plans, and destroy all their designs,
must be clothed with no less than almighty power.

[Luke 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 10:20</span></span>

Rather rejoice ... - Though it was an honor to work miracles, though it
is an honor to be endowed with talents, and influence, and learning, yet
it is a subject of "chief" joy that we are numbered among the people of
God, and have a title to everlasting life.

Names are written in heaven - The names of citizens of a city or state
were accustomed to be written in a book or register, from which they
were blotted out when they became unworthy, or forfeited the favor of
their country. Compare [Psa 69:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#028);
[Exo 32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032); [Deu
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#014); [Rev
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#005). That their "names were written in
heaven," means that they were "citizens" of heaven; that they were
friends of God and "approved" by him, and would be permitted to dwell
with him. This was of far more value than all "earthly" honor, power, or
wealth, and "in" this people should rejoice more than in eminent
endowments of influence, learning, talents, or possessions.

[Luke 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 10:21</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 11:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025).

[Luke 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 10:23</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 13:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#016).

[Luke 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 10:25</span></span>

A certain lawyer - One who professed to be well skilled in the laws of
Moses, and whose business it was to explain them.

Stood up - Rose - came forward to address him.

Tempted him - Feigned a desire to be instructed, but did it to perplex
him, or to lead him, if possible, to contradict some of the maxims of
the law.

Inherit eternal life - Be saved. This was the common inquiry among the
Jews. "They" had said that man must keep the commandments - the written
and oral law.

[Luke 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 10:26</span></span>

What is written ... - Jesus referred him to the "law" as a safe rule,
and asked him what was said there. The lawyer was doubtless endeavoring
to justify himself by obeying the law. He trusted to his own works. To
bring him off from that ground - to make him feel that it was an unsafe
foundation, Jesus showed him what the law "required," and thus showed
him that he needed a better righteousness than his own. This is the
proper use of the law. By comparing ourselves with "that" we see our own
defects, and are thus prepared to welcome a better righteousness than
our own - that of the Lord Jesus Christ. Thus the law becomes a
schoolmaster to lead us to him, [Gal
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024).

[Luke 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 10:27</span></span>

See this subject explained in the notes at [Mat
22:37-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037).

[Luke 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 10:29</span></span>

To justify himself - Desirous to appear blameless, or to vindicate
himself, and show that he had kept the law. Jesus wished to lead him to
a proper view of his own sinfulness, and his real departure from the
law. The man was desirous of showing that he had kept the law; or
perhaps he was desirous of justifying himself for asking the question;
of showing that it could not be so easily settled; that a mere reference
to the "words" of the law did not determine it. It was still a question
what was meant by "neighbor." The Pharisees held that the "Jews" only
were to be regarded as such, and that the obligation did not extend at
all to the Gentiles. The lawyer was probably ready to affirm that he had
discharged faithfully his duty to his countrymen, and had thus kept the
law, and could justify himself. Every sinner is desirous of "justifying
himself." He seeks to do it by his own works. For this purpose he
perverts the meaning of the law, destroys its spirituality, and brings
"down" the law to "his" standard, rather than attempt to frame his life
by "its" requirements.

[Luke 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">luk 10:30</span></span>

Jesus answering - Jesus answered him in a very different manner from
what he expected. By one of the most tender and affecting narratives to
be found anywhere, he made the lawyer his own judge in the case, and
constrained him to admit what at first he would probably have denied. He
compelled him to acknowledge that a Samaritan - of a race most hated of
all people by the Jews - had shown the kindness of a neighbor, while a
"priest" and a "Levite" had denied it "to their own countrymen."

From Jerusalem to Jericho - Jericho was situated about 15 miles to the
northeast of Jerusalem, and about 8 miles west of the river Jordan. See
the notes at [Mat 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#029).

Fell among thieves - Fell among "robbers." The word "thieves" means
those who merely take "property." These were highwaymen and not merely
took the property, but endangered the life. They were "robbers." From
Jerusalem to Jericho the country was rocky and mountainous, and in some
parts scarcely inhabited. It afforded, therefore, among the rocks and
fastnesses, a convenient place for highwaymen. This was also a very
frequented road. Jericho was a large place, and there was much traveling
to Jerusalem. At this time, also, Judea abounded with robbers. Josephus
says that at one time Herod the Great dismissed 40,000 men who had been
employed in building the temple, a large part of whom became highwaymen
(Josephus "Antiquities," xv. 7). The following remarks of Professor
Hackett, who visited Palestine in 1852, will furnish a good illustration
of the scene of this parable. It is remarkable that a parable uttered
more than eighteen hundred years ago might still be appropriately
located in this region.

Professor Hackett ("Illustrations of Scripture," p. 215, 216) says of
this region: "It is famous at the present day as the haunt of thieves
and robbers. No part of the traveler's journey is so dangerous as the
expedition to Jericho and the Dead Sea. The Oriental pilgrims who repair
to the Jordan have the protection of an escort of Turkish soldiers; and
others who would make the same journey must either go in company with
them, or provide for their safety by procuring a special guard. I was so
fortunate as to be able to accompany the great caravan at the time of
the annual pilgrimage. Yet, in spite of every precaution, hardly a
season passes in which some luckless wayfarer is not killed or robbed in
going down from Jerusalem to Jericho. The place derives its hostile
character from its terrible wildness and desolation. If we might
conceive of the ocean as being suddenly congealed and petrified when its
waves are tossed mountain high, and dashing in wild confusion against
each other, we should then have some idea of the aspect of the desert in
which the Saviour has placed so truthfully the parable of the good
Samaritan. The ravines, the almost inaccessible cliffs, the caverns,
furnish admirable lurking-places for robbers. They can rush forth
unexpectedly upon their victims, and escape as soon almost beyond the
possibility of pursuit.

"Every circumstance in this parable, therefore, was full of significance
to those who heard it. The Saviour delivered it near Bethany, on the
border of the frightful desert, [Luk
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#025), [Luk
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#038). Jericho was a sacerdotal city.
The passing of priests and Levites between that place and Jerusalem was
an everyday occurrence. The idea of a caravanserai or 'inn' on the way
was not invented, probably, for the sake of the allegory, but borrowed
from the landscape. There are the ruins now of such a shelter for the
benighted or unfortunate on one of the heights which overlook the
infested road. Thus it is that the instructions of our Lord derive often
the form and much of their pertinence from the accidental connections of
time and place."

[Luke 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 10:31</span></span>

By chance - Accidentally, or as it happened. It means that he did not do
it with a "design" to aid the man that was wounded.

A certain priest - It is said that not less than 12,000 priests and
Levites dwelt at Jericho; and as their business was at Jerusalem, of
course there would be many of them constantly traveling on that road.

When he saw him - He saw him lie, but came not near him.

Passed by on the other side - On the farther side of the way. Did not
turn out of his course even to come and see him.

[Luke 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 10:32</span></span>

A Levite - The Levites, as well as the priests, were of the tribe of
Levi, and were set apart to the duties of religion. The special duty of
the priest was "to offer sacrifice" at the temple; to present incense;
to conduct the morning and evening services of the temple, etc. The
office or duty of the "Levites" was to render assistance to the priests
in their services. In the journey of the Israelites through the
wilderness, it was their duty to transport the various parts of the
tabernacle and the sacred utensils. It was their duty to see that the
tabernacle and the temple were kept clean; to prepare supplies for the
sanctuary, such as oil, incense, wine, etc. They had also the care of
the sacred revenues, and after the time of David they conducted the
sacred "music" of the temple service, Num. 8:5-22; [Ch1
23:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#003), [Ch1
23:24-32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#024); [Ch1
24:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#027).

Came and looked on him - It is remarked by critics, here, that the
expression used does not denote, as in the case of the priest, that he
accidentally saw him and took no farther notice of him, but that he came
and looked on him more attentively, but still did nothing to relieve
him.

[Luke 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">luk 10:33</span></span>

A certain Samaritan - The Samaritans were the most inveterate foes of
the Jews. They had no dealings with each other. See the notes at [Mat
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005). It was this fact which rendered
the conduct of this good man so striking, and which was thus set in
strong contrast with the conduct of the priest and the Levite. "They"
would not help their own afflicted, and wounded countryman. "He," who
could not be expected to aid a Jew, overcame all the usual hostility
between the people; saw in the wounded man a neighbor, a brother, one
who needed aid; and kindly denied himself to show kindness to the
stranger.

[Luke 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">luk 10:34</span></span>

Pouring in oil and wine - These were often used in medicine to heal
wounds. Probably they were mingled together, and had a highly sanative
quality. How strikingly is his conduct contrasted with the priest and
Levite! And, how particularly as well as beautifully by this does our
Saviour show what we ought to do to those who are in circumstances of
need! He does not merely say "in general" that he showed him kindness,
but he "told how" it was done. He stopped - came where he was - pitied
him - bound up his wound - set him on his own beast - conducted him to a
tavern - passed the night with him, and then secured the kind
attendances of the landlord, promising him to pay him for his trouble
and all this without desiring or expecting any reward. If this had been
by a Jew, it would have been signal kindness; if it had been by a
Gentile, it would also have been great kindness; but it was by a
Samaritan - a man of a nation most hateful to the Jews, and therefore it
most strikingly shows what we are to do to friends and foes when they
are in distress.

[Luke 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">luk 10:35</span></span>

Two pence - About 27 cents, or 1 shilling, 2d. This may seem a small
sum, but we are to remember that that sum was probably ten times as
valuable then as now - that is, that it would purchase ten times as much
food and the common necessaries of life as the same sum would now.
Besides, it is probable that all the man wanted was "attention" and
kindness, and for all these it was the purpose of the Samaritan to pay
when he returned.

The host - The innkeeper.

[Luke 10:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">luk 10:36</span></span>

Was neighbour - Showed the kindness of a neighbor, or evinced the proper
feelings of a neighbor. The lawyer had asked him who was his neighbor?
Jesus in this beautiful narrative showed him who and what a neighbor
was, and he did this in a way that disarmed his prejudice, deeply
affected him in regard to his own duty, and evinced the beauty of
religion. Had he "at first" told him that a Samaritan might be a
neighbor to a Jew and deserve his kindness, he would have been at once
revolted at it; but when, by a beautiful and affecting narrative, he
brought the "man himself" to see that it might be, he was constrained to
admit it. Here we see the beauty of a parable and its use. It disarmed
prejudice, fixed the attention, took the mind gently yet irresistibly,
and prevented the possibility of cavil or objection. Compare, also, the
address of Nathan to David, [Sa2
12:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#001).

[Luke 10:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 10:37</span></span>

He that showed mercy - His "Jewish" prejudice would not permit him "to
name" the Samaritan, but there was no impropriety, even in his view, in
saying that the man who showed so much mercy was really the neighbor to
the afflicted, and not he who "professed" to be his neighbor, but who
would "do nothing" for his welfare.

Go, and do thou likewise - Show the same kindness to "all" - to friend
and foe - and "then" you will have evidence that you keep the law, and
not "till" then. Of this man we know nothing farther; but from this
inimitably beautiful parable we may learn:

1\. That the knowledge of the law is useful to make us acquainted with
our own sinfulness and need of a Saviour.

2\. That it is not he who "professes" most kindness that really loves us
most, but he who will most deny himself that he may do us good in times
of want.

3\. That religion requires us to do good to "all" people, however
"accidentally" we may become acquainted with their calamities.

4\. That we should do good to our enemies. Real love to them will lead
us to deny ourselves, and to sacrifice our own welfare, that we may help
them in times of distress and alleviate their wants.

5\. That he is really our neighbor who does us the most good - who helps
us in our necessities, and especially if he does this when there has
been "a controversy or difference" between us and him.

6\. We hence see the beauty of religion. Nothing else will induce people
to surmount their prejudices, to overcome opposition, and to do good to
those who are at enmity with them. True religion teaches us to regard
every man as our neighbor; prompts us to do good to all, to forget all
national or sectional distinctions, and to aid all those who are in
circumstances of poverty and want. If religion were valuable for nothing
"but this," it would be the most lovely and desirable principle on
earth, and all, especially in their early years, should seek it. Nothing
that a young person can gain will be so valuable as the feeling that
regards all the world as one great family, and to learn early to do good
to all.

7\. The difference between the Jew and the Samaritan was a difference in
"religion" and "religious opinion;" and from the example of the latter
we may learn that, while people differ in "opinions" on subjects of
religion, and while they are zealous for what they hold to be the truth,
still they should treat each other kindly; that they should aid each
other in necessity; and that they should thus show that religion is a
principle superior to the love of sect, and that the cord which binds
man to man is one that is to be sundered by no difference of opinion,
that Christian kindness is to be marred by no forms of worship, and by
no bigoted attachment for what we esteem the doctrines of the gospel.

[Luke 10:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 10:38</span></span>

A certain village - Bethany. See [Joh
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#001). It was on the eastern declivity
of the Mount of Olives. See the notes at [Mat
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001).

Received him - Received him kindly and hospitably. From this it would
seem that "Martha" was properly the mistress of the house. Possibly she
was a widow, and her brother Lazarus and younger sister Mary lived with
her; and as "she" had the care of the household, this will also show why
she was so diligently employed about domestic affairs.

[Luke 10:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 10:39</span></span>

Sat at Jesus' feet - This was the ancient posture of disciples or
learners. They sat at the "feet" of their teachers - that is, beneath
them, in a humble place. Hence, Paul is represented as having been
brought up at the "feet" of Gamaliel, [Act
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#003). When it is said that Mary sat at
Jesus' feet, it means that she was "a disciple" of his; that she
listened attentively to his instructions, and was anxious to learn his
doctrine.

[Luke 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">luk 10:40</span></span>

Martha was cumbered about much serving - Was much distracted with the
cares of the family, and providing suitably to entertain the Saviour. It
should be said here that there is no evidence that Martha had a worldly
or covetous disposition. Her anxiety was to provide suitable
entertainment for the Lord Jesus. As mistress of the family, this care
properly devolved on her; and the only fault which can be charged on her
was too earnest a desire to make such entertainment, when she might have
sat with Mary at his feet, and, perhaps, too much haste and fretfulness
in speaking to Jesus about Mary.

Dost thou not care ... - This was an improper reproof of our Lord, as if
"he" encouraged Mary in neglecting her duty. Or perhaps Martha supposed
that Mary was sitting there to show him the proper expressions of
courtesy and kindness, and that she would not think it proper to leave
him without his direction and permission. She therefore "hinted" to
Jesus her busy employments, her need of the aid of her sister, and
requested that he would signify his wish that Mary should assist her.

[Luke 10:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 10:41</span></span>

Thou art careful - Thou art anxious.

Troubled - Disturbed, distracted, very solicitous.

Many things - The many objects which excite your attention in the
family. This was probably designed as a slight reproof, or a tender hint
that she was improperly anxious about those things, and that she should,
with Mary, rather choose to hear the discourses of heavenly wisdom.

[Luke 10:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">luk 10:42</span></span>

But one thing is needful - That is, religion, or piety. This is
eminently and especially needful. Other things are of little importance.
This should be secured first, and then all other things will be added.
See [Ti1 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008); [Mat
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033).

That good part - The portion of the gospel; the love of God, and an
interest in his kingdom. She had chosen to be a Christian, and to give
up her time and affections to God.

Which shall not be taken away - God will not take away his grace from
his people, neither shall any man pluck them out of his hand, [Joh
10:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#028).

From this interesting narrative we learn:

1\. That the cares of this life are dangerous, even when they seem to be
most lawful and commendable. Nothing of a worldly nature could have been
more proper than to provide for the Lord Jesus and supply his wants. Yet
even "for this," because it too much engrossed her mind, the Lord Jesus
gently reproved Martha. So a care for our families may be the means of
our neglecting religion and losing our souls.

2\. It is of more importance to attend to the instructions of the Lord
Jesus than to be engaged in the affairs of the world. The one will abide
forever; the other will be but for a little time.

3\. There "are" times when it is proper to suspend worldly employments,
and to attend to the affairs of the soul. It "was" proper for Mary to do
it. It would have been proper for Martha to have done it. It "is" proper
for all on the Sabbath and at other occasional seasons - seasons of
prayer and for searching the word of God - to suspend worldly concerns
and to attend to religion.

4\. If attention to religion be omitted at "the proper time," it will
always be omitted. If Mary had neglected to hear Jesus "then," she might
never have heard him.

5\. Piety is the chief thing needed. Other things will perish. We shall
soon die. All that we can gain we must leave. But the "soul" will live.
There is a judgment-seat; there is a heaven; there is a hell; and "all"
that is needful to prepare us to die, and to make us happy forever, is
to be a friend of Jesus, and to listen to his teaching.

6\. Piety is the chief ornament in a female. It sweetens every other
virtue; adorns every other grace; gives new loveliness to the
tenderness, mildness, and grace of the female character. Nothing is more
lovely than a female sitting at the feet of the meek and lowly Jesus,
like Mary; nothing more unlovely than entire absorption in the affairs
of the world, like Martha. The most lovely female is she who has most of
the spirit of Jesus; the least amiable, she who neglects her soul - who
is proud, frivolous, thoughtless, envious, and unlike the meek and lowly
Redeemer. At his feet are peace, purity, joy. Everywhere else an
alluring and wicked world steals the affections and renders us vain,
frivolous, wicked, proud, and unwilling to die.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 11](luk011)

</div>
