<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](luk018)  [Next](luk020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001.md)

[Luke 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 19:1</span></span>

And Jesus entered ... - See the notes at [Mat
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#029.md). This means, perhaps, "he was
passing" through Jericho when Zacchaeus saw him. His house was "in"
Jericho.

[Luke 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 19:2</span></span>

A man named Zacchaeus - The name Zacchaeus is Hebrew, and shows that
this man was a "Jew." The Hebrew name properly means "pure," and is the
same as Zacchai in [Ezr 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#009.md); [Neh
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#014.md). The publicans, therefore, were
not all foreigners.

Chief among the publicans - Who presided over other tax-gatherers, or
who "received" their collections and transmitted them to the Roman
government.

He was rich - Though this class of people was despised and often
infamous, yet it seems that they were sometimes wealthy. They sustained,
however, the general character of "sinners," because they were
particularly odious in the eyes of the Jews. See [Luk
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#007.md). The evangelist has thought it
worthy of record that he was rich, perhaps, because it was so unlikely
that a "rich man" should follow so poor and despised a personage as
Jesus of Nazareth, and because it was so unusual a thing during his
personal ministry. Not many rich were called, but God chiefly chose the
poor of this world Compare [Co1
1:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026.md).

[Luke 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 19:3</span></span>

Who he was - Rather "what sort of person," he was, or how he appeared.
He had that curiosity which is natural to people to see one of whom they
have heard much. It would seem, also, that in this case mere "curiosity"
led to his conversion and that of his family. Compare [Co1
14:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#023.md). God makes use of every
principle - of curiosity, or sympathy, or affection, or hope, or fear -
to lead people in the way of salvation, and to impress truth on the
minds of sinners.

The press - The crowd; the multitude that surrounded Jesus. Earthly
princes are often borne in splendid equipages, or even carried, as in
Eastern nations, in palanquins on the shoulders of people. Jesus mingled
with the multitude, not seeking distinctions of that sort, and perhaps,
"in appearance," not distinguished from thousands that followed him.

Little of stature - Short. Not a tall man.

[Luke 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 19:4</span></span>

A sycamore tree - See this described in the notes at [Luk
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#006.md).

[Luke 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 19:5</span></span>

Abide at thy house - Remain there, or put up with him. This was an honor
which Zacchaeus did not expect. The utmost, it seems, which he aimed at
was to see Jesus; but, instead of that, Jesus proposed to remain with
him, and to give him the benefit of his personal instruction. It is but
one among a thousand instances where the Saviour goes, in bestowing
mercies, far beyond the desert, the desire, or the expectation of men;
and it is not improper to learn from this example that solicitude to
behold the Saviour will not pass unnoticed by him, but will meet with
his warm approbation, and be connected with his blessing. Jesus was
willing to encourage efforts to come to him, and his benevolence
prompted him to gratify the desires of the man who was solicitous to see
him. He does not disdain the mansions of the rich any more than he does
the dwelling-places of the poor, provided there be a humble heart; and
he did not suppose there was "less" need of his presence in order to
save in the house of the rich man than among the poor. He set an example
to all his ministers, and was not afraid or ashamed to proclaim his
gospel amid wealth. He was not awed by external splendor or grandeur.

[Luke 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 19:7</span></span>

Murmured - Found fault, complained.

To be a guest - To remain with, or to be entertained by.

A man that is a sinner - All publicans they regarded as great sinners,
and the "chief" of the publicans, therefore, they regarded as especially
wicked. It would appear also from Zacchaeus' confession that his
character "had been" that of an oppressive man. But the people seemed to
forget that he might be a penitent, and that the Messiah came to save
that which was lost.

[Luke 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 19:8</span></span>

The half of my goods I give to the poor - It is not necessary to
understand this as affirming that this "had" been his practice, or that
he said this in the way of proclaiming his own righteousness. It maybe
understood rather as a purpose which he "then" formed under the teaching
of Christ. He seems to have been sensible that he was a sinner. Of this
he was convinced, as we may suppose, by the presence and discourse of
Jesus. At first, attracted only by curiosity, or, it may be, by partial
conviction that this was the Messiah, he had sought to see the Saviour;
but his presence and conversation convinced him of his guilt, and he
stood and openly confessed his sins, and expressed his purpose to give
half his ill-gotten property to the poor. This was not a proclamation of
his "own" righteousness, nor the "ground" of his righteousness, but it
was the "evidence" of the sincerity of his repentance, and the
confession which with the mouth is made unto salvation, [Rom
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010.md).

And if I have taken - His office gave him the power of oppressing the
people, and it seems that he did not deny that it had been done.

By false accusation - This is the same word which in [Luk
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#014.md) is rendered "neither accuse any
falsely." The accusation seems to have been so made that the person
accused was obliged to pay much greater taxes, or so that his property
came into the hands of the informer. There are many ways in which this
might be done, but we do not know the exact manner.

I restore him - We cannot suppose that this had been always his
practice, for no man would wantonly extort money from another, and then
restore him at once four times as much; but it means that he was made
sensible of his guilt; perhaps that his mind had been a considerable
time perplexed in the matter, and that now he was resolved to make the
restoration. This was the "evidence" of his penitence and conversion.
And here it may be remarked that this is "always" an indisputable
evidence of a man's conversion to God. A man who has hoarded ill-gotten
gold, if he becomes a Christian, will be disposed to do good with it. A
man who has injured others - who has cheated them or defrauded them,
"even by due forms of law," must, if he be a Christian, be willing, as
far as possible, to make restoration. Zacchaeus, for anything that
appears to the contrary, may have obtained this property by the
decisions of courts of justice, but he now felt that it was wrong; and
though the defrauded people could not "legally" recover it, yet his
conscience told him that, in order to his being a true penitent, he must
make restitution. One of the best evidences of true conversion is when
it produces this result; and one of the surest evidences that a
"professed" penitent is not a "true" one, is when he is "not" disposed
to follow the example of this son of Abraham and make proper
restitution.

Four-fold - Four times as much as had been unjustly taken. This was the
amount that was required in the Jewish law when a sheep had been stolen,
and a man was convicted of the theft by trial at law, [Exo
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001.md). If he "confessed" it himself,
without being "detected" and tried, he had only to restore what was
stolen, and add to it a fifth part of its value, [Num
5:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#006.md). The sincerity of Zacchaeus'
repentance was manifest by his being willing to make restoration as
great as if it had been proved against him, evincing "his sense" of the
wrong, and his purpose to make full restitution. The Jews were allowed
to take "no interest" of their brethren [Lev
25:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#035.md), and this is the reason why
that is not mentioned as the measure of the restitution. When injury of
this kind is done in other places, the least that is proper is to
restore the principal and interest; for the injured person has a right
"to all" that his property would have procured him if it had not been
unjustly taken away.

[Luke 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 19:9</span></span>

Salvation is come to this house - This family. They have this day
received the blessings of the gospel, and become interested in the
Messiah's kingdom. Salvation "commences" when people truly receive
Christ and their sins are pardoned; it is "completed" when the soul is
sanctified and received up into heaven.

Forasmuch - Because. For he has given "evidence" that he is a new man,
and is disposed to forsake his sins and receive the gospel.

The son of Abraham - Hitherto, although a Jew, yet he has been a sinner,
and a great sinner. He was not worthy to be called a son of Abraham.
Now, by repentance, and by receiving the Christ whose day Abraham saw
and was glad [Joh 8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056.md), he has shown
himself to be worthy to be called his son. Abraham was an example of
distinguished piety; the father of the faithful [Rom
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011.md), as well as the ancestor of the
Jews. They were called his sons who were descended from him, and
particularly they who "resembled" him. In this place the phrase is used
in both senses.

[Luke 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 19:10</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#011.md).

[Luke 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 19:11</span></span>

He spake a parable - This parable has in some respects a resemblance to
the parable of the "talents" in [Mat
25:14-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#014.md), but it is not the same. They
differ in the following respects: That was spoken "after" he had entered
Jerusalem; this, while on his way there. That was delivered on the Mount
of Olives; this, in the house of Zacchaeus. That was delivered to teach
them the necessity of "improving" the talents committed to them; this
was for a different design. He was now near Jerusalem. A great multitude
attended him. His disciples regarded him as the Messiah, and by this
they understood a temporal prince who should deliver them from the
dominion of the Romans and set them at liberty. They were anxious for
that, and supposed that the time was at hand, and that "now," as soon as
he entered Jerusalem, he would assume the appearance of such a prince
and set up his kingdom. To "correct that notion" seems to have been the
main design of this parable. To do that, he tells them of a man who had
a right to the kingdom, yet who, "before" taking possession of it, went
into another kingdom to receive a confirmation of his title, thus
intimating that "he" would also go away "before" he would completely set
up his kingdom [Luk 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#012.md); he tells
them that this nobleman left to his servants "property" to be improved
in his absence, as "he" would leave to his disciples "talents" to be
used in his service [Luk 19:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#012.md); he
tells them that this nobleman was rejected by his own citizens [Luk
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#014.md), as "he" would be by the Jews;
and that he received the kingdom and called them to an account, as he
also would his own disciples.

Because he was nigh to Jerusalem - The capital of the country, and where
they supposed he would probably set up his kingdom.

The kingdom of God should immediately appear - That the reign of the
Messiah would immediately commence. He spoke the parable to "correct"
that expectation.

[Luke 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 19:12</span></span>

A certain nobleman - A prince; a man descended from kings, and having a
title, therefore, to succeed in the kingdom.

Went into a far country ... - This expression is derived from the state
of things in Judea in the time of the Saviour. Judea was subject to the
Romans, having been conquered by Pompey about sixty years before Christ.
It was, however, governed by "Jews," who held the government "under" the
Romans. It was necessary that the prince or king should receive a
recognition of his right to the kingdom by the Roman emperor and, in
order to this, that he should go to Rome; or, as it is said here, that
he might receive to himself a kingdom. This actually occurred several
times. Archelaus, a son of Herod the Great, about the time of the birth
of Jesus, went to Rome to obtain a confirmation of the title which his
father had left him, and succeeded in doing it. Herod the Great, his
father, had done the same thing before to secure the aid and countenance
of Antony. Agrippa the younger, grandson of Herod the Great, went to
Rome also to obtain the favor of Tiberius, and to be confirmed in his
government. Such instances, having frequently occurred, would make this
parable perfectly intelligible to those to whom it was addressed. By the
nobleman, here, is undoubtedly represented the Messiah, the Lord Jesus
Christ; by his going into a far country is denoted his going to heaven,
to the right hand of his Father, "before" he should "fully" set up his
kingdom and establish his reign among men.

[Luke 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 19:13</span></span>

Ten servants - Nothing in particular is denoted by the number "ten." It
is a circumstance intended to keep up the narrative. In general, by
these servants our Saviour denotes his disciples, and intends to teach
us that talents are given us to be improved, for which we must give an
account at his return.

Ten pounds - The word translated "pound" here denotes the Hebrew
"minah," which was equal to about 15 dollars, or 3 British pounds. The
pounds here denote the talents which God has given to his servants on
earth to improve, and for which they must give all account in the day of
judgment.

Occupy till I come - The word "occupy" here means not merely to
"possess," as it often does in our language, but to "improve," to employ
"in business," for the purpose of increasing it or of making "profit" on
it. The direction was to use this money so as to gain "more" against his
return. So Jesus commands his disciples to "improve" their talents; to
make the most of them; to increase their capability of doing good, and
to do it "until" he comes to call us hence, by death, to meet him. See
[Co1 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#007.md); [Eph
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007.md).

[Luke 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 19:14</span></span>

But his citizens - His "subjects," or the people whom he was desirous of
ruling.

Hated him - On account of his character, and their fear of oppression.
This was, in fact, the case with regard to Archelaus, the Jewish prince,
who went to Rome to be confirmed in his kingdom.

Sent a message, saying ... - His discontented subjects, fearing what
would be the character of his reign, sent an embassy to remonstrate
against his being appointed as the ruler. This actually took place.
Archelaus went to Rome to obtain from Augustus a confirmation of his
title to reign over that part of Judea which had been left him by his
father, Herod the Great. The Jews, knowing his character (compare [Mat
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#022).md), sent an embassy of 50 men to
Rome, to prevail on Augustus "not" to confer the title on him, but they
could not succeed. He "received" the kingdom, and reigned in Judea in
the place of his father. As this fact was "fresh" in the memory of the
Jews, it makes this parable much more striking. By this part of it
Christ designed to denote that the Jews would reject "him" - the
Messiah, and would say that they did not desire him to reign over them.
See [Joh 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#011.md). So it is true of all
sinners that they do not "wish" Jesus to reign over them, and, if it
were possible, would cast him off, and never submit to his reign.

[Luke 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 19:15</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 25:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#019.md).

[Luke 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 19:16</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 25:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#020.md).

Ten cities - We are not to suppose that this will be "literally"
fulfilled in heaven. Christ teaches here that our reward in heaven will
be "in proportion" to our faithfulness in improving our talents on
earth.

[Luke 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 19:20</span></span>

A napkin - A towel. He means by it that he had not wasted it nor thrown
it by carelessly, but had been "very careful" of it; so much so as to be
at the pains to tie it up in a towel and put it in a safe place, as if
he had been "very faithful" to his trust. So many people employ their
talents, their learning, their property, their influence. They "have"
them; they "keep" them; but they never "use" them in the service of the
Lord Jesus; and, in regard to their influence on the church or the
world, it would be the same if God had never conferred on them these
talents.

[Luke 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 19:21</span></span>

An austere man - Hard, severe, oppressive. The word is commonly applied
to unripe fruit, and means "sour," unpleasant; harsh. In this case it
means that the man was taking every advantage, and, while "he" lived in
idleness, was making his living out of the toils of others.

Thou takest up ... - Thou dost exact of others what thou didst not give.
The phrase is applied to a man who "finds" what has been lost by
another, and keeps it himself, and refuses to return it to the owner.
All this is designed to show the sinner's view of God. He regards him as
unjust, demanding more than man has "power" to render, and more,
therefore, than God has a "right" to demand. See the notes at [Mat
25:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#024.md).

[Luke 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 19:22</span></span>

Out of thine own mouth - By your own statement, or your own views of my
character. If you "knew" that this was my character, and "knew" that I
would be rigid, firm, and even severe, it would have been the part of
wisdom in you to have made the best use of the money in your power; but
as you "knew" my character beforehand, and was well acquainted with the
fact that I should demand a strict compliance with your obligation, you
have no right to complain if you are condemned accordingly. We are not
to suppose that God is "unjust or austere;" but what we are to learn
from this is, that as people know that God will be "just," and will call
them to a strict account in the day of judgment, they ought to be
prepared to meet him, and that they cannot then complain if God should
condemn them.

[Luke 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 19:23</span></span>

The bank - The treasury, or the place of exchange. Why did you not loan
it out, that it might be increased?

Usury - Interest.

[Luke 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 19:25</span></span>

And they said unto him - Those standing around him said.

He hath ... - This was probably an observation made by some of the
bystanders, as if surprised at such a decision. "He has already ten
pounds. Why take away this one, and add to what he already possesses?
Why should his property be increased at the expense of this man, who has
but one pound?" The answer to this is given in the following verse; that
every one that hath, to him shall be given; every man who is faithful,
and improves what God gives him, shall receive much more.

[Luke 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 19:26</span></span>

For I say ... - These are the words of the "nobleman" declaring the
principles on which he would distribute the rewards of his kingdom.

But those mine enemies - By the punishment of those who would not that
he should reign over them is denoted the ruin that was to come upon the
Jewish nation for rejecting the Messiah, and also upon all sinners for
not receiving him as their king. See the notes at the parable of the
talents in Matt. 25.

[Luke 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 19:28</span></span>

See the notes at Mat. 21:1-16.

[Luke 19:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">luk 19:40</span></span>

The stones would ...cry out - It is "proper" that they should celebrate
my coming. Their acclamations "ought" not to be suppressed. So joyful is
the event which they celebrate - the coming of the Messiah - that it is
not fit that I should attempt to impose silence on them. The expression
here seems to be "proverbial," and is not to be taken literally.
Proverbs are designed to express the truth "strongly," but are not to be
taken to signify as much as if they were to be interpreted literally.
The sense is, that his coming was an event of so much importance that it
"ought" to be celebrated in some way, and "would" be celebrated. It
would be impossible to restrain the people, and improper to attempt it.
The language here is strong proverbial language to denote that fact. We
are not to suppose, therefore, that our Saviour meant to say that the
stones were "conscious" of his coming, or that God would "make" them
speak, but only that there was "great joy" among the people; that it was
"proper" that they should express it in this manner, and that it was not
fit that he should attempt to repress it.

[Luke 19:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 19:41</span></span>

He wept over it - Showing his compassion for the guilty city, and his
strong sense of the evils that were about to come upon it. See the notes
at [Mat 23:37-39](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037.md). As he entered the
city he passed over the Mount of Olives. From that mountain there was a
full and magnificent view of the city. See the notes at [Mat
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001.md). The view of the splendid capital
- the knowledge of its crimes - the remembrance of the mercies of God
toward it - the certainty that it might have been spared if it had
received the prophets and himself - the knowledge that it was about to
put "him," their long-expected Messiah, to death, and "for" that to be
given up to utter desolation - affected his heart, and the triumphant
King and Lord of Zion wept! Amid all "his" prosperity, and all the
acclamations of the multitude, the heart of the Redeemer of the world
was turned from the tokens of rejoicing to the miseries about to come on
a guilty people. Yet they "might" have been saved. If thou hadst known,
says he, even thou, with all thy guilt, the things that make for thy
peace; if thou hadst repented, had been righteous, and had received the
Messiah; if thou hadst not stained thy hands with the blood of the
prophets, and shouldst not with that of the Son of God, then these
terrible calamities would not come upon thee. But it is too late. The
national wickedness is too great; the cup is full: mercy is exhausted;
and Jerusalem, with all her pride and splendor, the glory of her temple,
and the pomp of her service, "must perish!"

For the days shall come ... - This took place under Titus, the Roman
general, 70 a.d., about thirty years after this was spoken.

Cast a trench about thee - The word "trench" now means commonly a "pit
or ditch." When the Bible was translated, it meant also "earth thrown up
to defend a camp" (Johnson's "Dictionary"). This is the meaning of the
original here. It is not a pit or large "ditch," but a pile of earth,
stones, or wood thrown up to guard a camp, and to defend it from the
approach of an enemy. This was done at the siege of Jerusalem. Josephus
informs us that Titus, in order that he might compel the city to
surrender by "famine," built a wall around the whole circumference of
the city. This wall was nearly 5 miles in length, and was furnished with
thirteen castles or towers. This work was completed with incredible
labor in ten days. The professed design of this wall was "to keep" the
city "in on every side." Never was a prophecy more strikingly
accomplished.

Shall lay thee even with the ground ... - This was literally done. Titus
caused a plow to pass over the place where the temple stood. See the
notes at Matt. 24. All this was done, says Christ, because Jerusalem
knew not the time of its visitation - that is, did not know, and "would
not" know, that the Messiah had come. "His coming" was the time of their
merciful visitation. That time had been predicted, and invaluable
blessings promised as the result of his advent; but they would not know
it. They rejected him, they put him to death, and it was just that they
should be destroyed.

[Luke 19:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">luk 19:45</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 21:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012.md).

[Luke 19:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">luk 19:47</span></span>

Daily in the temple - That is, for five or six days before his
crucifixion.

[Luke 19:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">luk 19:48</span></span>

Could not find ... - Were not able to accomplish their purpose; they did
not know "how" to bring it about.

Very attentive - literally, "hung upon him" to hear him. The word
denotes an anxious desire, a fixed attention, a cleaving to him, and an
unwillingness to "leave" him, so that they might hear his words. This is
always the case when people become anxious about their salvation. They
manifest it by hanging on the preaching of the gospel; by fixed
attention; and by an unwillingness to leave the place where the word of
God is preached. In view of the fact that the Lord Jesus wept over
Jerusalem, we may remark:

\(1\) It was on account of the sins and danger of the inhabitants, and
of the fact that they had rejected offered mercy.

\(2\) there was "occasion" for weeping. Jesus would not have wept had
there been no cause for it. If they were in no danger, if there was no
punishment in the future world, why should he have wept? When the Lord
Jesus weeps over sinners, it is the fullest proof that they are in
danger.

\(3\) sinners are in the same danger now. They reject Christ as sinners
did then. They despise the gospel as they did then. They refuse now to
come to him as the inhabitants of Jerusalem did. Why are they not then
in the same danger?

\(4\) deep feeling, gushing emotions, lively affections, are proper in
religion. If the Saviour wept, it is not improper for us to weep - it is
right. Nay, can it be right "not" to weep over the condition of lost
man.

\(5\) Religion is tenderness and love. It led the Saviour to weep, and
it teaches us to sympathize and to feel deeply. Sin hardens the heart,
and makes it insensible to every pure and noble emotion; but religion
teaches us to feel "for others' woes," and to sympathize in the danger
of others.

\(6\) Christians and Christian ministers should weep over lost sinners.
They have souls just as precious as they had then; they are in the same
danger; they are going to the judgment-bar; they are wholly insensible
to their danger and their duty.

"Did Christ o'er sinners weep?

And shall our cheeks be dry?

Let floods of penitential grief.

Burst forth from every eye.

"The Son of God in tears.

Angels with wonder see!

Be thou astonished, O my soul;

He shed those tears for thee.

"He wept that we might weep;

Each sin demands a tear:

In heaven alone no sin is found.

And there's no weeping there."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 20](luk020.md)

</div>
