<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk016)  [Next](luk018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#001)

[Luke 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 17:1</span></span>

It is impossible - It cannot but happen. Such is the state of things
that "it will be." See these verses explained in the notes at [Mat
18:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#006).

[Luke 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 17:3</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015), [Mat
18:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#021). "Trespass against thee." Sin
against thee, or does anything that gives you an offence or does you an
injury.

Rebuke - Reprove. Go and tell him his fault, and seek an explanation.
Acquaint him with what has been the effect of his conduct, and the state
of your feelings, that he may acknowledge his error and repent.

[Luke 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 17:5</span></span>

Increase our faith - This duty of forgiving offences seemed so difficult
to the disciples that they strongly felt the need of an increase of
faith. They felt that they were prone themselves to harbor resentments,
and that it required an additional increase of true religion to enable
them to comply with the requirements of Jesus. We may learn from this:

1\. That Jesus has "the power" of increasing the faith of his people.
Strength comes from him, and especially strength to believe the gospel.
Hence, he is called the "Author and Finisher" of our faith, [Heb
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002).

2\. The duty of forgiving offences is one of the most difficult duties
of the Christian religion. It is so contrary to our natural feelings; it
implies such elevation above the petty feelings of malice and revenge,
and is so contrary to the received maxims of the world, which teach us
to "cherish" rather than to forgive the memory of offences, that it is
no wonder our Saviour dwells much on this duty, and so strenuously
insists on it in order to our having evidence that our hearts have been
changed.

Some have thought that this prayer that he would increase their faith
refers to the power of working miracles, and especially to the case
recorded in [Mat 17:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#016).

[Luke 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 17:6</span></span>

See [Mat 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#020). "Sycamine-tree." This
name, as well as sycamore, is given, among us, to the large tree
commonly called the buttonwood; but the tree here mentioned is
different. The Latin Vulgate and the Syriac versions translate it
"mulberry-tree." It is said to have been a tree that commonly grew in
Egypt, of the size and appearance of a mulberry-tree, but bearing a
species of figs. This tree was common in Palestine. It is probable that
our Lord was standing by one as he addressed these words to his
disciples. Dr. Thomson ("The Land and the Book," vol. i. p. 22-24) says
of this tree: "It is generally planted by the wayside, in the open space
where several paths meet." (Compare [Luk
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#004).) "This sycamore is a remarkable
tree. It not only bears several crops of figs during the year, but these
figs grow on short stems along the trunk and large branches, and not at
the end of twigs, as in other fruit-bearing trees. The figs are small,
and of a greenish-yellow color. At Gaza and Askelon I saw them of a
purple tinge, and much larger than they are in this part of the country.
They were carried to market in large quantities, and appeared to be more
valued there than with us. Still, they are, at best, very insipid, and
none but the poorer classes eat them. It is easily propagated, merely by
planting a stout branch in the ground, and watering it until it has
struck its roots into the soil. This it does with great rapidity and to
a vast depth. It was with reference to this latter fact that our Lord
selected it to illustrate the power of faith.

Now, look at this tree - its ample girth, its wide-spread arms branching
off from the parent trunk only a few feet from the ground; then examine
its enormous roots, as thick, as numerous, and as wide-spread into the
deep soil below as the branches extend into the air above the very best
type of invincible steadfastness. What power on earth can pluck up such
a tree? Heaven's thunderbolt may strike it down, the wild tornado may
tear it to fragments, but nothing short of miraculous power can fairly
pluck it up by the roots."

[Luke 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 17:7</span></span>

Having a servant ... - This parable appears to have been spoken with
reference to the rewards which the disciples were expecting in the
kingdom of the Messiah. The occasion on which it was spoken cannot be
ascertained. It does not seem to have any particular connection with
what goes before. It may be supposed that the disciples were somewhat
impatient to have the kingdom restored to Israel [Act
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#006) - that is, that he would assume
his kingly power, and that they were impatient of the "delay," and
anxious to enter on "the rewards" which they expected, and which they
not improbably were expecting in consequence of their devotedness to
him. In answer to these expectations, Jesus spoke this parable, showing
them,

1\. That they should be rewarded as a servant would be provided for;
but,

2\. That this was not the "first" thing; that there was a proper "order"
of things, and that thus the reward might be delayed, as a servant would
be provided for, but at the proper time, and at the pleasure of the
master; and,

3\. That this reward was not to be expected as a matter of "merit," but
would be given at the good pleasure of God, for they were but
unprofitable servants.

By and by - This should have been translated "immediately." He would
not, "as the first thing," or "as soon" as he returned from the field,
direct him to eat and drink. Hungry and weary he might be, yet it would
be proper for him first to attend upon his master. So the apostles were
not to be "impatient" because they did not "at once" receive the reward
for which they were looking.

To meat - To eat; or, rather, place thyself at the table.

[Luke 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 17:8</span></span>

I may sup - Make ready my supper.

Gird thyself - See the notes at [Luk
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#037).

[Luke 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 17:9</span></span>

I trow not - I "think" not; or I "suppose" not.

[Luke 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 17:10</span></span>

Are unprofitable servants - We have conferred no favor. We have
"merited" nothing. We have not "benefited" God, or laid him under
"obligation." If he rewards us, it will be matter of unmerited favor.
This is true in relation to Christians in the following respects:

1\. Our services are not "profitable" to God [Job
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#002); he "needs" not our aid, and his
essential happiness will not be increased by our efforts.

2\. The grace to do his will comes from him only, and all the praise of
that will be due to him.

3\. All that we do is what is our "duty;" we cannot lay claim to having
rendered any service that will "bind" him to show us favor; and,

4\. Our best services are mingled with imperfections. We come short of
his glory [Rom 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023); we do not serve
him as sincerely, and cheerfully, and faithfully as we ought; we are
far, very far from the example set us by the Saviour; and if we are
saved and rewarded, it will be because God will be merciful to our
unrighteousness, and will remember our iniquities no more, [Heb
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#012).

[Luke 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 17:11</span></span>

The midst of Samaria and Galilee - He went from Galilee, and probably
traveled through the chief villages and towns in it and then left it;
and as Samaria was situated "between" Galilee and Jerusalem, it was
necessary to pass through it; or it may mean that he passed along on the
borders of each toward the river Jordan, and so passed in the midst, "i.
e. between" Galilee and Samaria. This is rendered more probable from the
circumstance that as he went from Galilee, there would have been no
occasion for saying that he passed "through it," unless it be meant
through the "confines" or borders of it, or at least it would have been
mentioned before Samaria.

[Luke 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 17:12</span></span>

There met him - They were in his way, or in his path, as he was entering
the village. They were not allowed to enter the village while they were
afflicted with the leprosy, [Lev
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#046); [Num
5:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#002).

Lepers - See the notes at [Mat 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#002).

Stood afar off - At a distance, as they were required by law. They were
unclean, and it was not lawful for them to come near to those who were
in health. As Jesus was traveling, they were also walking in the
contrary way, and seeing him, and knowing that they were unclean, they
stopped or turned aside, so that they might not expose others to the
contagion.

[Luke 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 17:14</span></span>

Go show yourselves ... - See the notes at [Mat
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#004). By this command he gave them an
implied assurance that they would be healed; for the "design" for which
they were to go was to exhibit the "evidence" that they were restored,
and to obtain permission from the priest to mingle again in society. It
may also be observed that this required no small measure of "faith" on
their part, for he did not "first" heal them, and then tell them to go;
he told them to go without "expressly" assuring them that they would be
healed, and without, "as yet," any evidence to show to the priest. So
sinners defiled with the leprosy of sin, should put faith in the Lord
Jesus and obey his commands, with the fullest confidence that he is able
to heal them, and that he "will" do it if they follow his directions;
and that in due time they shall have the fullest evidence that their
peace is made with God, and that their souls shall by him be declared
free from the defilement of sin.

Were cleansed - Were cured, or made whole.

[Luke 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 17:15</span></span>

One of them ... - This man, sensible of the power of God and grateful
for his mercies, returned to express his gratitude to God for his
goodness. Instead of obeying "at once" the "letter" of the command, he
"first" expressed his thanks to God and to his Great Benefactor. There
is no evidence, however, that he did not, "after" he had given thanks to
God, and had poured out his joy at the feet of Jesus, go to the priest
as he was directed; indeed, he could not have been restored to society
without doing it; but he "first" poured out his thanks to God, and gave
him praise for his wonderful recovery. The first duty of sinners, after
they have been forgiven and have the hope of eternal life, is to
prostrate themselves at the feet of their Great Benefactor, and to
consecrate themselves to his service. "Then" let them go and show to
others the evidence that they are cleansed. Let them go and mingle, like
a restored leper, with their families and friends, and show by the
purity and holiness of their lives how great is the mercy that has
cleansed them.

He was a Samaritan - See the notes at [Mat
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005). This rendered his conduct more
remarkable and striking in the sight of the Jews. "They" considered the
Samaritans as especially wicked, and "themselves" as especially holy.
This example showed them, like the parable of the good Samaritan, that
in this they were mistaken: and one design of this seems to have been to
break down the "opposition" between the Jews and Samaritans, and to
bring the former to more charitable judgments respecting the latter.

[Luke 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 17:17</span></span>

Where are the nine? - Jesus had commanded them to go to the priest, and
they were probably "literally" obeying the commandment. They were
impatient to be healed and "selfish" in wishing it, and had no gratitude
to God or their Benefactor. Jesus did not "forbid" their expressing
gratitude to him for his mercy; he rather seems to reprove them for
"not" doing it. One of the first feelings of the sinner cleansed from
sin is a desire to praise his Great Benefactor; and a "real" willingness
to obey his commandments is not inconsistent with a wish to render
thanks to him for his mercy. With what singular propriety may this
question now be asked, "Where are the nine?" And what a striking
illustration is this of human nature, and of the ingratitude of man! One
had come back to give thanks for the favor bestowed on him; the others
were heard of no more. So now. When people are restored from dangerous
sickness, here and there one comes to give thanks to God; but "where are
the nine?" When people are defended from danger; when they are recovered
from the perils of the sea; when a steamboat is destroyed, and a large
part of crew and passengers perish, here and there one of those who are
saved acknowledges the goodness of God and renders him praise; but where
is the mass of them? They give no thanks; they offer no praise. They go
about their usual employments, to mingle in the scenes of pleasure and
of sin as if nothing had occurred. Few, few of all who have been rescued
from "threatening graves" feel their obligation to God, or ever express
it. They forget their Great Benefactor; perhaps the mention of his name
is unpleasant, and they scorn the idea that they are under any
obligations to him. Such, alas! is man, ungrateful man!

This stranger - This foreigner; or, rather, this alien, or this man of
another tribe. In the "Syraic" version, "this one who is of a foreign
people." This man, who might have been least "expected" to express
gratitude to God. The most unlikely characters are often found to be
most consistent and grateful. Men from whom we would expect "least" in
religion, are often so entirely changed as to disappoint all our
expectations, and to put to shame those who have been most highly
favored. The poor often thus put to shame the rich; the ignorant the
learned; the young the aged.

[Luke 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 17:19</span></span>

Go thy way - To the "priest;" for without "his" certificate he could not
again be restored to the society of his friends, or to the public
worship of God. Having now appropriately expressed your gratitude, go to
the priest and obey the law of God. Renewed sinners, while their hearts
overflow with gratitude to Jesus, "express" that gratitude by obeying
God, and by engaging in the appropriate duties of their calling and of
religion.

[Luke 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 17:20</span></span>

Was demanded - Was asked.

Of the Pharisees - This was a matter of much importance to them, and
they had taught that it would come with parade and pomp. It is not
unlikely that they asked this merely in "contempt," and for the purpose
of drawing out something that would expose him to ridicule.

The kingdom of God - The "reign" of God; or the dispensation under the
Messiah. See the notes at [Mat 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002).

With observation - With scrupulous and attentive looking for it, or with
such an appearance as to "attract" observation - that is, with pomp,
majesty, splendor. He did not deny that, according to their views, the
time was drawing near; but he denied that his kingdom would come in the
"manner" in which they expected. The Messiah would "not" come with pomp
like an earthly prince; perhaps not in such a manner as to be
"discerned" by the eyes of sagacious and artful people, who were
expecting him in a way agreeable to their own feelings. The kingdom of
God is "within" people, and it makes its way, not by pomp and noise, but
by silence, decency, and order, [Co1
14:40](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#040).

[Luke 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 17:21</span></span>

"Lo here! or, Lo there!" When an earthly prince visits different parts
of his territories, he does it with pomp. His movements attract
observation, and become the common topic of conversation. The inquiry
is, Where is he? which way will he go? and it is a matter of important
"news" to be able to say where he is. Jesus says that the Messiah would
not come in that manner. It would not be with such pomp and public
attention. It would be silent, obscure, and attracting comparatively
little notice. Or the passage may have reference to the custom of the
"pretended" Messiahs, who appeared in this manner. They said that in
this place or in that, in this mountain or that desert, they would show
signs that would convince the people that they were the Messiah. Compare
the notes at [Act 5:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#036).

Is within you - This is capable of two interpretations.

1\. The reign of God is "in the heart." It does not come with pomp and
splendor, like the reign of temporal kings, merely to control the
external "actions" and strike the senses of people with awe, but it
reigns in the heart by the law of God; it sets up its dominion over the
passions, and brings every thought into captivity to the obedience of
Christ.

2\. It may mean the new dispensation is "even now among you." The
Messiah has come. John has ushered in the kingdom of God, and you are
not to expect the appearance of the Messiah with great pomp and
splendor, for he is now among you. Most critics at present incline to
this latter interpretation. The ancient versions chiefly follow the
former.

[Luke 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 17:22</span></span>

(The days will come He here takes occasion to direct the minds of his
disciples to the days of vengeance which were about to fall on the
Jewish nation. Heavy calamities will befall the Jewish people, and you
will desire a deliverer.

Ye shall desire - You who now number yourselves among my disciples.

One of the days of the Son of man - The Son of man here means "the
Messiah," without affirming that "he" was the Messiah. Such will be the
calamities of those times, so great will be the afflictions and
persecutions, that you will greatly desire "a deliverer" - one who shall
come to you in the character in which "you have expected" the Messiah
would come, and who would deliver you from the power of your enemies;
and at that time, in the midst of these calamities, people shall rise up
pretending "to be" the Messiah, and to be able to deliver you. In view
of this, he takes occasion to caution them against being led astray by
them.

Ye shall not see it - You shall not see such a day of deliverance - such
a Messiah as the nation has expected, and such an interposition as you
would desire.

[Luke 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 17:23</span></span>

And they shall say ... - Many false Christs, according to Josephus,
appeared about that time, attempting to lead away the people. See the
notes at [Mat 24:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#023).

[Luke 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 17:25</span></span>

See the notes at [Mar 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#031).

[Luke 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 17:26</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 24:37-39](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#037).

[Luke 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 17:28</span></span>

They did eat ... - They were busy in the affairs of this life, as if
nothing were about to happen.

The same day ... - See [Gen 19:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#023).
"It rained." The word here used "might" have been rendered "he" rained.
In Genesis it is said that the "Lord" did it.

Fire and brimstone - God destroyed Sodom on account of its great
wickedness. He took vengeance on it for its sins; and the example of
Sodom is set before people to deter them from committing great
transgressions, and as a "full proof" that God will punish the guilty.
See [Jde 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007); also [Isa
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010); [Jer
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#014). Yet, in overthrowing it, he
used natural means. He is not to be supposed to have "created" fire and
brimstone for the occasion, but to have "directed" the natural means at
his disposal for their overthrow; as he did not "create" the waters to
drown the world, but merely broke up the fountains of the great deep and
opened the windows of heaven. Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim [Deu
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#023), were four great cities, on a
plain where is now the Dead Sea, at the southeast of Palestine, and into
which the river Jordan flows. They were built on ground which abounded,
doubtless, as all that region now does, in "bitumen or naphtha," which
is easily kindled, and which burns with great intensity. The phrase
"fire and brimstone" is a Hebrew form of expression, denoting sulphurous
fire, or fire having the smell of sulphur; and may denote a volcanic
eruption, or any burning like that of naphtha. There is no improbability
in supposing either that this destruction was accomplished by lightning,
which ignited the naphtha, or that it was a volcanic eruption, which, by
direction of God, overthrew the wicked cities.

From heaven - By command of God, or from the sky. To the people of Sodom
it had "the appearance" of coming from heaven, as all volcanic eruptions
would have. Hundreds of towns have been overthrown in this way, and all
by the agency of God. He rules the elements, and makes them his
instruments, at his pleasure, in accomplishing the destruction of the
wicked.

[Luk 17:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#030)

Even thus ... - Destruction came upon the old world, and upon Sodom,
"suddenly;" when they were engaged in other things, and little expecting
this. "So" suddenly and unexpectedly, says he, shall destruction come
upon the Jewish people. See the notes at Matt. 24.

[Luke 17:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 17:31</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 24:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#017).

[Luke 17:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 17:32</span></span>

Remember Lot's wife - See [Gen 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#026).
"She" looked back - she delayed - perhaps she "desired" to take
something with her, and God made her a monument of his displeasure.
Jesus directed his disciples, when they saw the calamities coming upon
the Jews, to flee to the mountains, [Mat
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#016). He here charges them to be in
haste - not to look back - not to delay - but to escape quickly, and to
remember that by delaying the wife of Lot lost her life.

[Luke 17:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">luk 17:33</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 10:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#039).

[Luke 17:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">luk 17:34</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 24:40-41](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#040).

[Luke 17:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 17:37</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 24:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#026).

Where, Lord? - Where, or in what direction, shall these calamities come?
The answer implies that it would be where there is the most "guilt and
wickedness." Eagles flock where there is prey. So, said he, these armies
will flock to the place where there is the most wickedness; and by this
their thoughts were directed at once to Jerusalem, the place of eminent
wickedness, and the place, therefore, where these calamities might be
expected to begin.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 18](luk018)

</div>
