<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk000)  [Next](luk002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

[Luke 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 1:1</span></span>

Forasmuch as many - It has been doubted who are referred to here by the
word "many." It seems clear that it could not be the other evangelists,
for the gospel by "John" was not yet written, and the word "many"
denotes clearly more than "two." Besides, it is said that they undertook
to record what the "eye-witnesses" had delivered to them, so that the
writers did not pretend to be eye-witnesses themselves. It is clear,
therefore, that other writings are meant than the gospels which we now
have, but what they were is a matter of conjecture. What are now known
as spurious gospels were written long after Luke wrote his. It is
probable that Luke refers to "fragments" of history, or to narratives of
"detached" sayings, acts, or parables of our Lord, which had been made
and circulated among the disciples and others. His doctrines were
original, bold, pure, and authoritative. His miracles had been
extraordinary, clear, and awful. His life and death had been peculiar;
and it is not improbable - indeed it is highly probable that such broken
accounts and narratives of detached facts would be preserved. That this
is what Luke means appears farther from [Luk
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#003), where "he" professes to give a
regular, full, and systematic account from the very beginning - "having
had perfect understanding of "all things from the very first." The
records of the others - the "many" - were broken and incomplete. His
were to be regular and full.

Taken in hand - Undertaken, attempted.

To set forth in order - To compose a narrative. It does not refer to the
"order" or "arrangement," but means simply to give a narrative. The word
rendered here "in order" is different from that in the third verse,
which "has" reference "to order," or to a full and fair "arrangement" of
the principal facts, etc., in the history of our Lord.

A declaration - A narrative - an account of.

Which are most surely believed among us - Among Christians - among all
the Christians then living. Here we may remark:

1\. That Christians of that day had the best of all opportunities for
knowing whether those things were true. Many had seen them, and all
others had had the account from those who had witnessed them.

2\. That infidels now cannot "possibly" be as good judges in the matter
as those who lived at the time, and who were thus competent to determine
whether these things were true or false.

3\. That all Christians do "most surely believe" the truth of the
gospel. It is their life, their hope, their all. Nor can they doubt that
their Saviour lived, bled, died, rose, and still lives; that he was
their atoning sacrifice, and that he is God over all, blessed forever.

[Luke 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 1:2</span></span>

As they delivered them - As they narrated them. As they gave an account
of them.

From the beginning - From the commencement of these things - that is,
from the birth of John, or perhaps from the beginning of the ministry of
Jesus.

Eye-witnesses - Who had seen those things themselves, and who were
therefore proper witnesses.

Ministers of the word - The term "word" here means the "gospel." Luke
never uses it, as John does, to denote the second Person of the Trinity.
These eye-witnesses and ministers refer, doubtless, to the seventy
disciples, to the apostles, and perhaps to other preachers who had gone
forth to proclaim the same things.

[Luke 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 1:3</span></span>

It seemed good - I thought it best; or, I have also determined. It
seemed "to be called for" that there should be a full, authentic, and
accurate account of these matters.

Having had perfect understanding ... - The literal translation of the
original here would be, "having exactly traced everything from the
first;" or, "having, by diligent and careful investigation, "followed
up" everything to the "source," to obtain an accurate account of the
matter." This much better expresses the idea. Luke did not profess to
have seen these things, and this expression is designed to show how he
acquired his information. It was by "tracing up" every account until he
became satisfied of its truth. Here observe,

1\. That in religion God does not set aside our natural faculties. He
calls us to look at evidence; to examine accounts; to make up our own
minds. Nor will any man be convinced of the truth of religion who does
"not" make investigation and set himself seriously to the task.

2\. We see the nature of Luke's inspiration. It was consistent with his
using his natural faculties or his own powers of mind in investigating
the truth. God, by His Holy Spirit, presided over his faculties,
directed them, and kept him from error.

In order - This word does not indicate that the exact order of time
would be observed, for that is not the way in which he writes; but it
means distinctly, particularly, in opposition to the confused and broken
accounts to which he had referred before.

Most excellent Theophilus - The word Theophilus means "a friend of God,"
or a pious man; and it has been supposed by some that Luke did not refer
to any particular "individual," but to any man that loved God; but there
is no reason for this opinion. Significant names were very common, and
there is no good reason to doubt that this was some individual known to
Luke. The application of the title "most excellent "proves it further.
It would not be given to an unknown man. The title "most excellent" has
by some been supposed to be given to express his "character," but it is
rather to be considered as denoting rank or office. It occurs only in
three other places in the New Testament, and is there given to men "in
office" - to Felix and Festus, [Act
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#026); [Act
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#003); [Act
26:25](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#025). These titles express no quality
of the "men," but belong to the "office;" and we may hence learn that it
is not improper for Christians, in giving honor to whom honor is due, to
address men in office by their customary titles, even if their moral
character be altogether unworthy of it. Who "Theophilus" was is unknown.
It is probable that he was some distinguished Roman or Greek who had
been converted, who was a friend of Luke, and who had requested an
account of these things. It is possible that this preface might have
been sent to him as a private letter with the gospel, and Theophilus
chose to have them published together.

[Luke 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 1:4</span></span>

The certainty - Have full evidence or proof of.

Been instructed - By the preachers of the gospel. The original word is
the one from which is derived our word "catechism - been catechized;"
but it does not denote here the "manner" in which the instruction was
imparted, as it does with us, but simply the fact that he had been
taught those things.

[Luke 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 1:5</span></span>

In the days of Herod - See the notes at [Mat
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001).

Of the course of Abia - When the priests became so numerous that they
could not at once minister at the altar, David divided them into 24
classes or courses, each one of which officiated for a week, 1 Chr. 24.
The class or course (shift) of Abia was the "eighth" in order, [Ch1
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#010). Compare [Ch2
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#014). The word "course" means the same
as "class," or order. The Greek-based word "Abia" is the same as the
Hebrew-based word "Abijah."

His wife was of the daughters of Aaron - A descendant of Aaron, the
first high priest of the Jews; so that "John the Baptist" was descended,
on the father's and the mother's side, from priests. Our Saviour was not
on either side. John would have been legally entitled to a place among
the priests; our Saviour, being of the tribe of Judah, would not.

[Luke 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 1:6</span></span>

Both righteous - Both "just" or holy. This means here more than external
conformity to the law. It is an honorable testimonial of their "piety"
toward God.

Walking in ... - Keeping the commandments. To walk in the way that God
commands is "to obey."

Ordinances - Rites and customs which God had ordained or appointed.
These words refer to all the duties of religion which were made known to
them.

Blameless - That is, no fault or deficiency could be found in them. They
were strict, exact, punctual. Yet this, if it had been mere "external"
observance, might have been no proof of piety. Paul, before his
conversion, also kept the law "externally" blameless, [Phi
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#006). But in the case of Zechariah and
Elizabeth it was real love to God and sincere regard for his law.

[Luke 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 1:7</span></span>

Well stricken in years - Old or advanced in life, so as to render the
prospect of having children hopeless.

[Luke 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 1:8</span></span>

Before God - In the temple, where God dwelt by the symbols of His
presence. The temple was regarded by the Jews as the "house" or dwelling
of God; and in the "first" temple there was, in the most holy place, a
"cloud" called the Shechinah, or a visible sign of the presence of God.
It was thus "before God" that Zechariah offered incense.

[Luke 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 1:9</span></span>

According to the custom of the priest's office, his lot was. - The
Jewish writers inform us that it was customary for the priests to divide
their daily task by "lot."

To burn incense - Incense is an aromatic or white rosin procured from
trees, chiefly in Arabia. It is obtained by making incisions in the
tree, and the gum flows out. It is distinguished for an especially
pleasant "smell" when burned, and was therefore used in ancient worship.
It was burned by the priest twice a day [Exo
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#007), and it seems to have been
emblematic of prayer and praise, or of the grateful offerings of the
heart wafted toward heaven. The incense used in the temple was made of
stacte, onycha, and galbanum [Exo
30:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#034), with pure frankincense, and it
was not lawful for this compound to be used elsewhere than in the house
of God.

Into the temple - See the notes at [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012). The part of the temple where
incense was burned was the "holy place."

[Luke 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 1:10</span></span>

The whole multitude - This was the regular time of evening prayer, and
multitudes came up to the temple to worship.

Praying without - That is, in the courts around the temple, particularly
in the court of the women.

[Luke 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 1:11</span></span>

An angel - An "angel" is a messenger sent from God. See the notes at
[Mat 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020). It had now been about 400
years since the time of "Malachi," and since there had been any divine
revelation. During that time the nation was looking for the Messiah, but
still with nothing more than the ancient prophecies to direct them. Now
that he was about to appear, God sent his messenger to announce his
coming, to encourage the hearts of his people, and to prepare them to
receive him.

On the right side ... - The altar of incense stood close by the veil
which divided the holy place from the most holy. On the north stood the
table of showbread; on the south the golden candlestick. As Zechariah
entered, therefore, with his face to the west, the angel would stand on
the north, or near the table of showbread. That table was 18 inches
square and 3 feet high. The top, as well as the sides and horns, was
overlaid with pure gold, and it was finished around the upper surface
with a crown or border of gold. Just below this border, four golden
rings were attached to each side of the altar, one near each corner. The
staves or rods for bearing the altar passed through these rings, and
were made of the same wood with the altar itself, and richly overlaid
with the same precious metal. Upon this altar incense was burned every
morning and every evening, so that it was literally perpetual, [Exo
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#008). Neither burnt-sacrifice, nor
meat-offering, nor drink-offering was permitted upon this altar; nor was
it ever stained with blood except once annually, when the priest made
atonement, [Lev 16:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#018).

[Luke 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 1:12</span></span>

He was troubled - He was alone, in the presence of God. The appearance
of the angel was sudden, unexpected, and therefore fearful.

[Luke 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 1:13</span></span>

Thy prayer is heard - That is, thy prayer for offspring. This, among the
Jews, was an object of intense desire. No prospect was more gloomy to
them than that of dying childless, so that their "name should perish."
Special pains, therefore, had been taken in the law to keep up the names
of families by requiring a man to marry his brother's wife, [Deu
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005).

[Luke 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 1:14</span></span>

Many shall rejoice at his birth - This does not refer so much to the
time of his birth as to the subsequent rejoicing. Such will be his
"character," that he will be an honor to the family, and many will
rejoice that he lived: or, in other words, he will be a blessing to
mankind.

[Luke 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 1:15</span></span>

Shall be great - Shall be eminent, or distinguished as a preacher.

In the sight of the Lord - Greek, "before the Lord." That is, shall be
"really" or "truly" great. God shall regard him as such.

Shall drink neither wine - The kind of wine commonly used in Judea was a
light wine, often not stronger than cider in this country. It was the
common drink of all classes of the people. See the notes at [Joh
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#011). The use of wine was forbidden
only to the Nazarite, [Num 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#003). It was
because John sustained this character that he abstained from the use of
wine.

Strong drink - It is not easy to ascertain precisely what is meant by
this word, but we are certain that it does not mean strong drink in our
sense of the term. Distilled spirits were not then known. The art of
distilling was discovered by an Arabian chemist in the 9th or 10th
century; but distilled liquors are not used by Arabians. They banished
them at once, as if sensible of their pernicious influence; nor are they
used in Eastern nations at all. Europe and America have been the places
where this poison has been most extensively used, and there it has
beggared and ruined millions, and is yearly sweeping thousands
unprepared into a wretched eternity. The "strong drink" among the Jews
was probably nothing more than fermented liquors, or a drink obtained
from fermented dates, figs, and the juice of the palm, or the lees of
wine, mingled with sugar, and having the property of producing
intoxication. Many of the Jewish writers say that by the word here
translated "strong drink" was meant nothing more than old wine, which
probably had the power of producing intoxication. See the notes at [Isa
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#011).

Shall be filled with the Holy Ghost ... - Shall be divinely designated
or appointed to this office, and qualified for it by all needful
communications of the Holy Spirit. To be "filled" with the Holy Spirit
is to be illuminated, sanctified, and guided by his influence. In this
place it refers:

1\. To the divine intention that he should be set apart to this work, as
God designed that Paul should be an apostle from his mother's womb, [Gal
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015).

2\. It refers to an actual fitting for the work from the birth by the
influence of the Holy Spirit, as was the case with Jeremiah [Jer
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005), and with the Messiah himself,
[Psa 22:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009).

[Luke 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 1:16</span></span>

Children of Israel - Jews. Descendants of Israel or Jacob.

Shall he turn - By repentance. He shall call them from their sins, and
persuade them to forsake them, and to seek the Lord their God.

[Luke 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 1:17</span></span>

Shall go before him - Before the Messiah. The connection here leads us
to suppose that the word "him" refers to the "Lord their God" in the
previous verse. If so, then it will follow that the Messiah was the Lord
God of Israel - a character abundantly given him in other parts of the
New Testament.

In the spirit and power of Elias - See the notes at [Mat
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#014).

To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children - In the time of John
the Jews were divided into a number of different sects. See the notes at
[Mat 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007). They were opposed violently
to each other, and pursued their opposition with great animosity. It was
impossible but that this opposition should find its way into families,
and divide parents and children from each other. John came that he might
allay these animosities and produce better feeling. By directing them
all to "one Master," the Messiah, he would divert their attention from
the causes of their difference and bring them to union. He would restore
peace to their families, and reconcile those parents and children who
had chosen different sects, and who had suffered their attachment "to
sect" to interrupt the harmony of their households. The effect of true
religion on a family will always be to produce harmony. It attaches all
the family to "one" great Master, and by attachment to him all minor
causes of difference are forgotten.

And the disobedient to the wisdom of the just - The "disobedient" here
are the unbelieving, and hence the impious, the wicked. These he would
turn to the wisdom of the just, or to such wisdom as the "just" or pious
manifest - that is, to true wisdom.

To make ready a people ... - To prepare them for his coming by
announcing that the Messiah was about to appear, and by calling them to
repentance. God has always required people to be pure in a special
manner when he was about to appear among them. Thus, the Israelites were
required to purify themselves for three days when he was about to come
down on Mount Sinai, [Exo 19:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#014).
And so, when God the Son was about to appear as the Redeemer, he
required that people should "prepare" themselves for his coming. So in
view of the future judgment - the second coming of the Son of man - he
requires that people should repent, believe, and be pure, [Pe1
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#007); [Pe2
3:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#011).

[Luke 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 1:18</span></span>

Whereby shall I know this? - The thing was improbable, and he desired
"evidence" that it would take place. The testimony of an "angel," and in
such a place, should have been proof enough; but people are slow to
believe the testimony of heavenly messengers. As a consequence of not
believing, he was struck mute.

[Luke 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 1:19</span></span>

I am Gabriel - The word "Gabriel" is made up of two Hebrew words, and
signifies "man of God." This angel is mentioned as having been deputed
to inform "Daniel" that his prayers were heard. See the notes at [Dan
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#016); [Dan
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#021).

That stand in the presence of God - To stand in the presence of one is a
phrase denoting "honor" or "favor." To be admitted to the presence of a
king, or to be with him, was a token of favor. So to stand before God
signifies merely that he was honored or favored by God. He was permitted
to come near him, and to see much of his glory. Compare [Kg1
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#008); [Kg1
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#006); [Kg1
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001); [Pro
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#029).

And am sent ... - The angels are "ministering spirits" sent forth to
minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation," [Heb
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#007), [Heb
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014). They delight to do the will of
God, and one way of doing that will is by aiding his children here, by
succoring the afflicted, and by defending those who are in danger. There
is no more absurdity or impropriety in supposing that angels may render
such aid, than there is in supposing that good people may assist one
another; and there can be no doubt that it affords high pleasure to the
angels of God to be "permitted" to aid those who are treading the
dangerous and trying path which leads to eternity. Holiness is the same
as benevolence, and holy beings seek and love opportunities to do good
to their fellow creatures. In the eye of holy beings all God's creatures
are parts of one great family, and whenever they can do them good they
rejoice in the opportunity, at any sacrifice.

These glad tidings - This good news respecting the birth of a son.

[Luke 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 1:20</span></span>

Because thou believest not ... - This was both a sign and a judgment - a
sign that he had come from God, and that the thing would be fulfilled:
and a judgment for not giving credit to what he had said. There is no
sin in the sight of God more aggravated than unbelief. When God speaks;
man should believe; nor can he that "will not" believe escape
punishment. God speaks only truth, and we should believe Him. God speaks
only what is for our good, and it is right that we should suffer if we
do not credit what He says.

[Luke 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 1:21</span></span>

The people waited - That is, beyond the usual time.

Marvelled - Wondered. The priest, it is said, was not accustomed to
remain in the temple more than half an hour commonly. Having remained on
this occasion a longer time, the people became apprehensive of his
safety, and wondered what had happened to him.

[Luke 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 1:22</span></span>

Had seen a vision - The word "vision" means "sight, appearance," or
"spectre," and is commonly applied to spirits, or to beings from another
world. When he came out of the temple, it is probable that they
"suspected" that something of this nature had detained him there, and
that, on inquiry of him, he signified by a nod that this was the case.
He was unable to speak, and they had no way of "perceiving" it but by
such a sign. On the word "vision," see the notes at [Isa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001).

For he beckoned unto them - That is, by beckoning unto them, or by a
sign, he informed them of what he had seen.

[Luke 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 1:23</span></span>

As soon as the days of his ministration ... - As soon as he had
fulfilled the duties of the week. It might have been supposed that the
extraordinary occurrence in the temple, together with his own calamity,
would have induced him at once to leave this place and return home; but
his duty was in the temple. His piety prompted him to remain there in
the service of God. He was not unfitted for burning incense by his
dumbness, and it was not proper for him to leave his post. It is the
duty of ministers of religion to remain at their work until they are
unfitted for it, and unable to serve God in their profession. Then they
must retire. But until that time, he that for trifling causes forsakes
his post is guilty of unfaithfulness to his Master.

[Luke 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 1:24</span></span>

Hid herself - Did not go forth into public, and concealed her condition.
This might have been done that she might spend her time more entirely in
giving praise to God for his mercies, and that she might have the
fullest proof of the accomplishment of the promise before she appeared
in public or spoke of the mercies of God.

[Luke 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 1:25</span></span>

Thus - In this merciful manner.

To take away my reproach - Among the Jews, a family of children was
counted a signal blessing, an evidence of the favor of God, [Psa
113:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#009); [Psa
128:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#003); [Isa
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001); [Isa
44:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003); [Lev
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#009). To be "barren," therefore, or to
be destitute of children, was considered a "reproach" or a "disgrace,"
[Sa1 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#006).

[Luke 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 1:26</span></span>

In the sixth month - The sixth month after Elizabeth's conception.

A city of Galilee named Nazareth - See the notes at [Mat
2:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#022).

[Luke 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 1:27</span></span>

To a virgin espoused ... - See the notes at [Mat
1:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#018). Compare the notes at [Isa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014).

House of David - Family of David, or descendants of David.

[Luke 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 1:28</span></span>

Hail - This word of salutation is equivalent to "Peace be with thee," or
"Joy be with thee;" a form of speech implying that she was signally
favored, and expressing joy at meeting her.

Highly favoured - By being the mother of the long-expected Messiah - the
mother of the Redeemer of mankind. Long had he been predicted; long had
the eyes of the nation been turned to him, and long had his coming been
an object of intense desire. To be reckoned among his "ancestors" was
accounted sufficient honor for even Abraham and David. But now the happy
"individual" was designated who was to be his mother; and on Mary, a
poor virgin of Nazareth, was to come this honor, which would have
rendered infinitely illustrious any of the daughters of Adam the honor
of giving birth to the world's Redeemer and the Son of God.

The Lord is with thee - The word "is" is not in the original, and the
passage may be rendered either "the Lord "is" with thee," or "the Lord
be" with thee," implying the prayer of the angel that all blessings from
God might descend and rest upon her.

Blessed art thou among women - This passage is equivalent to saying
"thou art the most happy of women."

[Luke 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 1:29</span></span>

Troubled at his saying - Disturbed or perplexed at what he said. It was
so unexpected, so sudden, so extraordinary, and was so high an honor,
that she was filled with anxious thoughts, and did not know what to make
of it.

Cast in her mind - Thought, or revolved in her mind.

What manner of salutation - What this salutation could mean.

[Luke 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">luk 1:30</span></span>

Fear not, Mary - Do not be alarmed at this appearance of an angel. He
only comes to announce to you good tidings. Similar language was
addressed by an angel to Joseph. See the notes at [Mat
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020).

Thou hast found favour with God - Eminent favor or mercy in being
selected to be the mother of the Messiah.

[Luke 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 1:31</span></span>

And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb - See the notes at [Isa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014).

And shalt call his name Jesus - A Saviour. See the notes at [Mat
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021). All this was announced. also, by
an angel to Joseph, after this visitation to Mary. See the notes at [Mat
1:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020).

[Luke 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 1:32</span></span>

He shall be great - There is undoubted reference in this passage to [Isa
9:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006). By his being "great" is meant
he shall be distinguished or illustrious; great in power, in wisdom, in
dominion on earth and in heaven.

Shall be called - This is the same as to say he "shall be" the Son, etc.
The Hebrews often used this form of speech. See [Mat
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#013).

The Highest - God, who is infinitely exalted; called the Highest,
because He is exalted over all his creatures on earth and in heaven. See
[Mar 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#007).

The throne - The kingdom; or shall appoint him as the lineal successor
of David in the kingdom.

His father David - David is called his father because Jesus was lineally
descended from him. See [Mat 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001). The
promise to David was, that there should "not fail" a man to sit on his
throne, or that his throne should be perpetual [Kg1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#004); [Kg1
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#025); [Kg1
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#005); [Ch2
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#016), and the promise was fulfilled by
exalting Jesus to be a Prince and a Saviour, and the perpetual King of
his people.

[Luke 1:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">luk 1:33</span></span>

Over the house of Jacob - The house of Jacob means the same thing as the
"family" of Jacob, or the descendants of Jacob - that is, the children
of Israel. This was the name by which the ancient people of God were
known, and it is the same as saying that he would reign over his own
church and people forever. This he does by giving them laws, by
defending them, and by guiding them; and this he will do forever in the
kingdom of his glory.

Of his kingdom there shall be no end - He shall reign among his people
on earth until the end of time, and be their king forever in heaven. his
is the only kingdom that shall never have an end; he the only King that
shall never lay aside his diadem and robes, and that shall never die.
"He "the only King that can defend us from all our enemies, sustain us
in death, and reward us in eternity. O how important, then, to have an
interest in his kingdom! and how unimportant, compared with "his" favor,
is the favor of all earthly monarchs!

[Luke 1:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">luk 1:35</span></span>

The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee - See [Mat
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020).

The power of the Highest ... - This evidently means that the body of
Jesus would be created by the direct power of God. It was not by
ordinary generation; but, as the Messiah came to redeem sinners - to
make atonement for "others," and not for himself it was necessary that
his human nature should be pure, and free from the corruption of the
fall. God therefore prepared him a body by direct creation that should
be pure and holy. See [Heb 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005).

That holy thing ... - That holy progeny or child.

Shall be called the Son of God - This is spoken in reference to the
human nature of Christ, and this passage proves, beyond controversy,
that "one" reason why Jesus was called the Son of God was because he was
begotten in a supernatural manner. He is also called the "Son of God" on
account of his resurrection, [Rom 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004);
[Act 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033), compared with [Psa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007).

[Luke 1:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">luk 1:36</span></span>

Thy cousin Elizabeth ... - The case of Elizabeth is mentioned to inspire
Mary with confidence, and to assure her that what was now promised would
be fulfilled. It was almost as improbable that Elizabeth should have a
child at her time of life, as it was that Mary should under the
circumstances promised.

[Luke 1:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 1:38</span></span>

And Mary said, Behold the handmaid ... - This was an expression of
resignation to the will of God, and of faith in the promise. To be the
"handmaid of the Lord" is to be submissive and obedient, and is the same
as saying, "I fully credit all that is said, and am perfectly ready to
obey all the commands of the Lord."

[Luke 1:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 1:39</span></span>

And Mary arose - The word "arose" here is equivalent to "setting out,"
or starting on a journey.

The hill country - The region in the vicinity of Jerusalem, commonly
called the hill country of Judea.

City of Juda - What city is meant is not known. Some have supposed it to
be Jerusalem, others Hebron; but all is conjecture. It was probably a
Levitical city, and the residence of Zechariah when he was not employed
in the temple.

[Luke 1:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">luk 1:40</span></span>

Saluted Elizabeth - Expressed great joy and gratification at seeing her,
and used the customary tokens of affectionate salutation.

[Luke 1:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 1:41</span></span>

Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost - The meaning of this seems to
be that she was filled with joy; with a disposition to praise God; with
a prophetic spirit, or a knowledge of the character of the child that
should be born of her. All these were produced by the Holy Spirit.

[Luke 1:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">luk 1:42</span></span>

Blessed art thou among women - She here repeated nearly the words of the
angel to Mary, esteeming it to be the highest honor among mothers to be
the mother of the Messiah. See the notes at [Luk
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#028).

[Luke 1:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">luk 1:43</span></span>

And whence is this to me? - An expression of humility. Why is it that
the mother of my Lord should come to me, as if to honor me?

Mother of my Lord - The word "Lord" sometimes denotes "divinity," and
sometimes superior, master, teacher, or governor. It was given by the
Jews to their expected Messiah; but whether they understood it as
denoting divinity cannot now be ascertained. It is clear only that
Elizabeth used it as denoting great dignity and honor.

[Luke 1:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">luk 1:45</span></span>

Blessed is she that believed - That is, "Mary" who believed what the
angel spoke to her. She was blessed not only in the act of believing,
but because the thing promised would certainly be fulfilled.

From these expressions of Elizabeth we may learn:

1\. That the spirit of prophecy had not entirely ceased among the Jews.

2\. That the Holy Spirit is the source of light, comfort, and joy.

3\. That everything about the birth of Jesus was remarkable, and that he
must have been more than a mere man.

4\. That the prospect of the coming of the Messiah was one of great joy
and rejoicing to ancient saints; and,

5\. That it was a high honor to be "the mother" of him that should
redeem mankind.

It is from "that honor" that the Roman Catholics have determined that it
is right to worship the Virgin Mary and to offer prayers to her - an act
of worship as idolatrous as any that could be offered to a creature.
Because:

1\. It is not anywhere commanded in the Bible.

2\. It is expressly forbidden to worship any being but God, [Exo
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#014); [Exo
20:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004); [Deu
6:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013); [Isa
45:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#020).

3\. It is idolatry to worship or pray to a creature.

4\. It is absurd to suppose that the Virgin Mary can be in all places at
the same time to hear the prayers of thousands at once, or to aid them.
There is no idolatry more gross, and of course more wicked, than to
worship the creature more than the Creator, [Rom
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025).

[Luke 1:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">luk 1:46</span></span>

My soul doth magnify the Lord - To "magnify" means to "make great," and
then to "extol," to "praise," to "celebrate." It does not mean here
strictly to "make great," but to increase "in our estimation" - that is,
to praise or extol. See [Psa 34:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#003);
[Sa2 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#026).

[Luke 1:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">luk 1:47</span></span>

In God my Saviour - God is called "Saviour," as he saves people from sin
and death. He was "Mary's" Saviour, as he had redeemed her soul and
given her a title to eternal life; and she rejoiced for that, and
especially for his mercy in honoring her by her being made the mother of
the Messiah.

[Luke 1:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">luk 1:48</span></span>

He hath regarded the low estate of his handmaid - Literally, he has
looked upon the low or humble condition of his handmaid. That is,
notwithstanding her humble rank and poverty, he has shown her favor. And
this example abundantly teaches what is elsewhere fully taught in the
Bible, that God is not a respecter of persons; that he is not
influenced, in conferring favors, by wealth, honor, or office, [Rom
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#011); [Rom
10:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#011). He seeks the humble and the
contrite; he imparts his rich blessings to those who feel that they need
them, and who will bless him for them, [Psa
138:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#006); [Isa
57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015).

From henceforth - Hereafter, or in consequence of this.

All generations - All people. All posterity.

Call me blessed - Pronounce me highly favored or happy in being the
mother of the Messiah. It is therefore right to consider her as highly
favored or happy; but this certainly does not warrant us to worship her
or to pray to her. Abraham was blessed in being the father of the
faithful; Paul in being the apostle to the Gentiles; Peter in first
preaching the gospel to them; but who would think of worshipping or
praying to Abraham, Paul, or Peter?

[Luke 1:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">luk 1:49</span></span>

He that is mighty - God.

Hath done to me great things - Hath conferred on me great favors and
distinguished mercies.

And holy is his name - This is an expression of Mary's feelings,
desiring to bestow on God all honor and praise. As the highest honor,
she declared that his "name" was "holy" - that is, that God was free
from sin, injustice, and impurity. The "name" of God is often put for
God Himself. The proper name of God is יהוה Yahweh, a word expressive of
His "essential being," derived from the word "to be," [Exo
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014); [Exo
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#003); [Psa
83:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#018). That name is holy; is to be
regarded as holy; and to make a common or profane use of it is solemnly
forbidden, [Exo 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#007).

[Luke 1:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">luk 1:50</span></span>

His mercy - Favor shown to the miserable and the guilty.

Is on them - Is shown or manifested to them.

That fear him - That "reverence" or honor Him. One kind of fear is that
which a servant has of a cruel master, or which a man has of a
precipice, the plague, or death. This is not the "fear" which we ought
to have toward God. It is the fear which a dutiful child has of a kind
and virtuous father a fear of injuring his feelings; of dishonoring him
by our life; of doing anything which he would disapprove. It is on those
who have such fear of God that his mercy descends. This is the fear of
the Lord which is the beginning of wisdom, [Psa
111:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#010); [Job
28:28](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#028).From generation to generation -
From one age to another - that is, it is unceasing; it continues and
abounds. But it means also more than this. It means that God's mercy
will descend on the children and children's children of those that fear
him and keep his commandments, [Exo
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#006). In this respect it is an
unspeakable privilege to be descended from pious parents; to have been
the subject of their prayers, and to have received their blessing. It is
also a matter of vast guilt not to copy their example and to walk in
their steps. If God is "disposed" to show mercy to thousands of
generations, how heavy will be the condemnation if the children of pious
parents do not avail themselves of it and early seek his favor!

[Luke 1:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">luk 1:51</span></span>

Hath showed strength with his arm - The "arm" is the symbol of strength.
The expression in this and the subsequent verses has no particular
reference to his mercy to Mary. From a contemplation of His goodness to
her, she enlarges her views to a contemplation of His goodness and power
in general, and to a celebration of the praises of God for all that he
has done to all people. This is the nature of true piety. It does not
terminate in thinking of God's mercy toward ourselves. It thinks of
others, and praises God that others also are made partakers of His
mercy, and that His goodness is manifested to all His works.

He scattereth the proud - He hath often done it in time of battle and
war. When the proud Assyrian, Egyptian, or Babylonian had come against
the people of God, He had often scattered them and driven away their
armies.

In the imagination of their hearts - Those who were lifted up or exalted
in their own view. Those who "thought themselves" to be superior to
other men.

[Luke 1:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">luk 1:52</span></span>

Hath put down the mighty - The "mighty" here denotes princes, kings, or
conquerors. See [Isa 14:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#012).

Their seats - Their "thrones," or the places where they sat in pomp and
power.

Exalted them - Raised them up, or placed them in the seats of those who
had been removed.

Low degree - Low or humble birth and condition in life. This probably
has reference to the case of her ancestor David. Mary was celebrating
the mercies of God to herself, to her family, and of course to her
ancestors. It was natural to allude to that great event in their history
when Saul was overcome in battle, and when David was taken from the
sheepfold and placed on the throne. The origin of illustrious families
is often obscure. People are often raised by industry, talent, and the
favor of God, from very humble stations - from the farm or mechanic's
shop - to places of great trust in the church and state. They who are
thus elevated, if imbued with right feelings, will not despise their
former employments nor their former companions, nor will they esteem
their parents or friends the less because they still remain in the same
rank in life. No conduct is more odious and unchristian than to be
ashamed of our birth or the humble circumstances of our friends.

[Luke 1:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">luk 1:53</span></span>

He hath filled the hungry with good things - This is a celebration of
the general mercy of God. He hath daily fed the poor, the needy, and
those who came to Him with humble hearts.

The rich he hath sent ... - While the poor come to him for a supply of
their daily wants, the rich come not that their necessities should be
supplied, but come with lofty hearts, and insatiable desires that their
riches may be increased. When this is the case, God not unfrequently not
only "withholds" what they ask, but he takes their riches away by fire,
or flood, or disappointments, and sends them away empty, [Pro
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#005). It is better to be poor and go
to God for our daily bread, than to be rich and forget our dependence on
Him, and to seek only a great increase of our property.

[Luke 1:54](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">luk 1:54</span></span>

Hath holpen - Hath helped or assisted. The word rendered "holpen"
denotes properly, "to take hold of one, to help him up when he is in
danger of falling," and here means that God had succored his people when
they were feeble, and were in danger of falling or being overthrown.

His servant Israel - His people the Israelites, or those who truly
revered him and kept His commandments. See [Isa
41:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#008); [Hos
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001).

In remembrance of his mercy - Or that His mercy may be remembered.

[Luke 1:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">luk 1:55</span></span>

As he spake to our fathers ... - That is, He has dealt mercifully with
the children of Israel, according as He promised Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob. The promise particularly here referred to is that respecting the
Messiah which was now about to be fulfilled; but there is no doubt that
there was also included the promises respecting all the other mercies
which had been conferred on the children of Israel. See [Gen
22:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017).

Forever - These words are to be referred to the preceding verse - "in
remembrance of His mercy" forever, "as he spake," etc. They denote that
the "mercy of God" manifested to His people should be had in everlasting
remembrance.

There is a striking similarity between this song of praise by Mary and
that spoken by "Hannah," [Sa1 2:2-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#002).
There are few pieces of "poetry" - for this is poetry, and almost the
only poetry in the New Testament - more beautiful than this. It is the
language of a humble, thankful, pious, female heart praising God:

1\. For his mercy to her, [Luk
1:46-49](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#046);

2\. For his mercy to all people - his "general" goodness, [Luk
1:50-53](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#050); and,

3\. His special goodness to his people, [Luk
1:54-55](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#054).

[Luke 1:59](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#059)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_059">luk 1:59</span></span>

On the eighth day - This was the day on which it was required to
circumcise children, [Gen 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#004).

And they called him Zacharias - The name of the child was commonly given
at the time of the circumcision, [Gen
21:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#003). The name "commonly" given to
the eldest son was that of the father.

[Luke 1:60](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">luk 1:60</span></span>

Shall be called John - This was the name which the angel had said should
be given to him, of which Zechariah had probably informed Elizabeth by
writing.

[Luke 1:61](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#061)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_061">luk 1:61</span></span>

There is none of thy kindred ... - The Jewish tribes and families were
kept distinct. To do this, and to avoid confusion in their genealogical
tables, they probably gave only those names which were found among their
ancestors. Another reason for this, common to all people, is the respect
which is felt for honored parents and ancestors.

[Luke 1:63](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#063)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">luk 1:63</span></span>

He asked - That is, by signs.

A writing table - The table denoted by this word was usually made of
wood and covered with wax. The ancients used to write on such tables, as
they had not the use of paper. The instrument used for writing was an
iron pen or style, by which they marked on the wax which covered the
table. Sometimes the writing-table was made entirely of lead.

[Luke 1:64](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#064)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_064">luk 1:64</span></span>

His mouth was opened ... - That is, he was enabled to speak. For nine
months he had been mute, and it is probable that they supposed that he
had been afflicted with a paralytic affection, and that he would not
recover. Hence, their amazement when he spoke. For one act of disbelief
all this calamity had come upon him, and it had not come without effect.
With true gratitude he offered praise to God for the birth of a son, and
for his restoration to the blessings of speech.

[Luke 1:65](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#065)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_065">luk 1:65</span></span>

And fear came ... - The word "fear" often denotes 'religious reverence.'
The remarkable circumstances attending the birth of John, and the fact
that Zechariah was suddenly restored to speech, convinced them that God
was there, and filled their minds with awe and veneration.

[Luke 1:66](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#066)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_066">luk 1:66</span></span>

What manner of child ... - Such were the remarkable circumstances of his
birth that they apprehended that he would be distinguished as a prophet,
or that great events would result from his life.

The hand of the Lord was with him - The word "hand" is used to denote
"aid, protection, favor." We stretch out the hand to aid those whom we
wish to help. The expression here means that God "aided" him,
"protected" him, or showed him favor. Some think that these words are a
part of the speech of the neighbors - "What manner of child shall this
be? God is so evidently with him!"

[Luke 1:67](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#067)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_067">luk 1:67</span></span>

Filled with the Holy Ghost - See [Luk
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#015).

And prophesied - The word "prophesy" means:

1\. To foretell future events.

2\. To celebrate the praises of God (see [Sa1
10:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005); [Kg1
18:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#029)); then to,

3\. Teach or preach the gospel, etc. See the notes at [Rom
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006).

This song of Zechariah partakes of all. It is principally employed in
the praises of God, but it also predicts the future character and
preaching of John.

[Luke 1:68](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#068)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_068">luk 1:68</span></span>

Blessed - See the notes at [Mat 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003).

Hath visited - The word here rendered "visited" means properly "to look
upon;" then to look upon in order "to know the state of anyone;" then to
visit for the purpose of "aiding those who need aid," or alleviating
misery. Compare [Mat 25:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#043). In this
sense it is used here. God "looked upon" the world - he saw it miserable
- he came to relieve it, and brought salvation.

And redeemed - That is, was "about to redeem," or had given the pledge
that he "would redeem." This was spoken under the belief that the
Messiah, "the Redeemer," was about to appear, and would certainly
accomplish his work. The literal translation of this passage is, "He
hath made a "ransom" for his people. A "ransom" was the "price" paid to
deliver a captive taken in war. A is a prisoner taken in war by B. B has
a right to detain him as a prisoner by the laws of war, but C offers B a
"price" if he will release A and suffer him to go at liberty. The price
which he pays, and which must be "satisfactory" to B - that is, be a
"reason" to B why he should release him is called a "price" or "ransom."
Men are sinners. They are bound over to just punishment by the law. The
law is holy, and God, as a just governor, must see that the law is
honored and the wicked punished; but if anything can be done which will
have the same "good effect" as the punishment of the sinner, or which
will be an "equivalent" for it - that is, be of equal value to the
universe - God may consistently release him.

If he can show the same hatred of sin, and deter others from sinning,
and secure the purity of the sinner, the sinner may be released.
Whatever will accomplish "this" is called a "ransom," because it is, in
the eye of God, a sufficient "reason" why the sinner should not be
punished; it is an equivalent for his sufferings, and God is satisfied.
The "blood of Jesus" - that is, his death in the place of sinners
constitutes such a ransom. It is in their stead. It is for them. It is
equivalent to their punishment. It is not itself a "punishment," for
that always supposes "personal crime," but it is what God is pleased to
accept in the place of the eternal sufferings of the sinner. The king of
the "Locrians" made a law that an adulterer should be punished with the
loss of his eyes. His "son" was the first offender, and the father
decreed that his son should lose one eye, and he himself one also. This
was the "ransom." He showed his "love," his regard for the honor of his
law, and the determination that the guilty should not escape. So God
gave his Son a "ransom" to show his love, his regard to justice, and his
willingness to save people; and his Son, in his death, was a ransom. He
is often so called in the New Testament, [Mat
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028); [Mar
10:45](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#045); [Tit
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#014); [Heb
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012). For a fuller view of the nature
of a ransom, see the notes at [Rom
3:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024).

[Luke 1:69](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#069)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_069">luk 1:69</span></span>

And hath raised up a horn - A horn is a symbol of strength. The figure
is taken from the fact that in horned animals the strength lies in the
"horn." Particularly, the great power of the rhinoceros or unicorn is
manifested by the use of a single horn of great "strength," placed on
the head near the end of the nose. When the sacred writers, therefore,
speak of great strength they often use the word "horn," [Psa
148:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#014); [Deu
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017); [Dan
7:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007); [Dan
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#021). The word salvation, connected
here with the word "horn," means that this "strength," or this mighty
Redeemer, was able to save. It is possible that this whole figure may be
taken from the Jewish "altar." On each of the four corners of the altar
there was an eminence or small projection called a "horn." To this
persons might flee for safety when in danger, and be safe, [Kg1
1:50](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#050); [Kg1
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#028). Compare the notes at [Luk
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#011). So the Redeemer "may be" called
the "horn of salvation," because those who flee to him are safe.

In the house - In the family, or among the descendants of David.

[Luke 1:70](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#070)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_070">luk 1:70</span></span>

His holy prophets ... - All the prophets are said to have referred to
the Messiah, from the beginning of the world. The most striking of these
were Jacob [Gen 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010); Moses [Deu
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015); Isaiah [Isa
9:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006); [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001).

Since the world began - This is not to be taken literally, for there
were no prophets "immediately after" the creation. It is merely a
general expression, designed to denote that all the prophets had
predicted the coming of the Messiah. Compare the [Luk
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#027) note; [Rev
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010) note.

[Luke 1:71](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#071)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_071">luk 1:71</span></span>

Saved from our enemies - The enemies of "man" are his sins, his carnal
propensities, his lusts, and the great adversary Satan and his angels,
who continually seek to destroy him. From "these" the Messiah came to
save us. Compare [Gen 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015); [Mat
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021).

The hand - The power; or to save us from them.

[Luke 1:72](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#072)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_072">luk 1:72</span></span>

To perform the mercy - To show the mercy promised. The expression in the
"original" is, "To make mercy with our fathers" - that is, to show
kindness to our fathers; and the propriety of it is founded on the fact
that mercy to "children" is regarded as kindness to the "parent."
Blessing the "children" was blessing the "nation;" was fulfilling the
promises made to the fathers, and "showing" that he regarded them in
mercy.

His holy covenant - The word "covenant" means compact or agreement. This
is in use among people. It implies equality in the parties; freedom from
constraint; freedom from previous obligation to do the thing now
covenanted; and freedom from obligation to enter into a compact, unless
a man chooses so to do. Such a transaction evidently can never take
place between man and God, for they are not equal. Man is not at liberty
to "decline" what God proposes, and he is under obligation to do "all"
that God commands. When the word "covenant," therefore, is used in the
Bible, it means sometimes a "command;" Sometimes a "promise;" sometimes
a "regular law" - as "the covenant of the day and night;" and sometimes
the way in which God dispenses mercy - that is, by the old and new
covenants. In the place before us it means "the promise" made to
Abraham, as the following verses clearly show.

[Luke 1:73](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#073)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_073">luk 1:73</span></span>

The oath - This oath is recorded in [Gen
22:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016). It was an oath in which God
swore by himself (because he could swear by no greater, [Heb
6:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#013)) that he would surely bless
Abraham and his posterity. That promise was now to be entirely fulfilled
by the coming of the Messiah.

[Luke 1:74](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#074)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_074">luk 1:74</span></span>

Might serve him - Might obey, honor, and worship him. This was regarded
as a "favor." This was what was promised, and for this Zechariah praised
God.

Without fear - Fear of death, of spiritual enemies, or of external foes.
In the sure hope of God's "eternal" favor beyond the grave.

[Luke 1:75](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#075)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_075">luk 1:75</span></span>

In holiness ... - In piety and strict justice.

Before him - In the presence of God. Performed as in his presence, and
with the full consciousness that he sees the heart. The "holiness" was
not to be merely external, but spiritual, internal, pure, such as "God"
would see and approve.

All the days of our life - To death. True religion increases and expands
until death.

[Luke 1:76](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#076)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_076">luk 1:76</span></span>

And thou, child ... - Zechariah predicts in this and the following
verses the dignity, the employment, and the success of John. He declares
what would be the subject of his preaching, and what his success.

Prophet of the Highest - Prophet of God; a prophet "appointed by God" to
declare his will, and to prepare the way for the coming of the Messiah.

The face of the Lord - The Lord Jesus, the Messiah, that was about to
appear. To go before "the face of one" is the same as to go immediately
before one, or to be immediately followed by another.

To prepare his ways - This is taken from [Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003). See the [Mat
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#003) niote, and [Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003) note.

[Luke 1:77](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#077)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_077">luk 1:77</span></span>

To give knowledge of salvation - Knowledge of the "way" of salvation:
that it was provided, and that the author of salvation was about to
appear.

By the remission of their sins - The word remission means pardon or
forgiveness. It implies that God will treat the sinner as if he had not
committed the sin. The idea here is, that the "salvation" about to be
offered was that which was connected with the pardon of sin. There can
be no other. God cannot treat people as his friends unless they come to
him by repentance and obtain forgiveness. When that is obtained, which
he is always disposed to grant, they can be treated with kindness and
mercy.

[Luke 1:78](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#078)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_078">luk 1:78</span></span>

Whereby the dayspring ... - The word "dayspring" means the morning
light, the aurora, the rising of the sun. It is called the dayspring
"from on high" because the light of the gospel shines forth from heaven.
God is its Author, and through His mercy it shines upon people. There is
here, doubtless, a reference to [Isa
60:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001); indeed, almost the very words
of that place are quoted. Compare also [Rev
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016).

[Luke 1:79](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#079)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_079">luk 1:79</span></span>

To give light ... - See the notes at [Mat
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#016).

To guide our feet ... - The figure in these verses is taken from
travelers, who, being overtaken by night, know not what to do, and who
wait patiently for the morning light, that they may know which way to
go. So man wandered. So he became benighted. So he sat in the shadow of
death. So he knew not which way to go until the Sun of righteousness
arose, and then the light shone brightly on his way, and the road was
open to the promised land of rest - to heaven.

This song of Zechariah is exceedingly beautiful. It expresses with
elegance the great points of the plan of redemption, and the mercy of
God in providing that plan. That mercy is "great." It is worthy of
praise - of our highest, loftiest songs of thanksgiving; for we were in
the shadow of death - sinful, wretched, wandering - and the light arose,
the gospel came, and people may rejoice in hope of eternal life.

[Luke 1:80](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#080)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_080">luk 1:80</span></span>

Waxed strong in spirit - That is, in courage, understanding, and
purposes of good, fitting him for his future work. The word "wax" means
to "increase, to grow," from an old Saxon word.

In the deserts - In Hebron, and in the hill country where his father
resided. He dwelt in obscurity, and was not known publicly by the
people.

Until the day of his showing - Until he entered on his public ministry,
as recorded in Matt. 3 - that is, probably, until he was about 30 years
of age. See Luke 3.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 2](luk002)

</div>
