<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](luk022)  [Next](luk024.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#001.md)

[Luke 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 23:1</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 27:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#001.md).

[Luke 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 23:2</span></span>

This fellow - The word "fellow" is not in the original. It conveys a
notion of "contempt," which no doubt they "felt," but which is not
expressed in the "Greek," and which it is not proper should be expressed
in the translation. It might be translated, "We found this man."

Perverting the nation - That is, exciting them to sedition and tumults.
This was a mere wanton accusation, but it was plausible before a Roman
magistrate; for,

1\. The Galileans, as Josephus testifies, were prone to seditions and
tumults.

2\. Jesus drew multitudes after him, and they thought it was easy to
show that this was itself promoting tumults and seditions.

Forbidding ... - About their charges they were very cautious and
cunning. They did not say that he "taught" that people should not give
tribute - that would have been too gross a charge, and would have been
easily refuted; but it was an "inference" which they drew. They said it
"followed" from his doctrine. He professed to be a king. They
"inferred," therefore, if "he" was "a king," that he must hold that it
was not right to acknowledge allegiance to any foreign prince; and if
they could make "this" out, they supposed that Pilate "must" condemn him
of course.

Tribute - Taxes.

Caesar - The Roman emperor, called also Tiberius. The name "Caesar" was
common to the Roman emperors, as "Pharaoh" was to the Egyptian kings.
"All" the kings of Egypt were called Pharaoh, or "the" Pharaoh; so all
the Roman emperors were called "Caesar."

[Luke 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 23:3</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#011.md).

[Luke 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 23:4</span></span>

I find no fault - I see no evidence that he is guilty of what you charge
him with. This was after Pilate had taken Jesus into the judgment-hall
by himself and examined him "privately," and had been satisfied in
regard to the nature of his kingdom. See [Joh
18:33-38](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#033.md). He was "then" satisfied that
though he claimed to be "a king," yet his kingdom was not of this world,
and that "his" claims did not interfere with those of Caesar.

[Luke 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 23:5</span></span>

The more fierce - The more urgent and pressing. They saw that there was
a prospect of losing their cause, and they attempted to press on Pilate
the point that would be most likely now to affect him. Pilate had, in
fact, acquitted him of the charge of being an enemy to Caesar, and they,
therefore, urged the other point more vehemently.

Stirreth up the people - Excites them to tumult and sedition.

All Jewry - All Judea.

From Galilee to this place - To Jerusalem - that is, throughout the
whole country. It is not merely in one place, but from one end of the
land to the other.

[Luke 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 23:6</span></span>

Whether he were a Galilean - He asked this because, if he was, he
properly belonged to Herod's jurisdiction, who reigned over Galilee.

[Luke 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 23:7</span></span>

Herod's jurisdiction - Herod Antipas, a son of Herod the Great. This was
the same Herod that put John the Baptist to death. Jesus had passed the
most of his life in the part of the country where he ruled, and it was,
therefore, considered that he belonged to his jurisdiction - that is,
that it belonged to Herod, not to Pilate, to try this cause.

[Luke 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 23:10</span></span>

Vehemently accused him - Violently or unjustly accused him, endeavoring
to make it appear that he had been guilty of sedition in Herod's
province.

[Luke 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 23:11</span></span>

Herod with his men of war - With his soldiers, or his body-guard. It is
probable that in traveling he had "a guard" to attend him constantly.

Set him at nought - Treated him with contempt and ridicule.

A gorgeous robe - A white or shining robe, for this is the meaning of
the original. The Roman princes wore "purple" robes, and "Pilate,"
therefore, put such a robe on Jesus. The Jewish kings wore a "white"
robe, which was often rendered very shining or gorgeous by much tinsel
or silver interwoven. Josephus says that the robe which Agrippa wore was
so bright with silver that when the sun shone on it, it so dazzled the
eyes that it was difficult to look on it. The Jews and Romans,
therefore, decked him in the manner appropriate to their own country,
for purposes of mockery. All this was unlawful and malicious, as there
was not the least evidence of his guilt.

Sent him to Pilate - It was by the interchange of these civilities that
they were made friends. It would seem that Pilate sent him to Herod as a
token of civility and respect, and with a design, perhaps, of putting an
end to their quarrel. Herod returned the civility, and it resulted in
their reconciliation.

[Luke 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 23:12</span></span>

Made friends together ... - What had been the cause of their quarrel is
unknown. It is commonly supposed that it was Pilate's slaying the
Galileans in Jerusalem, as related in [Luk
13:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#001.md). The occasion of their
reconciliation seems to have been the civility and respect which Pilate
showed to Herod in this case. It was not because they were united in
"hating" Jesus, as is often the case with wicked people, for Pilate was
certainly desirous of releasing him, and "both" considered him merely as
an object of ridicule and sport. It is true, however, that wicked
people, at variance in other things, are often united in opposing and
ridiculing Christ and his followers; and that enmities of long standing
are sometimes made up, and the most opposite characters brought
together, simply to oppose religion. Compare [Psa
83:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#005.md).

[Luke 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 23:15</span></span>

Nothing worthy of death is done unto him - Deserving of death. The
charges are not proved against him. They had had every opportunity of
proving them, first before Pilate and then before Herod, unjustly
subjecting him to trial before "two" men in succession, and thus giving
them a double opportunity of condemning him, and yet, after all, he was
declared by both to be innocent. There could be no better evidence that
he "was" innocent.

[Luke 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 23:16</span></span>

I will therefore chastise him - The word "chastise" here means to
"scourge or to whip." This was usually done before capital punishment,
to increase the sufferings of the man condemned. It is not easy to see
the reason why, if Pilate supposed Jesus to be "innocent," he should
propose publicly to scourge him. It was as "really" unjust to do that as
it was to crucify him. But probably he expected by this to conciliate
the minds of his accusers; to show them that he was willing to gratify
them if it "could" be done with propriety; and perhaps he expected that
by seeing him whipped and disgraced, and condemned to ridicule, to
contempt, and to suffering, they would be satisfied. It is farther
remarked that among the Romans it was competent for a magistrate to
inflict a "slight" punishment on a man when a charge of gross offence
was not fully made out, or where there was not sufficient testimony to
substantiate the precise charge alleged. All this shows,

1\. The palpable "injustice" of our Lord's condemnation;

2\. The persevering malice and obstinacy of the Jews; and,

3\. The want of firmness in Pilate.

He should have released him at once; but the love of "popularity" led
him to the murder of the Son of God. Man should do his duty in all
situations; and he that, like Pilate, seeks only for public favor and
popularity, will assuredly be led into crime.

[Luke 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 23:17</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#015.md).

[Luke 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 23:18</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 27:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#020.md).

[Luke 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 23:24</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#026.md).

[Luke 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 23:26</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 27:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#032.md).

After Jesus - Probably to bear one end of the cross. Jesus was feeble
and unable to bear it alone, and they compelled Simon to help him.

[Luke 23:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 23:28</span></span>

Daughters of Jerusalem - Women of Jerusalem. This was a common mode of
speaking among the Hebrews.

Weep for yourselves ... - This refers to the calamities that were about
to come upon them in the desolation of their city by the Romans.

[Luke 23:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">luk 23:30</span></span>

To the mountains, Fall on us ... - This is an image of great calamities
and judgments. So great will be the calamities that they will seek for
shelter from the storm, and will call on the hills to protect them. The
same figure is used respecting the wicked in the day of judgment in [Rev
6:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#016.md). Compare also [Isa
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#021.md).

[Luke 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 23:31</span></span>

For if they do these things in a green tree ... - This seems to be a
proverbial expression. A "green" tree is not easily set on fire; a dry
one is easily kindled and burns rapidly; and the meaning of the passage
is - "If they, the Romans, do these things to me, who am innocent and
blameless; if they punish me in this manner in the face of justice, what
will they not do in relation to this guilty nation? What security have
they that heavier judgments will not come upon them? What desolations
and woes may not be expected when injustice and oppression have taken
the place of justice, and have set up a rule over this wicked people?"
Our Lord alludes, evidently, to the calamities that would come upon them
by the Romans in the destruction of their city and temple. The passage
may be applied, however, without impropriety, and with great beauty and
force, to the punishment of the wicked in the future world.

Thus applied, it means that the sufferings of the Saviour, as compared
with the sufferings of the guilty, were like the burning of a green tree
as compared with the burning of one that is dry. A green tree is not
adapted to burn; a dry one is. So the Saviour - innocent, pure, and holy
- stood in relation to suffering. There were sufferings which an
innocent being could not endure. There was remorse of conscience, the
sense of guilt, punishment properly so called, and the eternity of woes.
He had the consciousness of innocence, and he would not suffer forever.
He had no passions to be enkindled that would rage and ruin the soul.
The sinner is "adapted" to sufferings, like a dry tree to the fire. He
is guilty, and will suffer all the horrors of remorse of conscience. He
will be punished literally. He has raging and impetuous passions, and
they will be enkindled in hell, and will rage forever and ever. The
meaning is, that if the innocent Saviour suffered "so much," the
sufferings of the sinner forever in hell must be more unspeakably
dreadful. Yet who could endure the sufferings of the Redeemer on the
cross for a single day? Who could bear them forever and ever, aggravated
by all the horrors of a guilty conscience, and all the terrors of
unrestrained anger, and hate, and fear, and wrath? "Why will the wicked
die?"

[Luke 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 23:32</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 27:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#035.md), [Mat
27:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#038.md).

[Luke 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">luk 23:34</span></span>

Father, forgive them - This is a fulfillment of the prophecy in [Isa
53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012.md); "He made intercession for the
transgressors." The prayer was offered for those who were guilty of
putting him to death. It is not quite certain whether he referred to the
"Jews" or "to the Roman soldiers." Perhaps he referred to both. The
Romans knew not what they did, as they were really ignorant that he was
the Son of God, and as they were merely obeying the command of their
rulers. The Jews knew, indeed, that he was "innocent," and they had
evidence, if they would have looked at it, that he was the Messiah; but
they did not know what would be the effect of their guilt; they did not
know what judgments and calamities they were bringing down upon their
country. It may be added, also, that, though they had abundant evidence,
if they would look at it, that he was the Messiah, and enough to leave
then without excuse, yet they did not, "in fact," believe that he was
the Saviour promised by the prophets, and had not, "in fact," any proper
sense of his rank and dignity as "the Lord of glory." If they had had,
they would not have crucified him, as we cannot suppose that they would
knowingly put to death their own Messiah, the hope of the nation, and
him who had been so long promised to the fathers. See the notes at [Co1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008.md). We may learn from this prayer:

1\. The duty of praying for our enemies, even when they are endeavoring
most to injure us.

2\. The thing for which we should pray for them is that "God" would
pardon them and give them better minds.

3\. The power and excellence of the Christian religion. No other
religion "teaches" people to pray for the forgiveness of enemies; no
other "disposes" them to do it. Men of the world seek for "revenge;" the
Christian bears reproaches and persecutions with patience, and prays
that God would pardon those who injure them, and save them from their
sins.

4\. The greatest sinners, through the intercession of Jesus, may obtain
pardon. God heard him, and still hears him "always," and there is no
reason to doubt that many of his enemies and murderers obtained
forgiveness and life. Compare [Act
2:37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037.md), [Act
2:42-43](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#042.md); [Act
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007.md); [Act
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#001.md).

They know not what they do - It was done through ignorance, [Act
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#017.md). Paul says that, "had they known
it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory," [Co1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008.md). Ignorance does not excuse
altogether a crime if the ignorance be willful, but it diminishes its
guilt. They "had" evidence; they "might" have learned his character;
they "might" have known what they were doing, and they "might" be held
answerable for all this. But Jesus here shows the compassion of his
heart, and as they were "really" ignorant, whatever might have been the
cause of their ignorance, he implores God to pardon them. He even urges
it as a "reason" why they should be pardoned, that they were ignorant of
what they were doing; and though people are often guilty for their
ignorance, yet God often in compassion overlooks it, averts his anger,
and grants them the blessings of pardon and life. So he forgave Paul,
for he "did it in ignorance, in unbelief," [Ti1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013.md). So God "winked" at the ignorance
of the Gentiles, [Act 17:30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030.md). Yet this
is no excuse, and no evidence of safety, for those who in our day
contemptuously put away from them and their children the means of
instruction.

[Luke 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">luk 23:35</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 27:41-44](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#041.md).

[Luk 23:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#038.md)

In letters of Greek ... - See the notes at [Mat
27:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#037.md).

[Luk 23:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#039.md)

One of the malefactors - Matthew [Mat
27:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#044.md) says "the thieves - cast the
same in his teeth." See the apparent contradiction in these statements
reconciled in the notes at that place.

If thou be Christ - If thou art the Messiah; if thou art what thou dost
pretend to be. This is a taunt or reproach of the same kind as that of
the priests in [Luk 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#035.md).

Save thyself and us - Save our lives. Deliver us from the cross. This
man did not seek for salvation truly; he asked not to be delivered from
his sins; if he had, Jesus would also have heard him. Men often, in
sickness and affliction, call upon God. They are earnest in prayer. They
ask of God to save them, but it is only to save them from "temporal"
death. It is not to be saved from their sins, and the consequence is,
that when God "does" raise them up, they forget their promises, and live
as they did before, as this robber "would" have done if Jesus had heard
his prayer and delivered him from the cross.

[Luke 23:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">luk 23:40</span></span>

Dost not thou fear God ... - You are condemned to die as well as he. It
is improper for you to rail on him as the rulers and Romans do. God is
just, and you are hastening to his bar, and you should, therefore, fear
him, and fear that he will punish you for railing on this innocent man.

Same condemnation - Condemnation to death; not death for the same thing,
but the same "kind" of death.

[Luke 23:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 23:41</span></span>

Due reward of our deeds - The proper punishment for our crimes. They had
been highwaymen, and it was just that they should die.

[Luke 23:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">luk 23:42</span></span>

Remember me - This is a phrase praying for favor, or asking him to grant
him an "interest" in his kingdom, or to acknowledge him as one of his
followers. It implied that he believed that Jesus was what he claimed to
be - the Messiah; that, though he was dying with them, yet he would set
up his kingdom; and that he had full power to bless him, though about to
expire. It is possible that this man might have heard him preach before
his crucifixion, and have learned there the nature of his kingdom; or it
may have been that while on the cross Jesus had taken occasion to
acquaint them with the nature of his kingdom. While he might have been
doing this, one of the malefactors may have continued to rail on him
while the other became truly penitent. Such a result of preaching the
gospel would not have been unlike what has often occurred since, where,
while the gospel has been proclaimed, one has been "taken and another
left;" one has been melted to repentance, another has been more hardened
in guilt. The promise which follows shows that this prayer was answered.
This was a case of repentance in the last hour, the trying hour of
death; and it has been remarked that one was brought to repentance
there, to show that no one should "despair" on a dying bed; and "but"
one, that none should be presumptuous and delay repentance to that awful
moment.

When thou comest ... - It is impossible now to fix the precise idea
which this robber had of Christ's coming. Whether it was that he
expected that he would rise from the dead, as some of the Jews supposed
the Messiah would; or whether he referred to the day of judgment; or
whether to an immediate translation to his kingdom in the heavens, we
cannot tell. All that we know is, that he fully believed him to be the
Messiah, and that he desired to obtain an interest in that kingdom which
he knew he would establish.

[Luke 23:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">luk 23:43</span></span>

Today ... - It is not probable that the dying thief expected that his
prayer would be so soon answered. It is rather to be supposed that he
looked to some "future" period when the Messiah would rise or would
return; but Jesus told him that his prayer would be answered that very
day, implying, evidently, that it would be "immediately" at death. This
is the more remarkable, as those who were crucified commonly lingered
for several days on the cross before they died; but Jesus foresaw that
measures would be taken to "hasten" their death, and assured him that
"that" day he should receive an answer to his prayer and be with him in
his kingdom.

Paradise - This is a word of "Persian" origin, and means "a garden,"
particularly a garden of pleasure, filled with trees, and shrubs, and
fountains, and flowers. In hot climates such gardens were especially
pleasant, and hence, they were attached to the mansions of the rich and
to the palaces of princes. The word came thus to denote any place of
happiness, and was used particularly to denote the abodes of the blessed
in another world. The Romans spoke of their Elysium, and the Greeks of
the gardens of Hesperides, where the trees bore golden fruit. The garden
of Eden means, also, the garden of "pleasure," and in [Gen
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#008.md) the Septuagint renders the word
"Eden by Paradise." Hence, this name in the Scriptures comes to denote
the abodes of the blessed in the other world. See the notes at [Co2
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004.md). The Jews supposed that the souls
of the righteous would be received into such a place, and those of the
wicked cast down to Gehenna until the time of the judgment. They had
many fables about this state which it is unnecessary to repeat. The
plain meaning of the passage is, "Today thou shalt be made happy, or be
received to a state of blessedness with me after death." It is to be
remarked that Christ says nothing about the "place where" it should be,
nor of the condition of those there, excepting that it is a place of
blessedness, and that its happiness is to commence immediately after
death (see also [Phi 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023).md); but from
the narrative we may learn:

1\. That the soul will exist separately from the body; for, while the
thief and the Saviour would be in Paradise, their "bodies" would be on
the cross or in the grave.

2\. That immediately after death - the same day - the souls of the
righteous will be made happy. They will feel that they are secure; they
will be received among the just; and they will have the assurance of a
glorious immortality.

3\. That state will differ from the condition of the wicked. The promise
was made to but one on the cross, and there is no evidence whatever that
the other entered there. See also the parable of the rich man and
Lazarus, [Luk 16:19-31](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019.md).

4\. It is the chief glory of this state and of heaven to be permitted to
see Jesus Christ and to be with him: "Thou shalt be with me." "I desire
to depart and to be with Christ," [Phi
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023.md). See also [Rev
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023.md); [Rev
5:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009.md).

[Luke 23:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">luk 23:44</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 27:45-50](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#045.md).

[Luke 23:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">luk 23:47</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 27:52-55](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#052.md).

[Luk 23:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#048.md)

The things which were done - The earthquake, the darkness, and the
sufferings of Jesus.

Smote their breasts - In token of alarm, fear, and anguish. They saw the
judgments of God; they saw the guilt of the rulers; and they feared the
farther displeasure of the Almighty.

[Luke 23:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#050.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">luk 23:50</span></span>

See the [Mat 27:57-61](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#057.md) notes; [Mar
15:42-47](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#042.md) notes.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 24](luk024.md)

</div>
