<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](luk023)  [Next](joh000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#001.md)

[Luke 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 24:1</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 28:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#001.md).

[Luke 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 24:13</span></span>

"Two of them." Two of the disciples. The name of one of them was
"Cleopas," [Luk 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#018.md). Many have
supposed that the other was Luke, and that he omitted his own name from
modesty. Others have supposed that it was Peter. See [Luk
24:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#034.md); [Co1
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#005.md). There is no evidence to guide us
here. Dr. Lightfoot has shown that "Cleopas" is the same name as
"Alpheus," who was the father of the apostle James, [Mat
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#003.md).

Emmaus - In regard to the locality of Emmaus, it seems quite probable
that it is the same village which is referred to by Josephus ("Jewish
Wars," vii. 6, Section 6), who states that, after the destruction of
Jerusalem, Titus gave "Emmaus," distant from Jerusalem threescore
furlongs, to 800 of his troops, whom he had dismissed from his army, for
their habitation. Dr. Thomson ("The Land and the Book," vol. ii. p. 307,
540) regards it as the present Kuriet el 'Aineb, which Dr. Robinson
identifies with Kirjath-jearim. Of this place he says: "Kuriet el 'Aineb
itself would be the proper distance from Jerusalem, and being on the
road to Jaffa, and on the dividing ridge between the plain and the
mountains, the Roman emperor might have deemed it an advantageous post
for a colony made up of his disbanded soldiers, who could keep in check
the surrounding country. Certain it is that in these later ages the
occupants of this place have controlled the whole adjacent region, and
for many a generation exercised their lawless tyranny upon helpless
pilgrims.

"It took just three hours' moderate riding from Kuriet el 'Aineb to
Jerusalem: first, a long descent into Wady Hanina, which passes between
it and Soba; then a similar ascent, succeeded by a very steep pass, and
a very slippery path down to Kulonia. At this place are some heavy
foundations of church, convent, or castle by the road-side, which may be
of almost any age, and also gardens of fruit-trees, irrigated by a
fountain of excellent water. Kulonia is on a hill north of the road, and
appears in a fair way to become a ruin itself before long. The path then
winds up a valley, and stretches over a dreary waste of bare rocks until
within a mile of the city, when the view opens upon its naked ramparts
and the mysterious regions toward the Dead Sea."

Threescore furlongs - Sixty furlongs, or about seven or eight miles. It
is not certain that these were apostles, but the contrary seems to be
implied in [Luk 24:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#033.md). See the notes
at that verse. If they were not, it is probable that they were intimate
disciples, who may have been much with the Saviour during the latter
part of his ministry and the closing scenes of his life. But it is
wholly unknown why they were going to Emmaus. It may have been that this
was their native place, or that they had friends in the vicinity. They
seem to have given up all for lost, and to have come to the conclusion
that Jesus was not the Messiah, though they naturally conversed about
it, and there were many things which they could not explain. Their
Master had been crucified contrary to their expectation, their hopes
dashed, their anticipation disappointed, and they were now returning in
sadness, and very naturally conversed, in the way, of the things which
had happened in Jerusalem.

[Luke 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 24:15</span></span>

Communed together - Talked together.

And reasoned - They reasoned, doubtless, about the probability or
improbability that Jesus was the Messiah; about the evidence of his
resurrection; about what was to be done in the present state of things.

Jesus himself drew near ... - The disciples were properly employed.
Their minds were anxious about the state of things, and they endeavored
to arrive at the truth. In this state of things Jesus came to solve
their doubts, and to establish them in the belief that he was the
Christ; and we may learn from this that Christ will guide those who are
sincerely endeavoring to know the truth. They who candidly and seriously
endeavor to ascertain what is true and right he will direct; and often
in an unexpected manner he will appear, to dissipate their doubts and to
scatter all their perplexities. "Our" duty is sincerely to strive to
ascertain the truth, and to do his will; and if his people do this, he
will not leave them to perplexity and wandering.

[Luke 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 24:16</span></span>

Their eyes were holden - This expression is used merely to denote that
they did not "know" who he was. It does not appear that there was
anything supernatural or miraculous in it, or that God used any power to
blind them. It may easily be accounted for without any such supposition;
for,

1\. Jesus appeared "in another form" [Mar
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#012.md) - that is, different from his
"usual" appearance.

2\. They were not "expecting" to see him - indeed, they did not suppose
that he was alive, and it required the strongest evidence to convince
them that he was really risen from the dead.

[Luke 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 24:17</span></span>

What manner of communications ... - What is the subject of your
conversation? What is it that has so much affected your minds? They were
deeply affected in the recollection of the death of Jesus; and, as
became all Christians, they were conversing about him, and were sad at
the overwhelming events that had come upon them.

[Luke 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 24:18</span></span>

Art thou only a stranger? ... - This is an expression of surprise that
he should be unacquainted with an affair that had made so much noise,
and that had been attended with so remarkable circumstances. The word
"stranger" here denotes one who had come to reside at a place only for a
"time," not a permanent inhabitant. Many Jews came up from all parts of
the world to Jerusalem, to keep the Passover there. They appear to have
taken Jesus to be such a stranger or foreigner. The meaning of this
verse may be thus expressed: "The affair concerning which we are sad has
been well known, and has made a great talk and noise, so that all, even
the strangers who have come up to remain there but a little time, are
well acquainted with it. Art thou the "only one" of them who has not
heard it? Is everybody so well acquainted with it, and thou hast not
heard of it? It is a matter of surprise, and we cannot account for it."

[Luke 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 24:19</span></span>

A prophet - A teacher sent from God. They did not now call him the
"Messiah," for his "death" had led them to doubt that, but they had no
doubt that he was a distinguished "prophet." The evidence of that was so
clear that they "could" not call it in question.

Mighty in deed - Powerful in working miracles, in raising the dead,
healing the sick, etc.

In word - In teaching.

Before God and all the people - Manifestly; publicly. So that "God"
owned him, and the people regarded him as a distinguished teacher.

[Luke 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 24:20</span></span>

Sec the notes at [Mat 26:59-66](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#059.md).

[Luke 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 24:21</span></span>

We trusted - We hoped and expected.

Should have redeemed Israel - That he was the Messiah, who would have
delivered the nation from the Romans.

Besides all this - It is to be observed that Cleopas states things just
as they occurred to his own mind. There is little connection. His mind
is confused and distracted. There were so many things that were
remarkable in Jesus; there was so much evidence that he was the Messiah;
their hopes had been so suddenly dashed by his death, and the succeeding
events had been so wonderful, that his mind was confused, and he knew
not what to think. The things which he now stated served to increase his
perplexity. The expressions here are perfectly natural. They bespeak an
agitated mind. They are simple touches of nature, which show that the
book was not forged. If the book had been the work of imposture, this
artless and perplexed narrative would not have been thought of.

Today is the third day ... - Jesus had foretold them that he would rise
on the third day. This they did not understand; but it is not improbable
that they looked to this day expecting something wonderful, and that the
visit to the sepulchre had called it to their recollection, and they
were more and more amazed when they put all these things together. As if
they had said, "The third day is come, and we have not seen him. Yet we
begin to remember his promise - the angels have informed us that he is
alive - but we do not know how to put these things together, or what to
make of them."

[Luke 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 24:22</span></span>

Certain women - See [Mat 28:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#001.md); [Joh
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#012.md).

A vision of angels - An appearance of angels, or they had seen angels.
See [Joh 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#012.md).

[Luke 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 24:24</span></span>

Certain of them which were with us - Peter and John. See [Joh
20:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#002.md).

[Luke 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 24:25</span></span>

O fools - The word "fool" sometimes is a term of reproach denoting
"wickedness." In this sense we are forbidden to employ it in addressing
another, [Mat 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022.md). That, however, is
a different word in the Greek from the one which occurs here. The one
there used implies contempt, but the one employed in this place denotes
"weakness or dulness." He reproached them for not seeing what he had
himself so clearly predicted, and what had been foretold by the
prophets. The word used in the original does not imply as much
"reproach" as the word "fool" does among us. It was not an expression of
"contempt;" it was an expression denoting merely that they were
"thoughtless," and that they did not properly "attend to" the evidence
that he must die and rise again.

Slow of heart to believe - Not quick to perceive. Dull of learning. They
had suffered their previous opinions and prejudices to prevent their
seeing the evidence that he must die and rise from the dead.

All that the prophets have spoken - Respecting the character and
sufferings of the Messiah. See the notes at [Luk
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#027.md).

[Luke 24:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 24:26</span></span>

Ought not Christ ... - Ought not the "Messiah." Was there not evidence
that he would do it? and was it not indispensable that he should, in
order to fulfil the prophecies? The "necessity" of his suffering these
things referred to "here" was that it was foretold that he "would." The
reason why it was predicted, and why it was necessary that it should
occur, was that it was proper that God should manifest his justice, and
do honor to his law, and secure the due regard for his government, while
he pardoned the guilty.

[Luke 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 24:27</span></span>

Beginning at Moses - At the "writings" of Moses, or at the beginning of
the Old Testament; or rather the word "beginning" should be separated
from what follows, denoting simply that he "commenced" his discourse,
and not that he began at the prophets as well as at Moses; thus, "And
commencing his discourse, or replying to them, he expounded from Moses
and the prophets," etc.

All the prophets - The books of the Old Testament generally.

He expounded - He explained or interpreted it to them. Probably He
showed them that their notions of the Messiah were not according to the
Scriptures. "They" expected a temporal prince; they were perplexed
because Jesus had not assumed the regal power, but had been put to
death. He showed them that according to the prophecies he ought to
suffer, and that his "death," therefore, was no argument that he was not
the Messiah.

In all the scriptures - In all the "writings" of the Old Testament. They
were called "scriptures" because they were "written," the art of
printing being then unknown.

The things concerning himself - Concerning the Messiah. It does not
appear that he "applied" them to himself, but left them, probably, to
make the application. He showed what the Scriptures foretold, and "they"
saw that these things applied to Jesus of Nazareth, and began to be
satisfied that he was the Messiah. The most striking passages
foretelling the character and sufferings of Christ are the following,
which we may suppose it possible our Saviour dwelt upon to convince them
that, though he was crucified, yet he was the Christ: [Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015.md); [Deu
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015.md); [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010.md); [Num
21:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#008.md); [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001.md); [Dan
9:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025.md); [Isa
9:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md); [Psa
110:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001.md); [Psa
16:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001.md); 22; [Mal
4:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002.md).

[Luke 24:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 24:28</span></span>

He made as though he would have gone further - He did not "say" he would
go farther, but he kept on as if it was not his intention to stop, and
doubtless he "would" have gone on if they had not constrained him to
tarry.

[Luke 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 24:29</span></span>

Constrained him - They urged him, or pressingly invited him. They did
not yet perceive that it was Jesus, but they had been charmed and
delighted with his discourse, and they wished to hear him farther.
Christians are delighted with communion with the Saviour. They seek it
as the chief object of their desire, and they find their chief pleasure
in fellowship with him. The two disciples felt it a privilege to
entertain the stranger, as they supposed, who had so charmed them with
his discourse; and so those to whom the gospel is preached, and who love
it, feel it a privilege, and not a burden, to show kindness to those who
bear to them the message of salvation.

Abide with us - Remain with us, or pass the night in our house.

[Luke 24:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">luk 24:30</span></span>

Sat at meat - Reclined at the table, or while he was at supper.

He took bread and blessed it ... - This was the office of the master of
a feast, and perhaps this first attracted particularly their attention.
Though he was in "their" house, yet he acted as "master" of the feast,
as he used to do with them before his death. Perhaps, also, as he "gave"
them the bread, they observed the "prints" in his hands, and they knew
that it was Jesus. This was not a "sacramental," but a common supper;
yet our Saviour sought a blessing on the food, and thus set an example
to all his followers to acknowledge God in their daily gifts, and to
seek his benediction in all their enjoyments.

[Luke 24:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 24:31</span></span>

Their eyes were opened - The obscurity was removed. They saw him to be
the Messiah. Their doubts were gone, and they saw clearly that he was
risen, and was truly, as they had long hoped, the Saviour of people. It
is not meant that they were before "blind," but that they did not know
until then who he was.

He vanished out of their sight - He suddenly departed. It does not
appear that there was anything miraculous in this, but, during their
surprise, he took the opportunity suddenly to withdraw from them.

[Luke 24:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 24:32</span></span>

Our heart burn within us - This is an expression denoting the deep
interest and pleasure which they had felt in his discourse before they
knew who he was. They now recalled his instruction; they remembered how
his words reached the "heart" as he spoke to them; how convincingly he
had showed them that the Messiah ought to suffer, and how, while he
talked to them of the Christ that they so much loved, their hearts
glowed with intense love. This feeling was not confined to them alone.
All the followers of Jesus know how precious and tender are the
communications of the Saviour, and how the heart glows with love as they
think or hear of his life, and sufferings, and death.

He opened to us - He explained to us the Scriptures. See [Luk
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#027.md).

This narrative shows us,

1\. How blind people may be to the plainest doctrines of the Scriptures
until they are explained to them. These disciples had often read or
heard the Scriptures, but never, until then, did they fully understand
that the Messiah must suffer.

2\. It is proper there should be those whose office it is to explain the
Scriptures. Jesus did it while on earth; he does it now by his Spirit;
and he has appointed his ministers, whose business it is to explain
them.

3\. If people attempt to explain the Bible, they should themselves
understand it. They should give their time and talents to a suitable
preparation to understand the sacred volume. Preaching should consist in
"real," and not "fancied" explanations of the Scriptures; the real
doctrines which "God" has taught in his word, and not the doctrines that
"men" have taught in their systems.

4\. Here was convincing evidence that Jesus was the Messiah. This was
but one of many instances where Jesus convinced his disciples, contrary
to their previous belief. In this case the evidence was abundant. He
first satisfied them from the Old Testament that the very things which
had happened were foretold; he then dissipated every doubt by showing
"himself" to them and convincing them that he was truly the Christ.
There was no chance here for deception and juggling. Who would have met
them and talked with them in this way but the real Saviour? Who would
have thought of writing this narrative to help an imposture? What
impostor would have recorded the dulness of the disciples as to the
plain declarations of the Old Testament, and "then" have thought of this
device to prop up the narrative? Everything about this narrative - its
simplicity - its tenderness - its particularity - its perfect nature -
its freedom from all appearance of trick - shows that it was taken from
real life; and if so, then the Christian religion is true, for here is
evidence that Jesus rose from the dead.

[Luke 24:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">luk 24:33</span></span>

The same hour - Though it was late, and they had stopped, as they
thought, for the night, yet such was their joy that they hastened to
tell it to their companions and friends. This was natural and proper,
and it shows how quick and ready they who have found the Saviour are to
tell it to others. Compare [Joh
1:41-45](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#041.md). Young converts to Christ
"should hasten" to tell their joy, and should not shrink at self-denial
to proclaim to others what God hath done for the soul, [Psa
66:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#016.md).

"My lips and cheerful heart, prepare.

To make his mercies known:

Come, ye that fear my God, and hear.

The wonders he hath done.

"When on my head huge sorrows fell,

I sought his heavenly aid;

He saved my sinking soul from hell,

And death's eternal shade."

The eleven - The eleven apostles. Judas was now dead. This shows that
the two that went to Emmaus were not apostles.

[Luke 24:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">luk 24:34</span></span>

Saying - The eleven said this.

Hath appeared to Simon - To Peter. It is not known precisely when this
happened, as the time and place are not mentioned. Paul has referred to
it in [Co1 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#005.md), from which it appears
that he appeared to "Cephas or Peter" before he did to any other of the
apostles. This was a mark of special love and favor, and particularly,
after Peter's denial, it showed how ready he was to pardon, and how
willing to impart comfort to those who are penitent, though their sins
are great.

[Luke 24:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">luk 24:36</span></span>

Jesus stood in the midst of them - This was when the apostles were
assembled, and when they had closed the doors for fear of the Jews, [Joh
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019.md). It was this fact, as well as
his sudden and unexpected appearance, that alarmed them. The doors were
shut, and the suddenness of his appearance led them to suppose they had
seen a spirit.

Peace be unto you - This was a form of salutation among the Hebrews
denoting a wish of peace and prosperity. See [Gen
43:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#023.md). It was especially appropriate
for Jesus, as he had said before his death that he left "his peace" with
them as their inheritance [Joh 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027.md),
and as they were now alarmed and fearful at their state, and trembling
for fear of the Jews, [Joh 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019.md).

[Luke 24:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 24:38</span></span>

Why are ye troubled? - Why are you alarmed or frightened?

And why do thoughts ... - The word "thoughts" here means "doubts" or
suspicions. It is used in this sense also in [Ti1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008.md). The doubts which they had were
whether he was the Christ. He reproves them for doubting this; for,

1\. The Scriptures had foretold his death;

2\. He had himself repeatedly done it; and,

3\. They had now the testimony of Peter that he had seen Jesus alive,
and of the angels that he was risen. After all this evidence, Jesus
reproves them for doubting whether he was truly the Messiah.

[Luke 24:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 24:39</span></span>

Behold my hands ... - Jesus proceeds to give them evidence that he was
truly the same person that had been crucified. He first showed them his
hands and his feet - still, pierced, and with the wounds made by the
nails still open. Compare [Joh 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#027.md).
He told them to handle him and see him. He ate before them. All this was
to satisfy them that he was not, as they supposed, a spirit. Nor could
better evidence have been given. He appealed to their senses, and
performed acts which a disembodied spirit could not do.

Handle me - Or touch me; feel of me. Compare [Joh
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#027.md).

And see - Be convinced, for you could not thus handle a spirit. The
object here was to convince them that his body had really come to life.

For a spirit ... - He appeals here to what they well knew; and this
implies that the spirit may exist separate from the body. That was the
view of the apostles, and our Saviour distinctly countenances that
belief.

[Luk 24:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#041.md)

Believed not for joy - Their joy was so great, and his appearance was so
sudden and unexpected, that they were bewildered, and still sought more
evidence of the truth of what they "wished" to believe. This is nature.
We have similar expressions in our language. "The news is too good to be
true;" or, "I cannot believe it; it is too much for me."

Any meat - This word does not mean "meat" in our sense of it, but in the
old English sense, denoting "anything to eat."

[Luk 24:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#042.md)

Honey-comb - Honey abounded in Palestine, and was a very common article
of food. Bees lived in caves of the rocks, in the hollows of trees, and
were also kept as with us. The disciples gave, probably, just what was
their own common fare, and what was ready at the time.

[Luke 24:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">luk 24:44</span></span>

These are the words - Or this is the "fulfillment" of what I before told
you respecting my death. See [Luk
18:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#033.md); [Mar
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#033.md).

While I was yet with you - Before my death. While I was with you as a
teacher and guide.

In the law of Moses - The five books of Moses - Genesis, Exodus,
Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy. Among the Jews this was the first
division of the Old Testament, and was called the "law."

The prophets - This was the second and largest part of the Hebrew
Scriptures. It comprehended the books of Joshua, Judges, 1st and 2nd
Samuel, 1st and 2nd Kings, which were called the "former prophets;" and
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the twelve smaller books from Daniel, to
Malachi, which were called the "latter prophets."

The psalms - The word here used probably means what were comprehended
under the name of "Hagiographa," or holy writings. This consisted of the
Psalms, Proverbs, Job, Song of Solomon, Ruth, Lamentations,
Ecclesiastes, Esther, Daniel, Ezra, and Nehemiah, and the two books of
Chronicles. This division of the Old Testament was in use long before
the time of Christ, and was what he referred to here; and he meant to
say that in "each of" these divisions of the Old Testament there were
prophecies respecting himself. The "particular" subject before them was
his "resurrection from the dead." A most striking prediction of this is
contained in [Psa 16:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#009.md). Compare it
with [Act 2:24-32](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024.md); [Act
13:35-37](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#035.md).

[Luke 24:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">luk 24:45</span></span>

Opened he their understanding - Enabled them fully to comprehend the
meaning of the prophecies which foretold his death and resurrection.
They had seen him die, they now saw him risen. Their prejudices were
now, by his instructions, and by the facts which they could no longer
call in question, removed, and they no longer doubted that he was the
Messiah, and that all the "facts" in the case which had before
confounded them could be easily accounted for. Hence, we may learn:

1\. That "facts," or the farther disclosure of truth, will yet remove
the "mysteries" that we now see in religion.

2\. That our prejudices and our preconceived opinions are one cause of
our seeing so many mysteries in the Bible. If a man is willing to take
the plain declarations of the Bible, he will commonly be little
perplexed with mysteries.

3\. That God only can open the mind so as fully to comprehend the
Scriptures. He only can overcome our prejudices, open our hearts, and
dispose us to receive the ingrafted word with meekness, and with the
simplicity of a child. See [Act 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#014.md);
[Jam 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#021.md); [Mar
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#015.md).

4\. The design of God's opening the understanding is that we may be
acquainted with the Scriptures. It is not that we may be made wise above
what is written, but that we may submit ourselves wholly to the Word of
God.

[Luke 24:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">luk 24:46</span></span>

It behoved - It became; it was proper or necessary that the Messiah
should thus suffer. It was predicted of him, and all things have
happened as it was foretold.

[Luke 24:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">luk 24:47</span></span>

Repentance - Sorrow for sin and forsaking of it. It was proper that the
"necessity" of repentance should be preached among all nations, for all
were sinners. See [Act 17:30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030.md).

Remission of sins - Pardon or forgiveness of sins. It should be
proclaimed that all people should repent, and that those who are
penitent may be pardoned.

In my name - By my command it should be proclaimed that people should
repent, and by my merit that they may be pardoned. Pardon is offered by
the authority of Christ to all nations, and this is a sufficient warrant
to offer the gospel "to every man."

Beginning at Jerusalem - This was the dwelling of his murderers, and it
shows his readiness to forgive the vilest sinners. It was the holy place
of the temple, the habitation of God, the place of the solemnities of
the ancient dispensation, and it was proper that pardon should be first
proclaimed there. This was done - the gospel was first preached there.
See Acts 2. Paul also, in his travels, preached the gospel "first" to
the Jews, the ancient people of God, offering them pardon through their
own Messiah; and, when "they" rejected it, turned to the Gentiles, [Act
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046.md).

[Luke 24:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">luk 24:48</span></span>

Are witnesses of these things - Of my life, my sufferings, my death, and
my resurrection. How solemn was their office - to "testify" these things
to the world, and, in the face of suffering and death, to go and
proclaim them to all nations! In like manner, "all" Christians are
witnesses for Christ. They are the "evidences" of his mercy and his
love, and they should so live that others may be brought to see and love
the Saviour.

[Luke 24:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#049.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">luk 24:49</span></span>

The promise of my Father - The promise which the Father had made to them
"through" the Saviour. See [Mat 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#019.md);
[Joh 14:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016.md), [Joh
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026.md). The promise was, that they
should be aided by the power of the Holy Spirit. He also doubtless
referred to the promise of God, made in the days of Joel, respecting the
outpouring of the Holy Spirit. See [Joe
2:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028.md), compared with [Act
2:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#016.md).

Endued with power from on high - The power which would be given them by
the descent of the Holy Spirit - the power of speaking with tongues, of
working miracles, and of preaching the gospel with the attending
blessing and aid of the Holy Spirit. This was accomplished in the gift
of the Holy Spirit on the day of Pentecost. See Acts 2.

[Luke 24:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#050.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">luk 24:50</span></span>

To Bethany - See the notes at [Mar
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#019.md). Bethany was on the eastern
declivity of the Mount of Olives, from which our Lord was taken up to
heaven, [Act 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#012.md). Bethany was a
favored place. It was the abode of Martha, and Mary, and Lazarus, and
our Saviour delighted to be there. From this place, also, he ascended to
his Father and our Father, and to his God and our God.

While he blessed them - While he commanded his benediction to rest upon
them; while he assured them of his favor, and commended them to the
protection and guidance of God, in the dangers, trials, and conflicts
which they were to meet in a sinful and miserable world.

[Luke 24:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#052.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">luk 24:52</span></span>

They worshipped him - The word "worship" does not "always" denote
religious homage. See the notes at [Mat
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#011.md). Compare [Luk
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#010.md). But here it is to be remarked,

1\. That they offered this worship to an "absent" Saviour. It was
"after" he left them and had vanished out of their sight. It was,
therefore, an act of religion, and was the "first" religious homage that
was paid to Jesus after he had left the world.

2\. If "they" worshipped an absent Saviour - a Saviour unseen by the
bodily eye, it is right for "us" to do it. It was an example which we
"may and should" follow.

3\. If worship may be rendered to Jesus, he is divine. See [Exo
20:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004.md).

[Luke 24:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#053.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">luk 24:53</span></span>

Were continually in the temple - Until the day of Pentecost - that is,
about ten days after. See Acts 2.

Praising and blessing God - Chiefly for the full proof that the Messiah
had come; had redeemed them, and had ascended to heaven. "Thus the days
of their mourning were ended." They were filled with happiness at the
assurance of redemption, and expressed what every Christian should feel
- fulness of joy at the glad tidings that a Saviour has died, and risen,
and ascended to God; and an earnest desire to pour forth in the
sanctuary prayers and thanksgivings to the God of grace for his mercy to
a lost and ruined world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Introduction](joh000.md)

</div>
