<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](luk013)  [Next](luk015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#001.md)

[Luke 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 14:1</span></span>

It came to pass - It so happened or occurred.

As he went ... - It is probable that he was invited to go, being in the
neighborhood [Luk 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#012.md); and it is
also probable that the Pharisee invited him for the purpose of getting
him to say something that would involve him in difficulty.

One of the chief Pharisees - One of the Pharisees who were "rulers," or
members of the great council or the Sanhedrin. See the notes at [Mat
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022.md). It does not mean that he was the
head of the "sect" of the Pharisees, but one of those who happened to be
a member of the Sanhedrin. He was, therefore, a man of influence and
reputation.

To eat bread - To dine. To partake of the hospitalities of his house.

On the sabbath-day - It may seem strange that our Saviour should have
gone to dine with a man who was a stranger on the Sabbath; but we are to
remember:

1\. That he was traveling, having no home of his own, and that it was no
more improper to go there than to any other place.

2\. That he did not go there for the purpose of feasting and amusement,
but to do good.

3\. That as several of that class of persons were together, it gave him
an opportunity to address them on the subject of religion, and to
reprove their vices.

If, therefore, the example of Jesus should be pled to authorize
accepting an invitation to dine on the Sabbath, it should be pled just
as it was. If we can go "just as he did," it is right. If when away from
home; if we go to do good; if we make it an occasion to discourse on the
subject of religion and to persuade people to repent, then it is not
improper. Farther than this we cannot plead the example of Christ. And
surely this should be the last instance in the world to be adduced to
justify dinner-parties, and scenes of riot and gluttony on the Sabbath.

They watched him - They malignantly fixed their eyes on him, to see if
he did anything on which they could lay hold to accuse him.

[Luke 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 14:2</span></span>

A certain man before him - In what way he came there we know not. He
might have been one of the Pharisee's family, or might have been placed
there by the Pharisees to see whether he would heal him. This last
supposition is not improbable, since it is said in [Luk
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#001.md) that they watched him.

The dropsy - A disease produced by the accumulation of water in various
parts of the body; very distressing, and commonly incurable.

[Luke 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 14:3</span></span>

Jesus, answering - To "answer," in the Scriptures, does not always
imply, as among us, that anything had been said before. It means often
merely to "begin" or to take up a subject, or, as here, to remark on the
case that was present.

Is it lawful ... - He knew that they were watching him. If he healed the
man at once, they would accuse him. He, therefore, proposed the question
to them, and when it was asked, they could not say that it was not
lawful.

[Luke 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 14:4</span></span>

They held their peace - They were silent. They "could" not say it was
not lawful, for the law did not forbid it. If it had they would have
said it. Here was the time for them to make objections if they had any,
and not after the man was healed; and as they "made" no objection
"then," they could not with consistency afterward. They were, therefore,
effectually silenced and confounded by the Saviour.

He took him - Took hold of the man, or perhaps took him apart into
another room. By taking hold of him, or touching him, he showed that the
power of healing went forth from himself.

[Luke 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 14:5</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#011.md).

Which of you ... - In this way Jesus refuted the notion of the
Pharisees. If it was lawful to save an ox on the Sabbath, it was also to
save the life of a man. To this the Jews had nothing to answer.

[Luke 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 14:7</span></span>

A parable - The word parable, here, means rather a "precept, an
injunction." He gave a "rule or precept" about the proper manner of
attending a feast, or about the humility which ought to be manifested on
such occasions.

That were bidden - That were invited by the Pharisee. It seems that he
had invited his friends to dine with him on that day.

When he marked - When he observed or saw.

Chief rooms - The word "rooms" here does not express the meaning of the
original. It does not mean "apartments," but "the higher places" at the
table; those which were nearest the head of the table and to him who had
invited them. See the notes at [Mat
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#006.md). That this was the common
character of the Pharisees appears from [Mat
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#006.md).

[Luke 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 14:8</span></span>

Art bidden - Are invited.

To a wedding - A wedding was commonly attended with a feast or banquet.

The highest room - The seat at the table nearest the head.

A more honourable man - A more aged man, or a man of higher rank. It is
to be remarked that our Saviour did not consider the courtesies of life
to be beneath his notice. His chief design here was, no doubt, to
reprove the pride and ambition of the Pharisees; but, in doing it, he
teaches us that religion does not violate the courtesies of life. It
does not teach us to be rude, forward, pert, assuming, and despising the
proprieties of refined social contact. It teaches humility and kindness,
and a desire to make all happy, and a willingness to occupy our
appropriate situation and rank in life; and this is true "politeness,"
for true politeness is a desire to make all others happy, and a
readiness to do whatever is necessary to make them so. They have utterly
mistaken the nature of religion who suppose that because they are
professed Christians, they must be rude and uncivil, and violate all the
distinctions in society. The example and precepts of Jesus Christ were
utterly unlike such conduct. He teaches us to be kind, and to treat
people according to their rank and character. Compare [Mat
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#021.md); [Rom
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#007.md); [Pe1
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#017.md).

[Luke 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 14:10</span></span>

The lowest room - The lowest seat at the table; showing that you are not
desirous of distinctions, or greedy of that honor which may properly
belong to you.

Shalt have worship - The word "worship" here means "honor." They who are
sitting with you shall treat you with respect. They will learn your rank
by your being invited nearer to the head of the table, and it will be
better to learn it thus than by putting yourself forward. They will do
you honor because you have shown a humble spirit.

[Luke 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 14:11</span></span>

Whosoever exalteth ... - This is universal among people, and it is also
the way in which God will deal with people. "Men" will perpetually
endeavor to bring down those who endeavor to exalt themselves; and it is
a part of God's regular plan to abase the proud, to bring down the
lofty, to raise up those that be bowed down, and show "his" favors to
those who are poor and needy.

[Luke 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 14:12</span></span>

Call not thy friends ... - This is not to be understood as commanding us
not to entertain "at all" our relatives and friends; but we are to
remember the "design" with which our Lord spoke. He intended, doubtless,
to reprove those who sought the society of the wealthy, and particularly
rich relatives, and those who claimed to be intimate with the great and
honorable, and who, to show their intimacy, were in the habit of
"seeking" their society, and making for them expensive entertainments.
He meant, also, to commend charity shown to the poor. The passage means,
therefore, call "not only" your friends, but call also the poor, etc.
Compare [Exo 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#008.md); [Sa1
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022.md); [Jer
7:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#022.md); [Mat
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013.md).

Thy kinsmen - Thy relations.

A recompense - Lest they feel themselves bound to treat you with the
same kindness, and, in so doing, neither you nor they will show any kind
spirit, or any disposition to do good beyond what is repaid.

[Luke 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 14:13</span></span>

The poor - Those who are destitute of comfortable food.

The maimed - Those who are deprived of any member of their body, as an
arm or a leg or who have not the use of them so that they can labor for
their own support.

[Luke 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 14:14</span></span>

Shalt be blessed - Blessed in the "act" of doing good, which furnishes
more "happiness" than riches can give, and blessed or rewarded "by God"
in the day of judgment.

They cannot recompense thee - They cannot invite you again, and thus pay
you; and by inviting "them" you show that you have a "disposition" to do
good.

The resurrection of the just - When the just or holy shall be raised
from the dead. Then "God" shall reward those who have done good to the
poor and needy from love to the Lord Jesus Christ, [Mat
10:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#042.md); [Mat
25:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034.md).

[Luke 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 14:15</span></span>

Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God - The kingdom
of God here means the kingdom which the Messiah was to set up. See the
notes at [Mat 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002.md). The Jews supposed
that he would be a temporal prince, and that his reign would be one of
great magnificence and splendor. They supposed that the "Jews" then
would be delivered from all their oppressions, and that, from being a
degraded people, they would become the most distinguished and happy
nation of the earth. To that period they looked forward as one of great
happiness. There is some reason to think that they supposed that the
ancient just people would then be raised up to enjoy the blessings of
the reign of the Messiah. Our Saviour having mentioned the "resurrection
of the just," this man understood it in the common way of the Jews, and
spoke of the special happiness which they expected at that time. The
Jews "only," he expected, would partake of those blessings. Those
notions the Saviour corrects in the parable which follows.

[Luke 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 14:16</span></span>

A great supper - Or great feast. It is said to be "great" on account of
the number who were invited.

Bade many - Invited many beforehand. There is little difficulty in
understanding this parable. The man who made the supper is, without
doubt, designed to represent God; the supper, the provisions which he
has made for the salvation of people; and the invitation, the offers
which he made to people, particularly to the Jews, of salvation. See a
similar parable explained in the notes at [Mat
22:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#001.md).

[Luke 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 14:17</span></span>

Sent his servant - An invitation had been sent before, but this servant
was sent at the time that the supper was ready. From this it would seem
that it was the custom to announce to those invited just the time when
the feast was prepared. The custom here referred to still prevails in
Palestine. Dr. Thomson ("The Land and the Book," vol. i. p. 178) says:
"If a sheikh, beg, or emeer invites, he always sends a servant to call
you at the proper time. This servant often repeats the very formula
mentioned in [Luk 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#017.md); Tefŭddŭlû, el
'asha hâder. Come, for the supper is ready. The fact that this custom is
mainly confined to the wealthy and to the nobility is in strict
agreement with the parable, where the certain man who made the great
supper and bade many is supposed to be of this class. It is true now, as
then, that to refuse is a high insult to the maker of the feast, nor
would such excuses as those in the parable be more acceptable to a Druse
emeer than they were to the lord of this 'great supper.'"

[Luke 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 14:18</span></span>

I have bought a piece of ground - Perhaps he had purchased it on
condition that he found it as good as it had been represented to him.

I must needs go - I have necessity, or am obliged to go and see it;
possibly pleading a contract or an agreement that he would go soon and
examine it. However, we may learn from this that sinners sometimes plead
that they are under a "necessity" to neglect the affairs of religion.
The affairs of the world, they pretend, are so pressing that they cannot
find time to attend to their souls. They have no time to pray, or read
the Scriptures, or keep up the worship of God. In this way many lose
their souls. God cannot regard such an excuse for neglecting religion
with approbation. He commands us to seek "first" the kingdom of God and
his righteousness, nor can he approve any excuse that people may make
for not doing it.

[Luke 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 14:19</span></span>

I go to prove them - To try them, to see if he had made a good bargain.
It is worthy of remark that this excuse was very trifling. He could as
easily have tried them at any other time as then, and his whole conduct
shows that he was more disposed to gratify "himself" than to accept the
invitation of his friend. He was selfish; just as all sinners are, who,
to gratify their own worldliness and sins, refuse to accept the offers
of the gospel.

[Luke 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 14:20</span></span>

I have married a wife ... - Our Saviour here doubtless intends to teach
us that the love of earthly relatives and friends often takes off the
affections from God, and prevents our accepting the blessings which he
would bestow on us. This was the most trifling excuse of all; and we
cannot but be amazed that "such" excuses are suffered to interfere with
our salvation, and that people can be satisfied for "such" reasons to
exclude themselves from the kingdom of God.

[Luke 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 14:21</span></span>

Showed his lord - Told his master of the excuses of those who had been
invited. Their conduct was remarkable, and it was his duty to acquaint
him with the manner in which his invitation had been received.

Being angry - Being angry at the people who had slighted his invitation;
who had so insulted him by neglecting his feast, and preferring "for
such reasons" their own gratification to his friendship and hospitality.
So it is no wonder that God is angry with the wicked every day. So
foolish as well as wicked is the conduct of the sinner, so trifling is
his excuse for not repenting and turning to God, that it is no wonder if
God cannot look upon their conduct but with abhorrence.

Go out quickly - The feast is ready. There is no time to lose. They who
partake of it must do it soon. So the gospel is ready; time flies; and
they who partake of the gospel must do it soon, and they who preach it
must give diligence to proclaim it to their fellow-men.

The streets and lanes of the city - The places where the poor, etc.,
would be found. Those first invited were the rich, who dwelt at ease in
their own houses. By these the Jews were intended; by those who were in
the streets, the Gentiles. Our Lord delivered this parable to show the
Jews that the Gentiles would be called into the kingdom of God. They
despised the Gentiles, and considered them cast out and worthless, as
they did those who were in the lanes of the city.

The maimed ... - See the notes at [Luk
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#013.md).

[Luke 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 14:22</span></span>

Yet there is room - He went out and invited all he found in the lanes,
and yet the table was not full. This he also reported to his master.
"There is room!" What a glorious declaration is this in regard to the
gospel! There yet is room. Millions have been saved, but there yet is
room. Millions have been invited, and have come, and have gone to
heaven, but heaven is not yet full. There is a banquet there which no
number can exhaust; there are fountains which no number can drink dry;
there are harps there which other hands may strike; and there are seats
there which others may occupy. Heaven is not full, and there yet is
room. The Sunday school teacher may say to his class, there yet is room;
the parent may say to his children, there yet is room; the minister of
the gospel may go and say to the wide world, there yet is room. The
mercy of God is not exhausted; the blood of the atonement has not lost
its efficacy; heaven is not full. What a sad message it "would" be if we
were compelled to go and say, "There is no more room - heaven is full -
not another one can be saved. No matter what their prayers, or tears, or
sighs, they cannot be saved. Every place is filled; every seat is
occupied." But, thanks be to God, this is not the message which we are
to bear; and if there yet is room, come, sinners, young and old, and
enter into heaven. Fill up that room, that heaven may be full of the
happy and the blessed. If any part of the universe is to be vacant, O
let it be the dark world of woe!

[Luke 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 14:23</span></span>

Go out into the highways - Since enough had not been found in the lanes
and streets, he commands the servant to go into the roads - the public
highways out of the city, as well as to the streets "in" it - and invite
them also.

Hedges - A hedge is the inclosure around a field or vineyard. It was
commonly made of thorns, which were planted thick, and which kept the
cattle out of the vineyard. "A common plant for this purpose is the
prickly pear, a species of cactus, which grows several feet high, and as
thick as a man's body, armed with sharp thorns, and thus forming an
almost impervious defense" (Professor Hackett, "Scripture
Illustrations," p. 174). Those in the hedges were poor laborers employed
in planting them or trimming them - people of the lowest class and of
great poverty. By his directing them to go first into the streets of the
city and then into the highways, we are not to understand our Saviour as
referring to different classes of people, but only as denoting the
"earnestness" with which God offers salvation to people, and his
willingness that the most despised should come and live. Some parts of
parables are thrown in for the sake of "keeping," and they should not be
pressed or forced to obtain any obscure or fanciful signification. The
great point in this parable was, that God would call in the Gentiles
after the Jews had rejected the gospel. This should be kept always in
view in interpreting all the parts of the parable.

Compel them - That is, urge them, press them earnestly, one and all. Do
not hear their excuses on account of their poverty and low rank of life,
but urge them so as to overcome their objections and lead them to the
feast. This expresses the "earnestness" of the man; his anxiety that his
table should be filled, and his purpose not to reject any on account of
their poverty, or ignorance, or want of apparel. So God is earnest in
regard to the most polluted and vile. He commands his servants, his
ministers, to "urge" them to come, to "press" on them the salvation of
the gospel, and to use all the means in their power to bring into heaven
poor and needy sinners.

[Luke 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 14:24</span></span>

For I say unto you - These may be considered as the words of Jesus,
making an application of the parable to the Pharisees before him.

None of those men - This cannot be understood as meaning that no "Jews"
would be saved, but that none of those who had "treated him, in that
manner" - none who had so decidedly rejected the offer of the gospel -
would be saved. We may here see how dangerous it is "once" to reject the
gospel; how dangerous to grieve away the Holy Spirit. How often God
forsakes forever the sinner who has been once awakened, and who grieves
the Holy Spirit. The invitation is full and free; but when it is
rejected, and people turn willfully away from it, God leaves them to
their chosen way, and they are drowned in destruction and perdition. How
important, then, is it to embrace the gospel "at once;" to accept the
gracious invitation, and enter without delay the path that conducts to
heaven!

[Luke 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 14:25</span></span>

See notes on [Mat 10:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#037.md).

[Luke 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 14:28</span></span>

Intending to build a tower - See [Mat
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#033.md). A tower was a place of defense
or observation, erected on high places or in vineyards, to guard against
enemies. It was made "high," so as to enable one to see an enemy when he
approached; and "strong," so that it could not be easily taken.

Counteth the cost - Makes a calculation how much it will cost to build
it.

[Luke 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 14:29</span></span>

Haply - Perhaps.

To mock him - To ridicule him. To laugh at him.

[Luke 14:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 14:31</span></span>

With ten thousand to meet ... - Whether he will be able, with the forces
which he "has," to meet his enemy. Christ here perhaps intends to denote
that the enemies which we have to encounter in following him are many
and strong, and that "our" strength is comparatively feeble. "To meet
him." To contend with him. To gain a victory over him.

[Luke 14:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 14:32</span></span>

Or else - If he is not able. If he is satisfied that he would be
defeated.

An ambassage - Persons to treat with an enemy and propose terms of
peace. These expressions are not to be improperly pressed in order to
obtain from them a spiritual signification. The general scope of the
parable is to be learned from the connection, and may be thus expressed:

1\. Every man who becomes a follower of Jesus should calmly and
deliberately look at all the consequences of such an act and be prepared
to meet them.

2\. Men in other things act with prudence and forethought. They do not
begin to build without a reasonable prospect of being able to finish.
They do not go to war when there is every prospect that they will be
defeated.

3\. Religion is a work of soberness, of thought, of calm and fixed
purpose, and no man can properly enter on it who does not resolve by the
grace of God to fulfil all its requirements and make it the business of
his life.

4\. We are to expect difficulties in religion. It will cost us the
mortification of our sins, and a life of self-denial, and a conflict
with our lusts, and the enmity and ridicule of the world. Perhaps it may
cost us our reputation, or possibly our lives and liberties, and all
that is dear to us; but we must cheerfully undertake all this, and be
prepared for it all.

5\. If we do not deliberately resolve to leave all things, to suffer all
things that may be laid on us, and to persevere to the end of our days
in the service of Christ, we cannot be his disciples. No man can be a
Christian who, when he makes a profession, is resolved after a while to
turn back to the world; nor can he be a true Christian if he "expects
that he will" turn back. If he comes not with a "full" purpose "always"
to be a Christian; if he means not to persevere, by the grace of God,
through all hazards, and trials, and temptations; if he is not willing
to bear his cross, and meet contempt, and poverty, and pain, and death,
without turning back, he "cannot" be a disciple of the Lord Jesus.

[Luke 14:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">luk 14:34</span></span>

See the [Mat 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013.md) note; [Mar
9:49-50](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#049.md) notes.

Salt is good - It is useful. It is good to preserve life and health, and
to keep from putrefaction.

His savour - Its saltness. It becomes tasteless or insipid.

Be seasoned - Be salted again.

Fit for the land - Rather, it is not fit "for land," that is, it will
not bear fruit of itself. You cannot sow or plant on it.

Nor for the dunghill - It is not good for manure. It will not enrich the
land,

Cast it out - They throw it away as useless.

He that hath ears ... - See [Mat
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#015.md). You are to understand that he
that has not grace in his heart; who merely makes a profession of
religion, and who sustains the same relation to true piety that this
insipid and useless mass does to good salt, is useless in the church,
and will be rejected. "Real" piety, true religion, is of vast value in
the world. It keeps it pure, and saves it from corruption, as salt does
meat; but a mere "profession" of religion is fit for nothing. It does no
good. It is a mere encumbrance, and all such professors are fit only to
be cast out and rejected. All such "must" be rejected by the Son of God,
and cast into a world of wretchedness and despair. Compare [Mat
7:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022.md); [Mat
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012.md); [Mat
23:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#030.md); [Mat
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#030.md); [Rev
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#016.md); [Job
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#013.md); [Job
36:13](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#013.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 15](luk015.md)

</div>
