<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk010)  [Next](luk012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#001)

[Luke 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 11:1</span></span>

As he was praying - Luke has taken notice of our Saviour's praying
often. Thus, at his baptism [Luk 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#021);
in the wilderness [Luk 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#016); before
the appointment of the apostles, he continued all night in prayer [Luk
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#012); he was alone praying [Luk
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#018); his transfiguration also took
place when he went up to pray [Luk
9:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#028).

Teach us to pray - Probably they had been struck with the excellency and
fervor of his prayers, and, recollecting that "John" had taught his
disciples to pray, they asked him also to teach "them." We learn,
therefore:

1\. That the gifts and graces of others should lead us to desire the
same.

2\. That the true method of praying can be learned only by our being
properly taught. Indeed, we cannot pray acceptably at all unless God
shall teach us how to pray.

3\. That it is proper for us to meditate beforehand what we are to ask
of God, and to arrange our thoughts, that we may not come thoughtlessly
into his presence.

[Luke 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 11:2</span></span>

See this passage explained in the notes at [Mat
6:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#009).

[Luk 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#004)

For we also forgive ... - This is somewhat different from the expression
in Matthew, though the sense is the same. The idea is, that unless we
forgive others, God will not forgive us; and unless we come to him
"really" forgiving all others, we cannot expect pardon. It does not mean
that by forgiving others we "deserve" forgiveness ourselves, or "merit
it," but that this is a disposition or state of mind without which God
cannot consistently pardon us.

Every one that is indebted to us - Every one that has "injured" us. This
does not refer to pecuniary transactions, but to offences similar to
those which "we" have committed against God, and for which we ask
forgiveness. Besides the variations in the "expressions" in this prayer,
Luke has omitted the doxology, or close, altogether; and this shows that
Jesus did nor intend that we should always use just this "form," but
that it was a general direction how to pray; or, rather, that we were to
pray for these "things," though not always using the same words.

[Luke 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 11:5</span></span>

And he said unto them ... - Jesus proceeds to show that, in order to
obtain the blessing, it was necessary to "persevere" in asking for it.
For this purpose he introduces the case of a friend's asking bread of
another for one who had come to him unexpectedly. His design is solely
to show the necessity of being "importunate" or persevering in prayer to
God.

At midnight - A time when it would be most inconvenient for his friend
to help him; an hour when he would naturally be in bed and his house
shut.

Three loaves - There is nothing particularly denoted by the number
"three" in this place. Jesus often threw in such particulars merely to
fill up the story, or to preserve the consistency of it.

My children are with me in bed - This does not necessarily mean that
they were in the "same bed" with him, but that they were "all" in bed,
the house was still, the door was shut, and it was troublesome for him
to rise at that time of night to accommodate him. It should be observed,
however, that the customs of Orientals differ in this respect from our
own. Among them it is not uncommon indeed it is the common practice for
a whole family - parents, children, and servants - to sleep in the same
room. See "The Land and the Book," vol. i. p. 180. This is "not" to be
applied to God, as if it were troublesome to him to be sought unto, or
as if "he" would ever reply to a sinner in that manner. All that is to
be applied to God in this parable is simply that it is proper to
"persevere" in prayer. As a "man" often gives because the request is
"repeated," and as one is not discouraged because the favor that he asks
of his neighbor is "delayed," so God often answers us after long and
importunate requests.

[Luke 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 11:8</span></span>

I tell you - The Latin Vulgate here adds, "if he shall continue
knocking." Though this is not in the Greek, yet it is indispensable that
it should be understood in order to the sense. Knocking "once" would not
denote "importunity," but it was because he "continued" knocking.

His importunity - His troublesome perseverance; his continuing to
disturb the man, and refusing to take any denial. The word "importunity"
denotes perseverance in an object, without any regard to time, place, or
circumstances - an improper perseverance. By this the man was
influenced. Rather than be disturbed he would rise and give what was
asked. This is to be applied to God in no other sense than that he often
hears prayers and grants blessings even "long after" they appear to be
unanswered or withheld. He does not promise to give blessings "at once."
He promises only that he will do it, or "will answer" prayer. But he
often causes his people long to wait. He tries their faith. He leaves
them to persevere for months or years, until they "feel" entirely their
dependence on him, until they see that they can obtain the blessing in
no other way, and until they are "prepared" to receive it. Often they
are not prepared to receive it when they ask it at first. They may be
proud, or have no just sense of their dependence, or they would not
value the blessing, or it may "at that time" not be best for them to
obtain it. But let no one despair. If the thing is for "our" good, and
if it is proper that it "should" be granted, God will give it. Let us
first ask aright; let us see that our minds are in a proper state; let
us feel our need of the blessing; let us inquire whether God has
"promised such" a blessing, and "then" let us persevere until God gives
it. Again: people, when they ask anything of God, often give over
seeking. They go "once," and if it is not granted they are discouraged.
It is not so when we ask anything of people. "Then" we persevere; we
take no denial; we go again, and "press" the matter until we obtain it.
So we should of God. We should go again and again, until the prayer is
heard, and God grants what we ask of him.

[Luke 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 11:9</span></span>

See this explained in the notes at [Mat
7:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007).

[Luk 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#012)

"A scorpion" See the notes at [Luk
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#019). Dr. Thomson (The Land and the
Book, vol. i. p. 379) says: "There is no imaginable likeness between an
egg and the ordinary black scorpion of this country, neither in color
nor size, nor, when the tail is extended, in shape; but old writers
speak of a "white" scorpion, and such a one, with the tail folded up, as
in specimens of fossil trilobites, would not look unlike a small egg.
Perhaps the contrast, however, refers only to the different properties
of the egg and the scorpion, which is sufficiently emphatic."

Pliny ("N. H.," xi. 25) says that in Judea the scorpions are about the
size of an egg, and not unlike one in shape.

[Luke 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 11:14</span></span>

See this passage explained in the notes at [Mat
12:22-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#022).

[Luke 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 11:24</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 12:43-45](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#043).

[Luke 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 11:27</span></span>

A certain woman - One of the crowd.

Blessed is the womb ... - She thought that the "mother" of such a person
must be especially happy in having such a son.

Yea, rather blessed ... - Jesus admits that she was happy - that it was
an honor to be his mother, but he says that the chief happiness, the
highest honor, was to obey the word of God. Compared with this, all
earthly distinctions and honors are as nothing. Man's greatest dignity
is in keeping the holy commandments of God, and in being prepared for
heaven. See the notes at [Luk 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020).

[Luke 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 11:29</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 12:38-42](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#038).

[Luke 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">luk 11:33</span></span>

These verses are found in Matthew, but in a different connection. See
the notes at [Mat 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015); [Mat
6:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#022).

[Luke 11:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 11:37</span></span>

And as he spake - While he was addressing the people, and particularly
while he was reproving that generation and declaring its crimes.

A certain Pharisee - The Pharisees had been particularly referred to in
the discourse of the Saviour recorded in the previous verses. This one,
perhaps, having felt particularly the force of the remarks of Jesus, and
being desirous of being alone with him, invited him to go home with him.
There is little doubt that this was for the purpose of drawing him away
from the people; that he did it with a malignant intention, perhaps with
a design to confute Jesus in private, or to reprove him for thus
condemning the whole nation as he did. He might have seen that those who
attacked Jesus "publicly" were commonly unsuccessful, and he desired.
probably, to encounter him more privately.

Besought him - Asked him.

To dine with him - The Jews, as well as the Greeks and Romans, had but
two principal meals. The first was a slight repast, and was taken about
ten or eleven o'clock of our time, and consisted chiefly of fruit, milk,
cheese, etc. The second meal was partaken of about three o'clock P. M.,
and was their principal meal. The "first" is the one here intended.

He went in - Though he knew the evil design of the Pharisee, yet he did
not decline the invitation. He knew that it might afford him an
opportunity to do good. These two things are to be observed in regard to
our Saviour's conduct in such matters:

1\. That he did not decline an invitation to dine with a man simply
because he was a Pharisee, or because he was a wicked man. Hence, he was
charged with being gluttonous, and a friend of publicans and sinners,
[Mat 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#019).

2\. He seized upon all occasions to do good. He never shrank from
declaring the truth, and making such occasions the means of spreading
the gospel. If Christians and Christian ministers would follow the
example of the Saviour always, they would avoid all scandal, and might
do even in such places a vast amount of good.

Sat down - Reclined at the table. See the notes at [Mat
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#006).

[Luke 11:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 11:38</span></span>

Saw it - Saw that he sat immediately down without washing.

Marvelled - Wondered. Was amazed. It was so unusual, and in his view so
improper.

Had not first washed - He wondered particularly, as he had been among a
mixed multitude, and they esteemed the "touch" of such persons
polluting. They never ate, therefore, without such washing. The origin
of the custom of washing with so much formality "before" they partook of
their meals was that they did not use, as we do, knives and forks, but
used their hands only. Hence, as their hands would be often in a dish on
the table, it was esteemed proper that they should be washed clean
before eating. Nor was their impropriety in the thing itself, but the
Pharisees made it a matter of ceremony; they placed no small part of
their religion in such ceremonies; and it was right, therefore, that our
Lord should take occasion to reprove them for it. Compare [Mar
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#004).

[Luke 11:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 11:39</span></span>

See [Mat 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#025). "Ravening." Robbery,
plunder. Here the sense is that the cup and platter were filled with
what had been unjustly taken from others. That is, they lived by their
wickedness; their food was procured by dishonesty and extortion. This
was a most terrible charge; and as it was applied, among others, to the
man who had invited the Saviour to dine with him, it shows that nothing
would prevent his dealing faithfully with the souls of people. Even in
the Pharisee's own house, and when expressly invited to partake of his
hospitality, he loved his soul so much that he faithfully warned him of
his crimes.

[Luke 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">luk 11:40</span></span>

Ye fools - How unwise and wicked is your conduct! The word denotes not
only "want of wisdom," but also wickedness. Compare [Psa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001); [Pro
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#019); [Pro
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#009). Your conduct is not merely
"foolish," but it is a cloak for sin - designed to countenance
wickedness.

Did not he ... - Did not God, who made the "body," make also the "soul?"
You Pharisees take great pains to cleanse the "body," under a pretence
of pleasing "God." Did "he"" not also make the "mind?" and is it not of
as much importance that "that" should be pure, as that the body should?

[Luke 11:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 11:41</span></span>

Alms - Charity. Benefactions to the poor.

Such things as ye have - Your property; though it has been gained
unjustly: though you have lived by rapine, and have amassed wealth in an
improper manner, yet, since "you have it," it is your duty to make the
best of it and do good. By giving to the poor, you may show your
repentance for your crimes in amassing money in this manner. You may
show that you disapprove of your former course of life, and are disposed
henceforward to live honestly. If this be the meaning of this passage,
then it shows what is the duty of those who have by unjust gains become
wealthy, and who are "then" converted to God. It may not be possible for
them in every case to make exact restitution to those whom they have
injured; thousands of instances of wrong they may have forgotten; many
persons whom they have injured may have died; but still they may show,
by giving to others, that they do not think their gains acquired
honestly, and that they truly repent. They may devote their property to
God; distribute it to the poor; or give it to send the gospel to the
heathen world. Thus may they show that they disapprove of their former
conduct; and thus may be seen one great principle of God's government -
"that good finally comes out of evil."

And behold ... - Doing this will show that you are a true penitent, and
the remainder of your property you will enjoy with a feeling that you
have done your duty, and no longer be smitten with the consciousness of
hoarding unjust gains. The object of the Saviour here seems to have been
to bring the Pharisee to repentance. Repentance consists in sorrow for
sin, and in forsaking it. This he endeavored to produce by showing him:

1\. The "evil" and hypocrisy of his conduct; and,

2\. By "exhorting" him to ""forsake" his sins, and to "show" this by
doing good.

Thus doing, he would evince that the "mind" was clean as well the
"body;" the "inside" as well as the "outside."

[Luke 11:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">luk 11:42</span></span>

See [Mat 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023).

Rue - This is a small garden plant, and is used as a medicine. It has a
rosy flower, a bitter, penetrating taste, and a strong smell.

[Luke 11:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">luk 11:43</span></span>

See [Mat 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#006), [Mat
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#027).

[Luke 11:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">luk 11:45</span></span>

Lawyers - Men learned in the law; but it is not known in what way the
lawyers differed from the "scribes," or whether they were Pharisees or
Sadducees.

Thus saying, thou ... - He felt that the remarks of Jesus about loving
the chief seats, etc., applied to them as well as to the Pharisees. His
conscience told him that if "they" were to blame, "he" was also, and he
therefore applied the discourse to himself.

Reproachest - Accusest. Dost calumniate or blame us, for we do the same
things. Sinners often consider "faithfulness" as "reproach" - they know
not how to separate them. Jesus did "not" reproach or abuse them. He
dealt faithfully with them; reproved them; told them the unvarnished
truth. Such faithfulness is rare; but when it "is" used, we must expect
that people will flinch, perhaps be enraged. Though their consciences
tell them they are "guilty," still they will consider it as abuse.

[Luke 11:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">luk 11:46</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#004).

[Luke 11:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">luk 11:47</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 23:29-36](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#029).

[Luk 11:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#049)

The wisdom of God - By the "wisdom of God," here, is undoubtedly meant
the Saviour himself. What he immediately says is not written in the Old
Testament. Jesus is called "the word of God" [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001), because he is the medium by which
God "speaks" or makes his will known. He is called "the wisdom of God,"
because by him God makes his wisdom known in creation ([Col
1:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013) and in redemption [Co1
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030). Many have also thought that the
Messiah was referred to in the [Pro
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#001) of Proverbs, under the name of
Wisdom.

I will send ... - See [Luk 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#003); [Mat
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016).

Shall slay ... - Compare [Joh 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#002);
[Act 7:52](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#052), [Act
7:59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#059); [Jam
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#010); [Act
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#002); [Act
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#019); [Co2
11:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#024); [Ch2
36:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#015).

[Luke 11:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">luk 11:52</span></span>

Woe unto you, lawyers! - See the notes at [Mat
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#013).

The key of knowledge - A key is made to open a lock or door. By their
false interpretation of the Old Testament they had taken away the true
key or method of understanding it. They had hindered the people from
understanding it aright. "You endeavor to prevent the people also from
understanding the Scriptures respecting the Messiah, and those who were
coming to "me" ye hindered." If there is any sin of special magnitude,
it is that of keeping the people in ignorance; and few people are so
guilty as they who by false instructions prevent them from coming to a
knowledge of the truth, and embracing it as it is in Jesus.

[Luke 11:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">luk 11:53</span></span>

To urge him vehemently - To press upon him "violently." They were
enraged against him. They therefore pressed upon him; asked him many
questions; sought to entrap him, that they might accuse him.

Provoke him ... - This means that they put many questions to him about
various matters, without giving him proper time to answer. They proposed
questions as fast as possible, and about as many things as possible,
that they might get him, in the hurry, to say something that would be
wrong, that they might thus accuse him. This was a remarkable instance
of their cunning, malignity, and unfairness.

[Luke 11:54](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">luk 11:54</span></span>

Laying wait for him - Or, rather, laying "snares" for him It means that
they endeavored to entangle him in his talk; that they did as men do who
catch birds - who lay snares, and deceive them, and take them unawares.

That they might accuse him - Before the Sanhedrin, or great council of
the nation, and thus secure his being put to death.

From this we may learn:

1\. That faithful reproofs must be expected to excite opposition and
hatred. Though the "conscience" may be roused, and may testify against
the man that is reproved, yet that does not prevent his hating the
reproof and the reprover.

2\. We see here the manner in which wicked people endeavor to escape the
reproofs of conscience. Instead of repenting, they seek vengeance, and
resolve to put the reprover to shame or to death.

3\. We see the exceeding malignity which people have against the Lord
Jesus. Well was it said that he was set for the fall of many in Israel,
that thereby the thoughts of many hearts might be revealed! [Luk
2:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034). Men, now, are not by nature
less opposed to Jesus than they were then.

4\. We see the wisdom, purity, and firmness of the Saviour. To their
souls he had been faithful. He had boldly reproved them for their sins.
They sought his life. Multitudes of the artful and learned gathered
around him, to endeavor to draw out something of which they might accuse
him, yet in vain. Not a word fell from his lips of which they could
accuse him. Everything that he said was calm, mild, peaceful, wise, and
lovely. Even his cunning and bitter adversaries were always confounded,
and retired in shame and confusion. Here, surely, must have been
something more than man. None but "God manifest in the flesh" could have
known all their designs, seen all their wickedness and their wiles, and
escaped the cunning stratagems that were laid to confound and entangle
him in his conversation.

5\. The same infinitely wise Saviour can still meet and confound all his
own enemies and those of his people, and deliver all his followers, as
he did himself, from all the snares laid by a wicked world to lead them
to sin and death.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 12](luk012)

</div>
