<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk020)  [Next](luk022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#001)

[Luke 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 21:1</span></span>

See this explained in the notes at [Mar
12:41-44](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#041).

[Luk 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#004)

Penury - Poverty. See this explained in the notes at [Mar
12:41-44](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#041).

[Luke 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 21:5</span></span>

Goodly stones - Beautiful stones. Either referring to the large, square,
and well-finished stones of which the eastern wall was built, or to the
precious stones which might have been used in decorating the temple
itself. See the notes at [Mar 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#001).

Gifts - This word properly denotes anything devoted or dedicated to God.
Anciently warriors dedicated to their gods the spoils of war - the
shields, and helmets, and armor, and garments of those slain in battle.
These were suspended in the temples. It would seem that something of
this kind had occurred in the temple of Jerusalem, and that the people,
to express their gratitude to God, had suspended on the pillars and
perches of the temple gifts and offerings. Josephus mentions
particularly a golden "vine" with which Herod the Great had adorned the
columns of the temple ("Antiq." xiii. 8). See also 2 Macc. 5:16; 9:16.

[Luke 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 21:6</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#002).

[Luke 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 21:7</span></span>

The account of the destruction of Jerusalem contained in this chapter
has been fully considered in the notes at Matt. 24. All that will be
necessary here will be an explanation of a few words that did not occur
in that chapter.

[Luk 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#009)

Commotions - Insurrections. Subjects rising against their rulers.

[Luk 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#011)

Fearful sights - See [Mat 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#007).

[Luk 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#012), [Luk
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#013)

Synagogues, and into prisons - See the notes at [Mar
13:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#009).

[Luk 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#014)

Settle it, therefore, in your hearts - Fix it firmly in your minds - so
firmly as to become a settled principle - that you are always to depend
on God for aid in all your trials. See [Mar
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#011).

[Luk 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#015)

A mouth - Eloquence, ability to speak as the case may demand. Compare
[Exo 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#011).

Gainsay - Speak against. They will not be able to "reply" to it, or to
"resist" the force of what you shall say.

[Luk 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#018)

A hair of your head perish - This is a proverbial expression, denoting
that they should not suffer any essential injury. This was strikingly
fulfilled in the fact that in the calamities of Jerusalem there is
reason to believe that no Christian suffered. Before those calamities
came on the city they had fled to "Pella," a city on the east of the
Jordan. See the notes at [Mat 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#018).

[Luk 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#019)

In your patience - Rather by your perseverance. The word "patience" here
means constancy or perseverance in sustaining afflictions.

Possess ye your souls - Some read here the "future" instead of the
"present" of the verb rendered "possess." The word "possess" means here
to "preserve" or keep, and the word "souls" means "lives." This passage
may be thus translated: By persevering in bearing these trials you
"will" save your lives, or you will be safe; or, by persevering
"preserve" your lives; that is, do not yield to these calamities, but
bear up under them, for he that endureth to the end, the same shall be
saved. Compare [Mat 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#013).

[Luk 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#022)

All things which are written may be fulfilled - Judgment had been
threatened by almost all the prophets against that wicked city. They had
spoken of its crimes and threatened its ruin. Once God had destroyed
Jerusalem and carried the people to Babylon; but their crimes had been
repeated when they returned, and God had again threatened their ruin.
Particularly was this very destruction foretold by Daniel, [Dan
9:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026); "And after threescore and two
weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself; and the people of
the prince that shall come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary; and
the end thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the end of the war
desolations are determined." See the notes at that passage.

[Luk 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#024)

Shall fall ... - No less than one million one hundred thousand perished
in the siege of Jerusalem.

Shall be led away captive - More than 90,000 were led into captivity.
See the notes at Matt. 24.

Shall be trodden down by the Gentiles - Shall be in possession of the
Gentiles, or be subject to them. The expression also implies that it
would be an "oppressive" subjection, as when a captive in war is trodden
down under the feet of the conqueror. Anciently conquerors "trod on" the
necks of those who were subdued by them, [Jos
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#024); [Sa2
22:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#041); [Eze
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#029). The bondage of Jerusalem has
been long and very oppressive. It was for a long time under the dominion
of the Romans, then of the Saracens, and is now of the Turks, and is
aptly represented by a captive stretched on the ground whose neck is
"trodden" by the foot of the conqueror.

Until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled - This passage has been
understood very differently by different expositors. Some refer it to
the time which the Romans who conquered it had dominion over it, as
signifying that "they" should keep possession of it until a part of the
pagans should be converged, when it should be rebuilt. Thus it was
rebuilt by the Emperor Adrian. Others suppose that it refers to the end
of the world, when all the Gentiles shall be converted, and they shall
"cease" to be Gentiles by becoming Christians, meaning that it should
"always" be desolate. Others, that Christ meant to say that in the times
of the millennium, when the gospel should spread universally, he would
reign personally on the earth, and that the "Jews" would return and
rebuild Jerusalem and the temple. This is the opinion of the Jews and of
many Christians. The meaning of the passage clearly is,

1\. That Jerusalem would be completely destroyed.

2\. That this would be done by Gentiles - that is, by the Roman armies.

3\. That this desolation would continue as long as God should judge it
proper in a fit manner to express his abhorrence of the crimes of the
nation - that is, until the times allotted to "them" by God for this
desolation should be accomplished, without specifying how long that
would be, or what would occur to the city after that.

It "may" be rebuilt, and inhabited by converted Jews. Such a thing is
"possible," and the Jews naturally seek that as their home; but whether
this be so or not, the time when the "Gentiles," as such, shall have
dominion over the city is limited. Like all other cities on the earth,
it will yet be brought under the influence of the gospel, and will be
inhabited by the true friends of God. Pagan, infidel, anti-Christian
dominion shall cease there, and it will be again a place where God will
be worshipped in sincerity - a place "even then" of special interest
from the recollection of the events which have occurred there. "How
long" it is to be before this occurs is known only to Him "who hath put
the times and seasons in his own power," [Act
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007).

[Luk 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#025)

See the notes at [Mat 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029).

Upon the earth distress of nations - Some have proposed to render the
word "earth" by "land," confining it to Judea. It often has this
meaning, and there seems some propriety in so using it here. The word
translated "distress" denotes anxiety of mind - such an anxiety as
people have when they do not know what to do to free themselves from
calamities; and it means here that the calamities would be so great and
overwhelming that they would not know what to do to escape. There would
be a want of counsel, and deep anxiety at the impending evils.

With perplexity - Rather "on account" of their perplexity, or the
desperate state of their affairs. The Syriac has it, "perplexity or
wringing of hands," which is a sign of deep distress and horror.

The sea and the waves roaring - This is not to be understood literally,
but as an image of great distress. Probably it is designed to denote
that these calamities would come upon them like a deluge. As when in a
storm the ocean roars, and wave rolls on wave and dashes against the
shore, and each succeeding surge is more violent than the one that
preceded it, so would the calamities come upon Judea. They would roll
over the whole land, and each wave of trouble would be more violent than
the one that preceded it, until the whole country would be desolate. The
same image is also used in [Isa 8:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007),
and [Rev 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#015).

[Luk 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#026)

Men's hearts failing them - This is an expression denoting the highest
terror. The word rendered "failing" commonly denotes to "die," and here
it means that the terror would be so great that people would faint and
be ready to die in view of the approaching calamities. And if this was
true in respect to the judgments about to come upon Judea, how much more
so will it be in the day of judgment, when the wicked will be arraigned
before the Son of God, and when they shall have before them the prospect
of the awful sufferings of hell - the pains and woes which shall
continue forever! It will be no wonder, then, if they call on the rocks
and mountains to hide them from the face of God, and if their hearts
sink within them at the prospect of eternal suffering.

[Luk 21:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#028)

Your redemption draweth nigh - See the notes at [Mat
24:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#033). This is expressed in [Luk
21:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#031) thus: "the kingdom of God is
nigh at hand" - that is, from that time God will signally build up his
kingdom. It shall be fully established when the Jewish policy shall come
to an end; when the temple shall be destroyed, and the Jews scattered
abroad. Then the power of the Jews shall be at an end; they shall no
longer be able to persecute you, and you shall be completely delivered
from all these trials and calamities in Judea.

[Luk 21:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#034)

Lest at any time your hearts be overcharged ... - The meaning of this
verse is, "Be continually expecting these things. Do not forget them,
and do not be "secure" and satisfied with this life and the good things
which it furnishes. Do not suffer yourselves to be drawn into the
fashions of the world; to be conformed to its customs; to partake of its
feasts and revelry; and so these calamities shall come upon you when you
least expect them." And from this we may learn - what alas! we may from
the "lives" of many professing Christians - that there is need of
cautioning the disciples of Jesus now that they do not indulge in the
festivities of this life, and "forget" that they are to die and come to
judgment. How many, alas! who bear the Christian name, have forgotten
this caution of the Saviour, and live as if their lives were secure; as
if they feared not death; as if there were no heaven and no judgment!
Christians should feel that they are soon to die, and that their portion
is not in this life; and, feeling this, they should be "looking for and
hasting unto the coming of the day of God."

Overcharged - Literally, "be made heavy," as is the case with those who
have eaten and drunken too much.

Surfeiting - Excessive eating and drinking, so as to oppress the body;
indulgence in the pleasures of the table. This word does not include
"intoxication," but merely indulgence in food and drink, though the food
and drink should be in themselves lawful.

Drunkenness - Intoxication, intemperance in drinking. The ancients were
not acquainted with the poison that we chiefly use on which to become
drunk. They had no distilled spirits. They became intoxicated on wine,
and strong drink made of a mixture of dates, honey, etc. All nations
have contrived some way to become intoxicated - to bring in folly, and
disease, and poverty, and death, by drunkenness; and in nothing is the
depravity of men more manifest than in thus endeavoring to hasten the
ravages of crime and death.

[Luk 21:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#035)

As a snare - In Matthew and Mark Jesus compares the suddenness with
which these calamities would come to the deluge coming in the days of
Noah. Here he likens it to a snare. Birds are caught by a snare or net.
It is sprung on them quickly, and when they are not expecting it. So,
says he, shall these troubles come upon Judea. The figure is often used
to denote the suddenness of calamities, [Psa
69:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022); [Rom
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#009); [Psa
124:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#007); [Isa
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#017).

[Luk 21:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#036)

To stand before the Son of man - These approaching calamities are
represented as the "coming of the Son of man" to judge Jerusalem for its
crimes. Its inhabitants were so wicked that they were not worthy to
stand before him and would be condemned, and the city would be
overthrown. To "stand before him" here denotes approbation, acquittal,
favor, and is equivalent to saying that "they" would be free from these
calamities, while they should come upon others. See [Rom
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#004); [Psa
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005); [Psa
130:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#003); [Rev
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#017). Perhaps, also, there is a
reference here to the day of judgment. See the notes at Matt. 24.

[Luke 21:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 21:37</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#017).

Came early in the morning - He returned early from the Mount of Olives,
and taught in the temple. Our Saviour did not waste his mornings in
idleness or sleep. He rose early and repaired to the temple. The people,
also, flocked to the sanctuary to hear him. This example is at once an
encouragement to early rising and to the early worship of God. It is a
reproof of those who spend the part of the day best fitted for devotion
in unnecessary sleep; and it shows the propriety, where it can be done,
of assembling early in the morning for prayer and the worship of God.
Early prayer-meetings have the countenance of the Saviour, and will be
found to be eminently conducive to the promotion of religion. The whole
example of Jesus goes to show the importance of beginning the day with
God, and of lifting up the heart to him for direction, for the supply of
our wants, and for preservation from temptation, before the mind is
engrossed by the cares, and distracted by the perplexities, and led away
by the temptations of this life. Commencing the day with God is like
arresting evil at the fountain; prayer at any other time, without this,
is an attempt to arrest it when it has swollen to a stream and rolls on
like a torrent. Let the day be begun with God, and the work of piety is
easy. Let the world have the ascendency in the morning, and it will be
likely to have it also at noonday and at evening.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 22](luk022)

</div>
