<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar003)  [Next](mar005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#001)

[Mark 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 4:1</span></span>

See the parable of the sower explained in the notes at [Mat
13:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#001).

See the parable of the sower explained in the notes at [Mat
13:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#001).

[Mark 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mar 4:10</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 13:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#010). On
[Mar 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#012), see the notes at [Joh
12:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#039).

When he was alone - That is, separate from the multitude. When he
withdrew from the multitude a few followed him for the purpose of more
instruction.

[Mar 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#013)

Know ye not this parable? - This which is so plain and obvious.

How then will ye know all parables? - Those which are more difficult and
obscure. As they were themselves to be "teachers," it was important that
they should be acquainted with the whole system of religion - of much
more importance for them at that time than for the mass of the people.

[Mark 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mar 4:14</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 13:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#018).

[Mark 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mar 4:21</span></span>

Is a candle brought ... - A candle is not lit up to be put immediately
under a measure or a bed, where it can give no light. Its design is to
give light. So my preaching by parables is not designed to obscure the
truth, but to throw light on it. You should understand those parables,
and, understanding them, should impart the truth to others also, as a
candle throws its beams upon a dark world.

Bushel - The word here used in the original means a measure for grain
containing about 12 quarts.

Bed - A couch, either to sleep on at night or to recline on at their
meals. Probably the latter is here meant, and is equivalent to our
saying a candle is not brought to be put "under" the table, but "on" it.
See the notes at [Mat 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#006).

[Mark 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mar 4:22</span></span>

There is nothing hid ... - See the notes at [Mat
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#026).

[Mark 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mar 4:24</span></span>

Take heed what ye hear - Or, consider well what you hear. Make a good
improvement of it.

With what measure ye mete ... - You shall be treated according to the
use you make of your opportunities of learning. If you consider it well,
and make a good improvement of what you hear, you shall be well
rewarded. If not, your reward shall be small. This is a proverbial
expression. See it explained in the notes at [Mat
7:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001).

Mete - Measure. With what measure ye measure.

Unto you that hear - To you who are "attentive," and who improve what
you hear.

[Mark 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mar 4:25</span></span>

For he that hath ... - See the notes at [Mat
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#012). The meaning here seems to be,
he that diligently attends to my words shall increase more and more in
the knowledge of the truth; but he that neglects them and is inattentive
shall become more ignorant; the few things which he had learned he will
forget, and his trifling knowledge will be diminished.

Hath not - Does not improve what he possessed, or does not make proper
use of his means of learning.

That which he hath - That which he had already learned. By this we are
taught the indispensable necessity of giving attention to the means of
instruction. The attention must be "continued." It is not sufficient
that we have learned some things, or appear to have learned much. All
will be in vain unless we go forward, and improve every opportunity of
learning the will of God and the way of salvation. So what children are
taught will be of little use unless they follow it up and endeavor to
improve themselves.

[Mark 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mar 4:26</span></span>

So is the kingdom of God - The gospel, or religion in the soul, may be
compared to this. See the notes at [Mat
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002). This parable is recorded only by
Mark.

[Mark 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mar 4:27</span></span>

And should sleep, and rise night and day - Should sleep in the night and
rise by day, for so the expression is to be understood. That is, should
live in his usual way, without exerting any influence over the growing
grain. By this we are not to infer that men are to use no diligence in
the obtaining and in the growth of piety; but the illustration shows
only that as we cannot tell how grain grows, so we cannot tell the mode
in which piety increases in the heart.

He knoweth not how - This is still true. After all the researches of
philosophers, no one has been able to tell the way in which grain grows.
They can observe one fact after another; they can see the changes; they
can see the necessity of rains and suns, of care and shelter, but beyond
this they cannot go. So in religion. We can mark the change; we can see
the need of prayer, and self-examination, and searching the Scriptures,
and the ordinances of religion, but we cannot tell in what way the
religious principle is developed and strengthened. As God unseen, yet by
the use of proper means, makes the grass to flourish, so God unseen, but
by proper means, nourishes the soul, and the plants of piety spring up,
and bloom, and bear fruit. Compare the notes at [Joh
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008).

[Mark 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mar 4:28</span></span>

For the earth bringeth forth fruit of herself - That is, it is done
without the power of man. It is done while man is engaged in other
things. The scope of this passage does not require us to suppose that
our Saviour meant to say that the earth had any productive power of
itself, but only that it produced its fruits not by the "power of man."
God gives it its power. It has no power of its own. So religion in the
heart is not by the power of man. It grows he cannot tell how, and of
course he cannot without divine aid, control it. It is by the power of
God. At the same time, as without industry man would have no harvest, so
without active effort he would have no religion. Both are connected with
his effort; both are to be measured commonly by his effort [Phi
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012); both grow he cannot tell how;
both increase when the proper means are used, and both depend on God for
increase.

First the blade - The green, tender shoot, that first starts out of the
earth before the stalk is formed.

Then the ear - The original means the stalk or spire of wheat or barley,
as well as the ear.

The full corn - The ripe wheat. The grain swollen to its proper size. By
this is denoted, undoubtedly, that grace or religion in the heart is of
gradual growth. It is at first tender, feeble, perhaps almost
imperceptible, like the first shootings of the grain in the earth.
Perhaps also, like grain, it often lies long in the earth before there
are signs of life. Like the tender grain, also, it needs care, kindness,
and culture. A frost, a cold storm, or a burning sun alike injure it. So
tender piety in the heart needs care, kindness, culture. It needs
shelter from the frosts and storms of a cold, unfeeling world. It needs
the genial dews and mild suns of heaven; in other words, it needs
instruction, prayer, and friendly counsel from parents, teachers,
ministers, and experienced Christians, that it may grow, and bring forth
the full fruits of holiness. Like the grain, also, in due time it will
grow strong; it will produce its appropriate fruit - a full and rich
harvest - to the praise of God.

[Mark 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mar 4:29</span></span>

Immediately he putteth in the sickle - This is the way with the farmer.
As soon as the grain is ripe it is cut down. So it is often with the
Christian. As soon as he is prepared for heaven he is taken there. But
we are not to press this part of the parable, as if it meant that all
are removed as soon as they are fit for heaven. Every parable contains
circumstances thrown in to fill up the story, which cannot be literally
interpreted. In this, the circumstance of sleeping and rising cannot be
applied to Christ; and in like manner, the harvest, I suppose, is not to
be literally interpreted. Perhaps the whole parable may be differently
interpreted. The seed sown may mean the gospel which he was preaching.
In Judea its beginnings were small; yet he would leave it, commit it to
his disciples, and return to his Father. The gospel, in the meantime,
left by him, would take root, spring up, and produce an abundant
harvest. In due time he would return, send forth the angels, and gather
in the harvest, and save his people forever. Compare the notes at [Mat
13:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031).

[Mark 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mar 4:30</span></span>

Whereunto shall we liken ... - This shows the great solicitude which
Jesus had to adapt his instructions to the capacity of his disciples. He
sought out the most plain and striking illustrations - an example which
should be followed by all the ministers of the gospel. At the same time
that the instructions of the pulpit should be dignified as our Saviour's
always were they should be adapted to the capacity of the audience and
easily understood. To do this the following things are necessary in a
minister:

1."Humility." A freedom from a desire to shine, and to astonish the
world by the splendor of his talents, and by his learning and eloquence.

2\. "Good sense." A satisfaction in being understood.

3\. Acquaintance with the habits of thought and manner of speaking among
the people. To do this, frequent contact with them is necessary.

4\. "A good sound education." It is the people of ignorance, with some
smattering of learning, and with a desire to confound and astonish
people by the use of unintelligible words. and by the introduction of
matter that is wholly unconnected with the subject, that most often
shoot over the heads of the people. Preachers of humility, good sense,
and education are content with being understood, and free from the
affectation of saying things to amaze and confound their auditors.

The kingdom of God - See the notes at [Mat
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002).

[Mark 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mar 4:31</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 13:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031).

[Mark 4:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mar 4:33</span></span>

Spake he the word - The word of God. The doctrines of his gospel.

As they were able to hear it - As they could comprehend it. They were
like children; and he was obliged to lead them along cautiously and by
degrees to a full understanding of the plan of salvation.

[Mark 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mar 4:34</span></span>

Without a parable spake he not unto them - That is, the things
pertaining to his kingdom. On other subjects he spake without parables.
On these, such was their prejudice, so many notions had they contrary to
the nature of his kingdom, and so liable would plain instructions have
been to give offence, that he employed this method to "insinuate" truth
gradually into their minds, and to prepare them fully to understand the
nature of his kingdom.

They were alone - His disciples.

He expounded - Explained. Showed them more at length the spiritual
meaning of the parables.

[Mark 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mar 4:35</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 8:18-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#018).

[Mar 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#036)

Even as he was in the ship - They took him without making any
preparation for the voyage; without providing any food or raiment. He
was sitting in a ship, or boat, instructing the people. In the same
boat, probably ill fitted to encounter a storm on the lake, they sailed.
This would render their danger more imminent and the miracle more
striking.

There were with him other little ships - Belonging probably to the
people, who, seeing him sail, resolved to follow him.

[Mar 4:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#039)

Peace, be still - There is something exceedingly authoritative and
majestic in this command of our Lord. Standing amid the howling tempest,
on the heaving sea, and in the darkness of night, by his own power he
stills the waves and bids the storm subside. None but the God of the
storms and the billows could awe by a word the troubled elements, and
send a universal peace and stillness among the winds and waves. He must,
therefore, be divine. The following remarks by Dr. Thomson, long a
resident in Syria, and familiar with the scenes which occur there, will
farther illustrate this passage, and the parallel account in [Mat
8:18-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#018), and also the passage in [Mat
14:23-32](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#023). The extract which follows is
taken from "The land and the Book," vol. ii. p. 32, 33: "To understand
the causes of these sudden and violent tempests, we must remember that
the lake lies low - 600 feet lower than the ocean; that the vast and
naked plateaus of the Jaulan rise to a great height, spreading backward
to the wilds of the Hauran and upward to snowy Hermon; that the
water-courses have cut out profound ravines and wild gorges, converging
to the head of this lake, and that these act like gigantic "funnels" to
draw down the cold winds from the mountains.

On the occasion referred to we subsequently pitched our tents at the
shore, and remained for three days and nights exposed to this tremendous
wind. We had to double-pin all the tent-ropes, and frequently were
obliged to hang with our whole weight upon them to keep the quivering
tabernacle from being carried up bodily into the air. No wonder the
disciples toiled and rowed hard all that night; and how natural their
amazement and terror at the sight of Jesus walking on the waves! The
faith of Peter in desiring and "daring" to set foot on such a sea is
most striking and impressive; more so, indeed, than its failure after he
made the attempt. The whole lake, as we had it, was lashed into fury;
the waves repeatedly rolled up to our tent door, tumbling over the ropes
with such violence as to carry away the tent-pins. And moreover, those
winds are not only violent, but they come done suddenly, and often when
the sky is perfectly clear. I once went in to swim near the hot baths,
and, before I was aware, a wind came rushing over the cliffs with such
force that it was with great difficulty I could regain the shore. Some
such sudden wind it was, I suppose, that filled the ship with waves so
that it was now full, while Jesus was asleep on a pillow in the hinder
part of the ship; nor is it strange that the disciples aroused him with
the cry of Master! Master! carest thou not that we perish."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 5](mar005)

</div>
