<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Mark Index](mar.md)  
  [Previous](mar014)  [Next](mar016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#001.md)

[Mark 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 15:1</span></span>

See the principal events in this chapter explained in the notes at Matt.
27.

[Mark 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mar 15:16</span></span>

Called Praetorium - The hall of the "praetor," or Roman governor, where
he sat to administer justice.

Whole band - See the notes at [Mat
27:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#027.md).

[Mark 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mar 15:17</span></span>

With purple - Matthew says scarlet. See the notes at [Mat
27:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#028.md).

About his head - In the form of a garland or diadem. The whole head was
not covered, but it was placed in a circle round the temples.

[Mark 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mar 15:19</span></span>

Worshipped him - Mocked him with the "appearance" of homage. The word
"worship" here denotes only the respect and honor shown to princes and
kings. It does not refer to any "religious" homage. They regarded him as
foolishly and madly claiming to be a king - not as claiming to be
divine.

[Mark 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mar 15:23</span></span>

Wine mingled ... - Matthew says "vinegar." It was probably "wine
soured," so that it might be called either. This was the common drink of
the Roman soldiers.

Myrrh - See the notes at [Mat 27:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034.md).

[Mark 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mar 15:25</span></span>

And it was the third hour ... - In [Joh
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#014.md) it is said, "And it was the
preparation of the passover, and about the sixth hour, etc. Much
difficulty has been felt in reconciling these passages, and infidels
have usually adduced them to prove that the evangelists have
contradicted themselves. In reconciling them the following remarks may
perhaps make the matter clear:

\(1\) The Jews divided both the night and the day into four equal parts
of three hours each. See the notes at [Mat
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025.md). The first division of the day
commenced at six o'clock in the morning, and ended at nine; the second
commenced at nine and ended at twelve, etc. "The third" hour mentioned
by Mark would therefore correspond with our nine o'clock; the "sixth"
hour mentioned by John would correspond with our twelve, or noon.

\(2\) mark professes to give the time accurately; John does not. He says
"it was about the sixth hour," without affirming that this was exactly
the time.

\(3\) a mistake in "numbers" is easily made; and if it should he
admitted that such an error had crept into the text here, it would be
nothing more than has occurred in many ancient writings. It has been
proved, moreover, that it was common not to write the "words" indicating
numbers at "length," but to use "letters." The Greeks designated numbers
by the letters of the alphabet, and this mode of computation is found in
ancient manuscripts. For example, the Cambridge manuscript of the New
Testament has in this very place in Mark, not the word "third" written
at length, but the Greek letter gamma (γ), the usual notation for third.
Now it is well known that it would be easy to mistake this for the Greek
letter sigma (ς), the mark denoting "six." An error of this kind in an
early manuscript might be extensively propagated, and might have led to
the present reading of the text. Such an error is actually known to
exist in the "Chronicon" of Paschal, where Otho is said to have reigned
ς, (six) months, whereas it is known that he reigned but three, and in
this place, therefore, the γ, three, was mistaken for ς, six.

\(4\) there is some external authority for reading "third" in [Joh
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#014.md). The Cambridge manuscript has
this reading. Nonnus, who lived in the fifth century, says that this was
the true reading (Wetstein). Peter of Alexandria, in a fragment
concerning the Passover, as quoted by Usher, says, "It was the
preparation of the Passover, and about the "third" hour, as," he adds,
"the most accurate copies of the Bible have it; and this was the
handwriting of the evangelist (John), which is kept, by the grace of
God, in his most holy church at Ephesus" (Mill). It is to be admitted,
however, that no great reliance is to be placed on this account. That a
mistake "might" have occurred in the early manuscripts is not
improbable. No man can "prove" that it did "not" so occur, and so long
as this cannot be proved, the passages should not be adduced as
conclusive proof of contradiction.

After all, perhaps, without the supposition that there is any error in
the text, the whole difficulty may be removed by the following
statements:

\(1\) Calvary was "without" the walls of Jerusalem. It was a
considerable distance from the place where Jesus was tried and
condemned. Some time, more or less, would be occupied in going there,
and in the preparatory measures for crucifying him.

\(2\) it is not necessary to understand "Mark" as saying that it was
precisely nine o'clock, according to our expression. With the Jews it
was six until seven; it was the third hour until the fourth commenced;
it was the ninth until it was the tenth. They "included" in the "third"
hour the whole time from the third to the fourth. The same mode they
adopted in regard to their days. See the notes at [Mat
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#040.md).

\(3\) it is not unduly pressing the matter to suppose that Mark spoke of
the time when the process for crucifixion commenced - that is, when he
was condemned - when they entered upon it - when they made the
preparation. Between that and the time when he was taken "out" of
Jerusalem to Mount Calvary, and when he was actually nailed to the tree,
there is no improbability in supposing that there might have been an
interval of more than an hour. Indeed, the presumption is that
considerably more time than that would elapse.

\(4\) John does not profess, as has been remarked, to be strictly
accurate. He says "it was about the sixth hour," etc.

\(5\) now suppose that John meant to indicate the time when he was
"actually" suspended on the cross - that he spoke of the "crucifixion"
denoting the "act of suspension," as it struck "him" - and there is no
difficulty. Any other two men - any witnesses - might give just such an
account now. One man would speak of the time when the process for an
execution commenced; another, perhaps, of the very "act" of the
execution and would "both" speak of it in general terms, and say that a
man was executed at such a time; and the circumstantial variation would
"prove" that there was no collusion, no agreement to "impose" on a court
- that they were honest witnesses. That is "proved" here.

\(6\) that this is the true account of the matter is clear from the
evangelists themselves, and "especially from Mark." The three first
evangelists concur in stating that there was a remarkable "darkness"
over the whole land from the "sixth" to the "ninth" hour, [Mat
27:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#045.md); "[Mar
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#033.md);" [Luk
23:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#044.md). This fact - in which Mark
concurs - would seem to indicate that "the actual crucifixion" continued
only during that time - that he was, in fact, suspended at about the
sixth hour, though the preparations for crucifying him had been going on
(Mark) for two hours before. The fact that Mark [Mar
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#033.md) mentions this darkness as
commencing at the "sixth" and not at the "third" hour, is one of the
circumstances undesignedly occurring that seems to signify that the
crucifixion then had "actually" taken place, though the various
arrangements for it [Mar 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#025.md) had
been going on from the "third" hour.

One thing is conclusively proved by this - that the evangelists did not
"conspire together" to impose on the world. They are independent
witnesses, and they were honest men; and the circumstance adverted to
here is one that is allowed to be of great value in testimony in courts
of justice - "circumstantial variation with essential agreement."

[Mark 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mar 15:26</span></span>

The superscription - The writing over his head upon the cross.

The King of the Jews - See the notes at [Mat
27:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#037.md).

[Mark 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mar 15:28</span></span>

And the scripture was fulfilled ... - This passage of Scripture is found
in [Isa 53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012.md). This does not mean that
he "was" a transgressor, but simply that in dying he "had a place" with
transgressors. Nor does it mean that God regarded him as a sinner; but
that at his death, in popular estimation. or by the sentence of the
judge, he was "regarded as" a transgressor, and was treated in the same
manner as the others who were put to death for their transgressions.
Jesus died, the "just" for the "unjust," and in his death, as well as in
his life, he was "holy, harmless, undefiled."

[Mark 15:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mar 15:42</span></span>

The even - The time after three o'clock in the afternoon.

The Preparation ... - The following day was to be a day of special
solemnity, called the "great day" of the feast. More than ordinary
preparation was therefore made for "that" Sabbath on the day before.
Hence, the day was known as a day of preparation. This consisted in the
preparation of food, etc., to be used on the Sabbath.

[Mark 15:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mar 15:43</span></span>

Joseph, an honorable counselor - A distinguished man, who probably held
a high office among the Jews, as one of their great council, or a Jewish
senator. The word "honorable," here, is not a mere title of "office,"
but is given in reference to his personal character, as being a man of
integrity and blameless life.

Waited for the kingdom of God - Waited for, or expected, the coming of
the Messiah. But this expression means more than an "indefinite"
expectation that the Messiah "would" come, for all the Jews expected
that. It implies that he believed "Jesus" to be the Messiah, and that he
had "waited" for Him to build up the kingdom of God; and this agrees
with what John says [Joh 19:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#038.md), that
he was a disciple of Jesus, but secretly, for fear of the Jews. He had
retained his "secret" belief, in the hope that Jesus would be proclaimed
and treated as the Messiah, and then he probably proposed openly to
acknowledge his attachment to him. But God called him to a public
profession of attachment in a different manner, and gave this
distinguished man grace to evince it. So men often delay a profession of
attachment to Christ. They cherish a secret love, they indulge a hope in
the mercy of God, but they conceal it for fear of man; whereas God
requires that the attachment should be made known. "Whosoever is ashamed
of me," said the Saviour, "and of my words, of him also shall the Son of
man be ashamed when he cometh in the glory of his Father and with the
holy angels," [Mar 8:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#038.md). Those who
love the Saviour have no right to hide their light under a bushel. As
soon as they have evidence satisfactory to their own mind that they are
Christians, or have a "prevalent" belief, after faithful examination,
that they truly love God, and that they depend on the Lord Jesus for
salvation, so soon are they bound to profess Christ before men. This is
the command of God, and this is the way of peace. None have the prospect
of "comfort" in religion who do not have respect to all of the
commandments of God.

Went in boldly unto Pilate - God had raised up this distinguished
counselor and secret disciple for a special and most important occasion.
The disciples of Jesus had fled, and if they had not, they had no
influence with Pilate. Unless there had been a special application to
Pilate in behalf of Jesus, his body would have been buried "that night"
in the same grave with the malefactors, for it was a law of the Jews
that the body of an executed man should not remain on the cross on the
Sabbath. At this critical juncture God called forward this secret
disciple - this friend of Jesus, though unknown as such to the world -
and gave him confidence. He dared to express sympathy for the Saviour;
he went in boldly and begged the body of Jesus. It needed no small
measure of courage to do this. Jesus had just been condemned, mocked,
spit on, crucified - the death of a slave or of the most guilty wretch.
To avow attachment for him now was proof of sincere affection; and the
Holy Spirit has thought this worthy of special notice, and has set down
this bold attachment of a senator for Jesus for our imitation.

Craved the body - Begged, or asked.

[Mark 15:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">mar 15:44</span></span>

And Pilate marveled if - Wondered if he was dead, or wondered that he
was so soon dead. It was not common for persons crucified to expire
under two or three days, sometimes not until the sixth or seventh.
Joseph had asked for the "body," implying that he was dead. That he was,
had been ascertained by the soldiers. See [Joh
19:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#033.md).

[Mark 15:45](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">mar 15:45</span></span>

When he knew it of the centurion - Being informed by the centurion of
the fact that he was dead. The centurion had charge of the soldiers who
watched him, and could therefore give correct information.

[Mark 15:47](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">mar 15:47</span></span>

Beheld where he was laid - The affection of these pious females never
forsook them, in all the trials and sufferings of their Lord. With true
love they followed him to the cross; they came as near to him as they
were permitted to come in his last moments; they followed him when taken
down and laid in the tomb. The strong, the mighty, the youthful, had
fled; but female love never forsook him, even in his deepest
humiliation. This is the nature of true love; it is strongest in such
scenes. While "professed" attachment will abound in prosperity and live
most in sunshine, it is only genuine love that will go into the dark
shades of adversity and flourish there. In scenes of poverty, want,
affliction, and death, it shows its genuineness. That which lives there
is genuine. That which turns away from such scenes is spurious.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 16](mar016.md)

</div>
