<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar015)  [Next](luk000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#001)

[Mark 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 16:1</span></span>

See this passage explained in the notes at [Mat
28:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#001).

[Mar 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#001)

Sweet spices - "Aromatics." Substances used in embalming. The idea of
sweetness is not, however, implied in the original. Many of the
substances used for embalming were "bitter" - as, for example, myrrh -
and none of them, perhaps, could properly be called "sweet." The word
"spices" expresses all that there is in the original.

Anoint him - Embalm him, or apply these spices to his body to keep it
from putrefaction. This is proof that they did not suppose he would rise
again; and the fact that they did not "expect" he would rise, gives more
strength to the evidence for his resurrection.

[Mar 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#004)

It was very great - These words belong to the third verse: "Who shall
roll us away the stone from the door of the sepulchre?" for, the
evangelist adds, it was very great.

[Mar 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#005)

Sitting on the right side - As they entered. The sepulchre was large
enough to admit persons to go into it; not unlike, in that respect, our
vaults.

[Mar 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#007)

Tell his disciples and Peter - It is remarkable that Peter is singled
out for special notice. It was proof of the kindness and mercy of the
Lord Jesus. Peter, just before the death of Jesus, had denied him. He
had brought dishonor on his profession of attachment to him. It would
have been right if the Lord Jesus had from that moment cast him off and
noticed him no more. But he loved him still. Having loved him once, he
loved unto the end, [Joh 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001). As a
proof that he forgave him and still loved him, he sent him this
"special" message - the assurance that though he had denied him, and had
done much to aggravate his sufferings, yet he had risen, and was still
his Lord and Redeemer. We are not to infer, because the angel said,
"Tell his disciples and Peter," that Peter was not still a disciple. The
meaning is, "Tell his disciples, and especially Peter," sending to him a
particular message. Peter was still a disciple. Before his fall, Jesus
had prayed for him that his faith should not fail [Luk
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#032); and as the prayer of Jesus was
"always" heard [Joh 11:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#042), so it
follows that Peter still retained faith sufficient to be a disciple,
though he was suffered to fall into sin.

See this passage explained in the notes at [Mat
28:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#001).

Tell his disciples and Peter - It is remarkable that Peter is singled
out for special notice. It was proof of the kindness and mercy of the
Lord Jesus. Peter, just before the death of Jesus, had denied him. He
had brought dishonor on his profession of attachment to him. It would
have been right if the Lord Jesus had from that moment cast him off and
noticed him no more. But he loved him still. Having loved him once, he
loved unto the end, [Joh 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001). As a
proof that he forgave him and still loved him, he sent him this
"special" message - the assurance that though he had denied him, and had
done much to aggravate his sufferings, yet he had risen, and was still
his Lord and Redeemer. We are not to infer, because the angel said,
"Tell his disciples and Peter," that Peter was not still a disciple. The
meaning is, "Tell his disciples, and especially Peter," sending to him a
particular message. Peter was still a disciple. Before his fall, Jesus
had prayed for him that his faith should not fail [Luk
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#032); and as the prayer of Jesus was
"always" heard [Joh 11:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#042), so it
follows that Peter still retained faith sufficient to be a disciple,
though he was suffered to fall into sin.

[Mark 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mar 16:11</span></span>

Believed not - This is proof that they did not expect his resurrection;
proof that they were not easily deceived, and that nothing but the
clearest evidence could undeceive them.

[Mark 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mar 16:12</span></span>

He appeared in another form - In a form unlike his ordinary appearance
so much so that they did not at first know him. See the notes at Luke
24:13-31. "As they walked and went into the country." To Emmaus, [Luk
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#013).

[Mark 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mar 16:13</span></span>

The residue - The remainder. Those who remained at Jerusalem.

[Mark 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mar 16:14</span></span>

Afterward he appeared unto the eleven - Judas was dead, and the apostles
were then called "the eleven." This was done even when one of them was
absent, as Thomas was on this occasion. See the "Harmony of the Accounts
of the Resurrection, Appearances, and Ascension of Christ," at the close
of the notes on Matthew.

As they sat at meat - The word meat here means food, or meals. As they
were reclining at their meals.

And upbraided them ... - Rebuked them, or reproached them. This was done
because, after all the evidence they had had of his resurrection, still
they did not believe. This is a most important circumstance in the
history of our Lord's resurrection. Never were people more difficult to
be convinced of anything than they were of that fact. And this shows
conclusively that they had not conspired to impose on the world; that
they had given up all for lost when he died; that they did not expect
his resurrection; and all this is the strongest proof that he truly
rose. They were not convinced until it was impossible for them longer to
deny it. Had they expected it, they would have caught easily at the
slightest evidence, and would have turned every circumstance in favor of
such an event. It may be added that it was impossible that eleven men of
good natural understanding should have been deceived in so plain a case.
They had been with Jesus three years; they perfectly knew his features,
voice, manner; and it is not credible that they should have been
deceived by anyone who might have pretended to have been the Lord Jesus.

[Mark 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mar 16:15</span></span>

Into all the world - To the Gentiles as well as the Jews. It was
contrary to the opinions of the Jews that the Gentiles should be
admitted to the privileges of the Messiah's kingdom, or that the
partition wall between them should be broken down. See [Act
22:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#021). It was long before the
disciples could be trained to the belief that the gospel was to be
preached to all men; and it was only by special revelation, even after
this command, that Peter preached to the Gentile centurion, Acts 10;
Jesus has graciously ordered that the preaching of the gospel shall be
stopped by no barriers. Wherever there is man, there it is to be
proclaimed. To every sinner he offers life, and all the world is
included in the message of mercy, and every child of Adam is offered
eternal salvation.

Preach - Proclaim; make known; offer. To do this to every creature is to
offer pardon and eternal life to him on the terms of the plan of mercy -
through repentance, and faith in the Lord Jesus.

The gospel - The good news. The tidings of salvation. The assurance that
the Messiah has come, and that sin may be forgiven and the soul saved.

To every creature - That is, to every human being. Man has no right to
limit this offer to any class of men. God commands his servants to offer
the salvation to "all men." If they reject, it is at their peril. God is
not to blame if they do not choose to be saved. His mercy is manifest;
his grace is boundless in offering life to a creature so guilty as man.

[Mark 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mar 16:16</span></span>

He that believeth - That is, believeth the gospel. "He who credits it to
be true, and acts as if it were true." This is the whole of faith. Man
is a sinner. He should act on the belief of this truth and repent. There
is a God. Man should believe it, and fear and love him, and seek his
favor. The Lord Jesus died to save him. To have faith in him is to
believe that this is true, and to act accordingly; that is, to trust
him, to rely on him, to love him, to feel that we have no merit, and to
cast our all upon him. There is a heaven and a hell. To believe this is
to credit the account and act as if it were true - to seek the one and
avoid the other. We are to die. To believe this is to act as if this
were so; to be in readiness for it, and to expect it daily and hourly.
In one word, faith is feeling and acting as if there were a God, a
Saviour, a heaven, a hell; as if we were sinners and must die; as if we
deserved eternal death and were in danger of it; and, in view of all,
casting our eternal interests on the mercy of God in Christ Jesus. To do
this is to be a Christian: not to do it is to be an infidel.

Is baptized - Is initiated into the church by the application of water,
as significant that he is a sinner, and needs the purifying influences
of the Holy Spirit. It is worthy of remark that Jesus has made "baptism"
of so much importance. He did not say, indeed, that a man could not be
saved without baptism, but he has strongly implied that where this is
neglected "knowing it to be a command of the Saviour," it endangers the
salvation of the soul. Faith and baptism are the beginnings of a
Christian life: the one the beginning of piety in the soul, the other of
its manifestation before men or of a profession, of religion. Every man
endangers his eternal interest by being ashamed of Christ before men.
See [Mar 8:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#038).

Shall be saved - Saved from sin [Mat
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021) and from eternal death [Joh
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024); [Joh
3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036), and raised to eternal life in
heaven, [Joh 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028); [Joh
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002), [Joh
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024).

Shall be damned - That is, condemned by God and cast off from his
presence, [Th2 1:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006). It implies that
they will be adjudged to be guilty by God in the day of judgment [Rom
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012), [Rom
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#016); [Mat
25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041); that they will deserve to die
forever [Rom 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#006), [Rom
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#008), and that they will be cast out
into a place of woe to all eternity, [Mat
25:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046). It may be asked how it can be
just in God to condemn men forever for not believing the gospel? I
answer:

1\. God has a right to appoint his own terms of mercy.

2\. Man has no claim on him for heaven.

3\. The sinner rejects the terms of salvation, knowingly, deliberately,
and perseveringly.

4\. He has a special disregard and contempt for the gospel.

5\. His unbelief is produced by the love of sin.

6\. He shows by this that he has no love for God, and his law, and for
eternity.

7\. He slights the objects dearest to God and most like him; and,

8\. He must be miserable.

A creature who has no confidence in God; who does not believe that he is
true or worthy of his regard, and who never seeks his favor, must be
wretched. He rejects God, and he must go into eternity without a Father
and without a God. He has no source of comfort in himself, and must die
for ever. There is no being in eternity but God that can make man happy,
and without his favor the sinner must be wretched.

[Mark 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mar 16:17</span></span>

And these signs - These miracles. These evidences that they are sent
from God.

Them that believe - The apostles, and those in the primitive age who
were endowed with like power. This promise was fulfilled if it can be
shown that these signs followed in the case of any who believed, and it
is not necessary to suppose that they would follow in the case of all.
The meaning is, that they would be the result of faith, or of the belief
of the gospel. It is true that they were. These signs were shown in the
case of the apostles and early Christians. The infidel cannot say that
the promise has not been fulfilled unless he can show that this never
occurred; the Christian should be satisfied that the promise was
fulfilled if these miracles were ever actually wrought, though they do
not occur now; and the believer now should not expect a miracle in his
case. Miracles were necessary for the establishment of religion in the
world; they are not necessary for its continuance now.

In my name - By my authority, and using the power that I would in such
cases, if bodily present. This was done; and in this they differed
essentially from the manner in which Jesus himself wrought miracles. He
did it in "his own name," and as possessing original, underived
authority. See the account of his stilling the sea ([Mat
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#026), etc.); of his healing the sick
[Mat 9:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#005); of his raising Lazarus,
John 11. The prophets spoke "in the name of the Lord." The apostles did
likewise, [Act 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006), etc. There was,
therefore, an important difference between Jesus and all the other
messengers that God has sent into the world. He acted in his own name;
they in the name of another. He wielded his own power; they were the
instruments by which God put forth the omnipotence of his arm to save.
He was therefore God; they were men of like passions as other men, [Act
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#015).

Shall they cast out devils - See the notes at [Mat
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024). Compare [Act
16:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#016).

Shall speak with new tongues - Shall speak other languages than their
native language. This was remarkably fulfilled on the day of Pentecost,
[Act 2:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004). It existed, also, in
other places. See [Co1 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010).

[Mark 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mar 16:18</span></span>

They shall take up serpents - When it is necessary for the sake of
establishing religion, they shall handle poisonous reptiles without
injury, thus showing that God was with them to keep them from harm. This
was literally fulfilled when Paul shook the viper from his hand. See
[Act 28:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#005).

Any deadly thing - Any poison usually causing death.

Shall not hurt them - There is a similar promise in [Isa
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#002).

They shall lay hands on the sick ... - See instances of this in the Acts
of the Apostles, [Act 3:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006); [Act
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#015), etc.

[Mark 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mar 16:19</span></span>

He was received up into heaven - In a cloud from the Mount of Olives.
See [Act 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009).

The right hand of God - We are not to suppose that God has hands, or
that Jesus sits in any particular direction from God. This phrase is
taken from the manner of speaking among men, and means that he was
exalted to honor and power in the heavens. It was esteemed the place of
the highest honor to be seated at the right hand of a prince. So, to be
seated at the right hand of God, means that Jesus is exalted to the
highest honor of the universe. Compare [Eph
1:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020).

[Mark 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mar 16:20</span></span>

They went forth - The apostles.

Everywhere - In all parts of the world. See the account in the Acts and
the Epistles.

The Lord worked with them - By miracles; by removing obstacles; by
supporting them; and by giving the gospel success and making it
effectual to saving men.

Confirming the word - Showing it to be the word of God or a revelation
from heaven.By signs following - By attending miracles. By raising the
dead, healing the sick, etc., as signs that God was with them, and had
sent them forth to preach.

Amen - Truly, verily. So be it. This word here, however, is of no
authority. There is no reason to think that it was added by Mark.

Mark is more concise than either of the other evangelists. In most
instances he coincides with Matthew, though he has added some
circumstances which Matthew had omitted. There is no evidence, however,
that he copied from Matthew. The last chapter in Mark contains some
things omitted in Matthew. and some things of fearful import. We learn
from it that the gospel is to be preached to all mankind. Every person
is to be offered eternal life, and he rejects it at his peril. The
condition of the person who will not believe is fearfully awful. The Son
of God has solemnly declared that he shall be damned. He will judge the
world, and there is none that can deliver out of his hand. No excuse
will be allowed for not believing. Unless a man has faith he must be
lost for ever. This is the solemn assurance of the Bible; and in view of
this awful declaration of the merciful Redeemer, how sad is the
condition of him who has no confidence in Jesus, and who has never
looked to him for eternal life! And how important that without delay he
should make his peace with God, and possess that faith which is
connected with everlasting salvation!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Introduction](luk000)

</div>
