<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat026)  [Next](mat028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#001)

[Matthew 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 27:1</span></span>

Jesus is brought before Pilate - See also [Mar
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#001); [Luk
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#001); [Joh
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028).

When the morning was come - This was not long after Jesus had been
condemned by the Sanhedrin.

Peter's last denial was probably not far from three o'clock a. m., or
near the break of day. As soon as it was light, the Jews consulted
together for the purpose of taking his life. The sun rose at that season
of the year in Judea not far from five o'clock a. m., and the time when
they assembled, therefore, was not long after Peter's denial.

The chief priests and elders of the people took counsel - They ned on
his trial [Mat 26:65-66](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#065) agreed that he
deserved to die, "on a charge of blasphemy;" yet they did not dare to
put him to death by stoning, as they did afterward Stephen Acts 7, and
as the law commanded in case of blasphemy, for they feared the people.
They therefore "consulted," or took counsel together, to determine on
what pretence they could deliver him to the Roman emperor, or to fix
some charge of a civil nature by which Pilate might be induced to
condemn him. The charge which they fixed on was not that on which they
had tried him, and on which they had determined he ought to die, but
"that of perverting the nation, and of forbidding to give tribute to
Caesar," [Luk 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#002). On this
accusation, if made out, they supposed Pilate could be induced to
condemn Jesus. On a charge of "blasphemy" they knew he could not, as
that was not an offence against the Roman laws, and over which,
therefore, Pilate claimed no jurisdiction.

To put him to death - To devise some way by which he might be put to
death under the authority of the Roman governor.

[Matthew 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 27:2</span></span>

And when they had bound him - He was "bound" when they took him in the
garden, [Joh 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#012). Probably when he
was tried before the Sanhedrin in the palace of Caiaphas, he had been
loosed from his bonds, being there surrounded by multitudes, and
supposed to be safe. As they were about to lead him to another part of
the city now, they again bound him. The binding consisted, probably, in
nothing more than tying his hands.

Pontius Pilate, the governor - The governor appointed by the Romans over
Judea. The governor commonly resided at Caesarea; but he came up to
Jerusalem usually at the great feasts, when great numbers of the Jews
were assembled, to administer justice, and to suppress tumults if any
should arise. The "title" which Pilate received was that of "governor or
procurator." The duties of the office were, chiefly, to collect the
revenues due to the Roman emperor, and in certain cases to administer
justice. Pilate was appointed governor of Judea by Tiberius, then
Emperor of Rome. John says [Joh 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028)
that they led Jesus from Caiaphas to the hall of judgment - that is, to
the part of the "praetorium," or governor's palace, where justice was
administered. The Jews did not, however, enter in themselves, lest they
should be defiled, but that they might eat the Passover. In [Num
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#022) it is said that whosoever
touched an unclean thing should be unclean. For this reason they would
not enter into the house of a pagan, lest they should contract some
defilement that would render them unfit to keep the Passover.

[Matthew 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 27:3</span></span>

Then Judas, when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself - This
shows that Judas did not suppose that the affair would have resulted in
this calamitous manner. He probably expected that Jesus would work a
miracle to deliver himself, and not suffer this condemnation to come
upon him. When he saw him taken, bound, tried, and condemned - when he
saw that all probability that he would deliver himself was taken away -
he was overwhelmed with disappointment, sorrow, and remorse. The word
rendered "repented himself," it has been observed, does not of necessity
denote a change "for the better," but "any" change of views and
feelings. Here it evidently means no other change than that produced by
the horrors of a guilty conscience, and by deep remorse for crime at its
unexpected results. It was not saving repentance. That leads to a holy
life this led to an increase of crime in his own death. True repentance
leads the sinner to the Saviour. This led away from the Saviour to the
gallows. Judas, if he had been a true penitent, would have come then to
Jesus; would have confessed his crime at his feet, and sought for pardon
there. But, overwhelmed with remorse and the conviction of vast guilt,
he was not willing to come into his presence, and added to the crime of
treason that of self-murder. Assuredly such a man could not be a true
penitent.

[Matthew 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 27:4</span></span>

I have sinned - I have been guilty. I have done wrong.

In that I have betrayed the innocent blood - That is, in betraying an
innocent being to death. Blood is put here for "life," or for the "man."
The meaning is, that he knew and felt that Jesus was innocent. This
confession is a remarkable proof that Jesus was innocent. Judas had been
with him for three years. He had seen him in public and private; he had
heard his public teaching and his private views; he had seen him in all
circumstances; and if he had done anything evil, or advanced anything
against the Roman emperor, Judas was competent to testify it. Had he
known any such thing he would have stated it. His testimony, being a
disciple of Jesus, would have been to the chief priests far more
valuable than that of any other man; and he might not only have escaped
the horrors of a troubled conscience and an awful death, but have looked
for an ample reward. That he did not make such a charge that he fully
and frankly confessed that Jesus was innocent - and that he gave up the
ill-gotten price of treason, is full proof that, in the belief of Judas,
the Saviour was free from crime, and even the suspicion of crime.

What is that to us? - This form of speaking denoted that they had
nothing to do with his remorse of conscience, and his belief that Jesus
was innocent. They had secured what they wanted - the person of Jesus -
and they cared little now for the feelings of the traitor. So all wicked
men who make use of the agency of others for the accomplishment of crime
or the gratification of passion care little for the effect on the
instrument. They will soon cast him off and despise him, and in
thousands of instances the instruments of villainy and the panders to
the pleasures of others are abandoned to remorse, wretchedness, crime,
and death.

[Matthew 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 27:5</span></span>

And he cast down ... - This was an evidence of his remorse of conscience
for his crime. His ill-gotten gain now did him no good. It would not
produce relief to his agonized mind. He "attempted," therefore, to
obtain relief by throwing back the price of treason; but he attempted it
in vain. The consciousness of guilt was fastened to his soul; and Judas
found, as all will find, that to cast away or abandon ill-gotten wealth
will not alleviate a guilty conscience.

In the temple - It is not quite certain what part of the temple is here
meant. Some have thought that it was the place where the Sanhedrin were
accustomed to sit; others, the treasury; others, the part where the
priests offered sacrifice. It is probable that Judas cared little or
thought little to what particular part of the temple he went. In his
deep remorse he hurried to the temple, and probably cast the money down
in the most convenient spot, and fled to some place where he might take
his life.

And went and hanged himself - The word used in the original, here, has
given rise to much discussion, whether it means that he was suffocated
or strangled by his great grief, or whether he took his life by
suspending himself. It is acknowledged on all hands, however, that the
latter is its most usual meaning, and it is certainly the most obvious
meaning. Peter says, in giving an account of the death of Jesus [Act
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#018), that Judas, "falling headlong,
burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out." There has
been supposed to be some difficulty in reconciling these two accounts,
but there is really no necessary difference. Both accounts are true.
Matthew records the mode in which Judas attempted his death by hanging.
Peter speaks of the result. Judas probably passed out of the temple in
great haste and perturbation of mind. He sought a place where he might
perpetrate this crime.

He would not, probably, be very careful about the fitness or the means
he used. In his anguish, his haste, his desire to die, he seized upon a
rope and suspended himself; and it is not at all remarkable, or indeed
unusual, that the rope might prove too weak and break. Falling headlong
- that is, on his face - he burst asunder, and in awful horrors died - a
double death, with double pains and double horrors - the reward of his
aggravated guilt. The explanation here suggested will be rendered more
probable if it be supposed that he hung himself near some precipitous
valley. "Interpreters have suggested," says Professor Hackett
(Illustrations of Scripture, pp. 275, 276), "that Judas may have hung
himself on a tree near a precipice over the valley of Hinnom, and that,
the limb or rope breaking, he fell to the bottom, and was dashed to
pieces by the fall. For myself, I felt, as I stood in this valley and
looked up to the rocky terraces which hang over it, that the proposed
explanation was a perfectly natural one. I was more than ever satisfied
with it. I measured the precipitous, almost perpendicular walls in
different places, and found the height to be, variously, 40, 36, 33, 30,
and 25 feet. Trees still grow quite near the edge of these rocks, and,
no doubt, in former times were still more numerous in the same place. A
rocky pavement exists, also, at the bottom of the ledges, and hence on
that account, too, a person who should fall from above would be liable
to be crushed and mangled as well as killed. The traitor may have
struck, in his fall, upon some pointed rock, which entered the body and
caused 'his bowels to gush out.'"

[Matthew 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 27:6</span></span>

It is not lawful ... - It was forbidden [Deu
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#018) to take what was esteemed as an
abomination and to offer it to God. The price of blood - that is, of the
life of a man - they justly considered as an improper and unlawful
offering.

The treasury - The "treasury" was kept in the court of the women. See
plan of the temple, [Mat 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012). It was
composed of a number of small "chests" placed in different parts of the
"courts" to receive the voluntary offerings of the people, as well as
the half shekel required of every Jew. The original word rendered here
as "treasury" contains the notion of an "offering to God." What was
given there was considered as an offering made to him.

The price of blood - The life is in the "blood." See the notes at [Rom
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025). The word "blood" here means the
same as "life." The price of blood means the price by which the life of
a man has been purchased. This was an acknowledgment that in their view
Jesus was innocent. They had bought him, not condemned him justly. It is
remarkable that they were so scrupulous now about so small a matter,
comparatively, as putting this money in the treasury, when they had no
remorse about "murdering an innocent" man, and crucifying him who had
given full evidence that he was the Messiah. People are often very
scrupulous in "small" matters, who stick not at great crimes.

[Matthew 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 27:7</span></span>

And they took counsel ... - They consulted among themselves about the
proper way to dispose of this money.

And bought with them - In [Act 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#018),
it is said of Judas that "he purchased a field with the reward of his
iniquity." By the passage in the Acts is meant no more than that he
"furnished the means" or "was the occasion" of purchasing the field. It
is not of necessity implied that Judas actually made the contract and
paid down the money to buy a field to bury strangers in - a thing which
would be in itself very improbable, but that it was "by his means" that
the field was purchased. It is very frequent in the Scriptures, as well
as in other writings, to represent a man as doing that which he is only
the cause or occasion of another's doing. See [Act
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023); [Joh
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#001); [Mat
27:59-60](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#059).

The potter's field - Probably this was some field well known by that
name, which was used for the purpose of making earthen vessels. The
price paid for a field so near Jerusalem may appear to be very small;
but it is not improbable that it had been worked until the clay was
exhausted, and was neither suitable for that business nor for tillage,
and was therefore considered as of little value.

To bury strangers in - Jews, who came up from other parts of the world
to attend the great feasts at Jerusalem. The high priests, who regarded
the "Gentiles" as abominable, would not be inclined to provide a
burial-place for them.

[Matthew 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 27:8</span></span>

The field of blood - The field purchased by the price of blood. The name
by which this field was called was "Aceldama," [Act
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#019). It was just without the walls of
Jerusalem, on the south of Mount Zion. It is now used as a burying-place
by the Armenian Christians in Jerusalem, who have a magnificent convent
on Mount Zion - Missionary Herald, 1824, p. 66. See the plan of
Jerusalem.

To this day - That is, to the day when Matthew wrote this gospel, about
30 years after the field was purchased.

[Matthew 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 27:9</span></span>

Spoken by Jeremy the prophet - The words quoted here are not to be found
in the prophecy of Jeremiah. Words similar to these are recorded in [Zac
11:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#012), and from that place this
quotation has been doubtless made. Much difficulty has been experienced
in explaining this quotation. In ancient times, according to the Jewish
writers; "Jeremiah" was reckoned the first of the prophets, and was
placed first in the "Book of the Prophets," thus: Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
Isaiah, and the twelve minor prophets. Some have thought that Matthew,
quoting this place, quoted the Book of the Prophets under the name of
that which had the "first" place in the book, that is, Jeremiah; and
though the words are those of Zechariah, yet they are quoted correctly
as the words of the Book of the Prophets, the first of which was
Jeremiah. Others have thought that there was a mistake made by ancient
transcribers, writing the name Jeremiah instead of Zechariah; and it is
observed that this might be done by the change of only a single letter.
It was often the custom to abridge words in writing them. Thus, instead
of writing the name of Jeremiah in full, it would be written in Greek,
"Iriou." So Zechariah would be written "Zion." By the mere change of
Zinto I, therefore, the mistake might easily be made. Probably this is
the correct explanation. Others have supposed that the words were
"spoken by Jeremiah," and that "Zechariah" recorded them, and that
Matthew quoted them as they were - the words of Jeremiah. The passage is
not quoted literally; and by its being "fulfilled" is meant, probably,
that the language used by Zechariah on a similar occasion would express
also this event. See the notes at [Mat
1:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#022). It was language appropriate
to this occasion.

The price of him that was valued - That is, the price of him on whom a
value was set. The word rendered "valued," here, does not, as often in
our language, mean to "esteem," but to "estimate;" not to love, approve,
or regard, but to fix a price on, to estimate the value of. This they
considered to be thirty pieces of silver, "the common price of a slave."

They of the children of Israel did value - Some of the Jews, the leaders
or priests, acting in the name of the nation.

Did value - Did estimate, or fix a price on.

[Matthew 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 27:10</span></span>

And gave them - In Zechariah it is, I gave them. Here it is represented
as being given by the priests. The meaning is not, however, different.
It is, that this price "was given" for the potter's field.

As the Lord appointed me - That is, "commanded" me. The meaning of the
place in Zechariah is this: He was directed to go to the Jews as a
prophet - a pastor of the people. They treated him, as they had done
others, with great contempt. He asks them to give him "his price" - that
is, the price which they thought he and his pastoral labors were worth,
or to show their estimate of his office. If they thought it of value,
they were to pay him accordingly; if not, they were to "forbear" - that
is, to give nothing. To show their "great contempt" of him and his
office, and of God who had sent him, they gave him thirty pieces of
silver - "the price of a slave." This God commanded or "appointed him"
to give to the potter, or to throw into the pottery to throw away. So in
the time of Jesus the same thing was substantially repeated. Jesus came
as the Messiah. They hated and rejected him. To show their contempt of
him and his cause, they valued him "at the price of a slave." This was
thrown down in the temple, taken by the priests, and appropriated to the
purchase of a field owned by a "potter" - worn-out land of little or no
value; all showing at how low a price, through the whole transaction,
the Son of God was estimated. Though the words quoted here are not
precisely like those in Zechariah, yet the sense and general structure
are the same.

[Matthew 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 27:11</span></span>

And Jesus stood before the governor - Many things are omitted by
Matthew, in the account of this trial, which are recorded by the other
evangelists. A much more full account is found in [Joh
18:28-40](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028).

And the governor asked him ... - This question was asked On account of
the "charge" which the Jews brought against Jesus, "of perverting the
nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar," [Luk
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#002). It was on this charge that,
after consultation, they had agreed to arraign him before Pilate. See
the notes at [Mat 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#001). "They" had
condemned him for "blasphemy," but they well knew that Pilate would
altogether disregard an accusation of that kind. They therefore
attempted to substitute a totally different accusation from that on
which they had professed to find him guilty, to excite the jealousy of
the Roman governor, and to procure his death on a charge of treason
against the Roman emperor.

Thou sayest - That is, thou sayest right, or thou sayest the truth. We
may wonder why the Jews, if they heard this confession, did not press it
upon the attention of Pilate as a full confession of his guilt. It was
what they had accused him of. But it might be doubtful whether, in the
confusion, they heard the confession; or, if they did, Jesus took away
all occasion of triumph by explaining to Pilate the "nature" of his
kingdom, [Joh 18:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#036). Though he
acknowledged that he was a king, yet he stated fully that "his kingdom
was not of this world," and that therefore it could not be alleged
against him as treason against the Roman emperor. This was done "in the
palace," apart from the Jews, and fully satisfied Pilate of his
innocence, [Joh 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#023).

[Matthew 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 27:12</span></span>

When he was accused ... - To wit, of perverting the nation, and of
forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, [Luk
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#002), [Luk
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#005). Probably this was done in a
tumultuous manner and in every variety of form.

He answered nothing - He was conscious of his innocence. He knew that
they could not prove these charges. They offered no testimony to prove
them, and, in conscious innocence, he was silent.

[Matthew 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 27:13</span></span>

They witness against thee - This means, rather, that they accused him.
They were not "witnesses," but accusers. These accusations were repeated
and pressed. They charged him with exciting the people, teaching
throughout, all Judea from Galilee to Jerusalem, and exciting the nation
to sedition, [Luk 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#005).

[Matthew 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 27:14</span></span>

To never a word - That is, not at all. He said nothing. This is, an
emphatic way of saying that he answered nothing. There was no need of
his replying. He was innocent, and they offered no proof of guilt.
Besides, his appearance was full evidence in his favor. He was poor,
unarmed, without powerful friends, and alone. His life had been public,
and his sentiments were well known, and the charge had on the face of it
the aspect of absurdity. It deserved, therefore, no answer.

Marvelled greatly - Wondered exceedingly, or was much surprised. He was
probably more surprised that he bore this so meekly, and did not return
railing for railing, than that he did not set up a defense. The latter
was unnecessary - the former was unusual. The governor was not
accustomed to see it, and was therefore greatly amazed.

It was at this time that Pilate, having heard them speak of Galilee [Luk
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#005), asked if he was a Galilean.
Having ascertained that he was, and being probably desirous of freeing
himself from any further trouble in the affair, under pretence that he
belonged to Herod's jurisdiction, he sent Jesus to Herod, who was then
at Jerusalem attending the feast of the Passover, [Luk
23:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#006). Herod, having examined him,
and finding no cause of death in him, sent him back to Pilate. Pleased
with the respect which had been shown him, Herod laid aside his enmity
against Pilate, and they became friends. The cause of their friendship
does not appear to be at all that they were united in opposing the
claims of Jesus to be the Messiah, but the respect which Pilate had
shown in sending Jesus to him.

[Matthew 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 27:15</span></span>

See also the parallel places in [Mar
15:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#006); [Luk
23:17-23](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#017); [Joh
18:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#039).

[Mat 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#015)

At that feast - The feast of the Passover.

The governor was wont to release ... - that is, was "accustomed" to
release.

From what this custom arose, or by whom it was introduced, is not known.
It was probably adopted to secure popularity among the Jews, and to
render the government of the Romans less odious. Any little indulgence
granted to the Jews during the heavy oppression of the Romans would
serve to conciliate their favor, and to keep the nation from sedition.
It might happen often that when persons were arraigned before the Romans
on charge of sedition, some special favorite of the people, or some
leader, might be among the number. It is evident that if they had the
privilege of recovering such a person, it would serve much to allay
their feelings, and make tolerable the yoke under which they groaned.

[Mat 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#016)

A notable prisoner - The word "notable" means one that is
"distinguished" in any way either for great virtues or great crimes.

In this place it evidently means the latter He was perhaps the leader of
a band who had been guilty of sedition, and had committed murder in an
insurrection, [Luk 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#019).

[Mat 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#017)

Whom will ye that I release ... - Pilate was satisfied of the innocence
of Jesus, [Luk 23:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#013)

He was therefore desirous of releasing him. He expected to release one
to the people. He knew that Jesus, though condemned by the chief
priests, was yet popular among the people He therefore attempted in this
manner to rescue him from the hands of the priests, and expected that
the people would prefer Him to an odious and infamous robber and
murderer. Had the people been left to themselves it would probably have
been done.

Jesus, which is called Christ - That is, Jesus, who claims to be the
Messiah. Pilate probably did not believe it, or care much for it. He
used the name which Jesus had acquired among the people. Perhaps, also,
he thought that they would be more likely to ask him to be released if
he was presented to them as the Messiah. Mark [Mar
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#009) adds that he asked them whether
they would that he should release "the King of the Jews?" It is probable
that he asked the question in both ways. Perhaps it was several times
repeated, and Matthew has recorded one way in which it was asked, and
Mark another. He asked them whether they would demand him who "was
called the Christ," expecting that they would be moved by the claims of
the Messiah - claims which, when he entered Jerusalem in triumph, and in
the temple, they had acknowledged. He asked them whether they would have
the "King of the Jews" probably to ridicule the priests who had
delivered him on that charge. He did it to show the people how absurd
the accusation was. There Jesus stood, apparently a poor, inoffensive,
unarmed, and despised man. Herod had set him at naught and scourged him,
and sent him back. The charge, therefore, of the priests, that he was a
"king" opposed to the Roman emperor, was supremely ridiculous; and
Pilate, expecting that the people would see it so, hoped also that they
would ask that he might be released.

[Mat 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#018)

For he knew that for envy ... - This was envy at his popularity.

He drew away the people from them. This Pilate understood, probably,
from his knowledge of the pride and ambition of the rulers, and from the
fact that no danger could arise from a person that appeared like Jesus.
If Pilate knew this, he was bound to release him himself. As a governor
and judge, he was under obligation to protect the innocent, and should,
in spite of all the opposition of the Jews, at once have set him at
liberty. But the Scriptures could not then have been fulfilled. It was
necessary, in order that an atonement should be made. that Jesus should
be condemned to die. At the same time. it shows the wisdom of the
overruling providence of God, that he was condemned by a man who was
satisfied of his innocence, and who proclaimed before his accusers his
"full belief" that there was no fault in him.

[Mat 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#019)

When he was set down on the judgment-seat - Literally, "While he was
sitting." This message was probably received when he had resumed his
place on the judgment-seat, after Jesus had been sent to Herod.

See the notes at [Mat 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#014).

His wife sent unto him - The reason why she sent to him is immediately
stated - that she had a dream respecting him. We know nothing more of
her. We do not know whether she had ever seen the Saviour herself, but
it would seem that she was apprised of what was taking place, and
probably anticipated that the affair-would involve her husband in
trouble.

Have thou nothing to do ... - That is, do not condemn him. Perhaps she
was afraid that the vengeance of heaven would follow her husband and
family if he condemned the innocent.

That just man - The word "just," here, has the sense of "innocent," or
not guilty. She might have been satisfied of his innocence from other
sources as well as from the dream.

I have suffered many things ... - Dreams were considered as indications
of the divine will, and among the Romans and Greeks, as well as the
Jews, great reliance was placed on them. Her mind was probably agitated
with the subject. She was satisfied of the innocence of Jesus; and,
knowing that the Jews would make every effort to secure his
condemnation, it was not unnatural that her mind should be excited
during her sleep, perhaps with a frightful prospect of the judgments
that would descend on the family of Pilate if Jesus was condemned. She
therefore sent to him to secure, if possible, his release.

This day - It was now early in the morning. The Jewish "day" began at
sunset, and she employed the usual language of the Jews respecting time.
The dream was, in fact, in the night.

[Mat 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#020)

Persuaded the multitude - The release of a prisoner was to be to the
people, not to the rulers.

The rulers, therefore, in order to secure the condemnation of Jesus,
urged on the people to demand Barabbas. The people were greatly under
the influence of the priests. Galileans among the citizens of Jerusalem
were held in contempt. The priests turned the pretensions of Jesus into
ridicule. Hence, in a popular tumult, among a flexible and changing
multitude, they easily excited those who, but a little before, had cried
Hosanna, to cry, Crucify him.

[Mat 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#021)

Whether of the twain? - Which of the two, Jesus or Barabbas?

[Mat 27:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#023)

And the governor said, Why? - Luke informs us that Pilate put this
question to them "three times," so anxious was he to release him.

He affirmed that he had found no cause of death in him. He said,
therefore, that he would chastise him and let him go. He expected,
probably, by causing him to be publicly whipped, to excite their
compassion, to satisfy "them," and thus to evade the demands of the
priests, and to set him at liberty with the consent of the people. So
weak and irresolute was this Roman governor! Satisfied of his innocence,
he should at once have preferred "justice to popularity," and acted as
became a magistrate in acquitting the innocent.

Let him be crucified - See the notes at [Mat
27:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#039). Luke says they were instant
with loud voices demanding this. They urged it. They demanded it with a
popular clamor.

[Matthew 27:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 27:24</span></span>

He took water ... - The Jews were accustomed to wash their hands when
they wished to show that they were innocent of a crime committed by
others. See [Deu 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#006); [Psa
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006). Pilate, in doing this, meant to
denote that they were guilty of his death, but that he was innocent. But
the mere washing of his hands did not free him from guilt. He was
"bound" as a magistrate to free an innocent man; and whatever might be
the clamour of the Jews, "he" was guilty at the bar of God for suffering
the holy Saviour to be led to execution, in order to gratify the malice
of enraged priests and the clamors of a tumultuous populace.

See ye to it - That is, take it upon yourselves. You are responsible for
it, if you put him to death.

[Matthew 27:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 27:25</span></span>

His blood be on us ... - That is, let the guilt of putting him to death,
if there be any, be on us and our children. We will be answerable for
it, and will consent to bear the punishment for it. It is remarked by
writers that, among the Athenians, if anyone accused another of a
capital crime, he devoted himself and children to the same punishment if
the accused was afterward found innocent. So in all countries the
conduct of the parent involves the children in the consequences of his
conduct. The Jews had no right to call down this vengeance on their
children, but, in the righteous judgment of God, it has come upon them.
In less than forty years their city and temple were overthrown and
destroyed. More than a million of people perished in the siege.
Thousands died by famine; thousands by disease; thousands by the sword;
and their blood ran down the streets like water, so that, Josephus says,
it extinguished things that were burning in the city. Thousands were
crucified suffering the same punishment that they had inflicted on the
Messiah. So great was the number of those who were crucified, that,
Josephus says, they were obliged to cease from it, "room being wanted
for the crosses, and crosses for the men." See the notes at Matt. 24. To
this day, also, the curse has remained. They have been a nation
scattered and peeled; persecuted almost everywhere, and a hissing and a
byword among people. No single nation, probably, has suffered so much;
and yet they have been preserved. All classes of people, all the
governments of the earth, have conspired to overwhelm them with
calamity, and yet they still live as monuments of the justice of God,
and as proofs, going down from age to age, that the Christian religion
is true - standing demonstrations of the crime of their fathers in
putting the Messiah to death, and in calling down vengeance on their
heads.

[Matthew 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 27:26</span></span>

And when he had scourged Jesus - See the notes at [Mat
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#017). Among the Romans it was
customary to scourge or whip a "slave" before he was crucified. This was
done to inflict greater suffering. than crucifixion would be alone, and
to add to the horrors of the punishment. Our Lord, being about to be put
to death after the manner of a slave, was also treated as a slave as one
of the lowest and most despised of mankind.

He delivered him to be crucified - Not merely gave him up to them to
crucify him, as if they only were answerable, but he gave him up as a
judge, when he ought to have saved his life and might have done it.
Crucifixion was a Roman punishment; it was performed by Roman soldiers;
Pilate pronounced the sentence from a Roman tribunal, and Pilate affixed
the title to the cross. Pilate, therefore, as well as the Jews, was
answerable to God for the death of the Savior of the world.

[Matthew 27:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 27:27</span></span>

See also [Mar 15:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#015); [Joh
19:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#001).

[Mat 27:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#027)

Into the common hall - The original word here means, rather, the
governor's palace or dwelling.

The trial of Jesus had taken place outside of the palace. The Jews would
not enter in [Joh 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028), and it is
probable that courts were held often in a larger and more public place
than would be a room in his dwelling. Jesus, being condemned, was led by
the soldiers away from the Jews "within" the palace, and subjected there
to their profane mockery and sport.

The whole band - The "band" or cohort was a tenth part of a Roman
legion, and consisted of from 400 to 600 men, according to the size of
the legion. Compare the notes at [Mat
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029).

[Mat 27:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#028)

And they stripped him - That is, they either took off all his upper
garments or removed all his clothing, probably the former.

A scarlet robe - Mark says they clothed him in "purple." The "scarlet"
color was obtained from a species of fruit; "purple" from shell-fish.

See the notes at [Isa 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018). The
ancients gave the name "purple" to any color that had a mixture of "red"
in it, and consequently these different colors might be sometimes called
by the same name. The "robe" used here was the same kind worn by Roman
generals and other distinguished officers of the Roman army, and also by
the Roman governors. It was made so as to be placed on the shoulders,
and was bound around the body so as to leave the right arm at liberty.
As we cannot suppose that Pilate would array him in a new and splendid
robe, we must suppose that this was one which had been worn and cast off
as useless, and was now used to array the Son of God as an object of
ridicule and scorn.

[Mat 27:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#029)

Had platted - The word "platted" here means "woven together." They made
a "wreath" of a thorn-bush.

A crown - Or perhaps, rather, a wreath.

A crown was worn by kings, commonly made of gold and precious stones. To
ridicule the pretensions of Jesus that he was a king, they probably
plucked up a thornbush growing near, made it into something resembling
in shape a royal crown, so as to correspond with the old purple robe,
and to complete the mockery.

Of thorns - What was the precise species of shrub denoted here is not
certainly known. It was, however, doubtless, one of that species that
has sharp points of very hard wood. They could therefore be easily
pressed into the slain and cause considerable pain. Probably they seized
upon the first thing in their way that could be made into a crown, and
this happened to be a "thorn," thus increasing the sufferings of the
Redeemer. Palestine abounds with thorny shrubs and plants. "The traveler
finds them in his path, go where he may. Many of them are small, but
some grow as high as a man's head. The Rabbinical writers say that there
are no less than 22 words in the Hebrew Bible denoting thorny and
prickly plants." Professor's Hackett's Illustrations of Scripture, p.
135. Compare [Pro 24:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#030); [Pro
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#019); [Jer
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#003).

And a reed in his right hand - A reed is a straight, slender herb,
growing in marshy places, and abundant on the banks of the Jordan. It
was often used for the purpose of making staves for walking, and it is
not improbable that this was such a staff in the possession of some
person present. The word is several times thus used. See [Kg2
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#021); [Isa
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#006); [Eze
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#006). Kings commonly carried a
"sceptre," made of ivory or gold, as a sign of their office or rank,
[Est 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#011); [Est
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#004). This "reed" or "staff" they put
in his hand, in imitation of a "sceptre," to deride, also, his
pretensions of being a king.

And they bowed the knee - This was done for mockery. It was an act of
pretended homage. It was to ridicule his saying that he was a king. The
common mode of showing respect or homage for kings was by kneeling or
prostration. It shows amazing forbearance on the part of Jesus that he
thus consented to be ridiculed and set at naught. No mere human being
would have borne it. None but he who loved us unto death, and who saw
the grand results that would come from this scene of sufferings, could
have endured such mockery.

Hail, King of the Jews! - The term "hail" was a common mode of
salutation to a king, or even to a friend. It implies, commonly, the
highest respect for office as well as the person, and is an invocation
of blessings. Here it was used to carry on what they thought to be the
farce of his being a king; to ridicule in every possible way the
pretensions of a poor, unattended, unarmed man of Nazareth, as if he was
a weak impostor or was deranged.

[Mat 27:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#030)

And they spit upon him - This was a token of the deepest contempt and
insult.

See the notes at [Mat 26:67](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#067).

And took the reed - The cane, probably so large as to inflict a heavy
blow.

And smote him on the head - Not merely to injure him by the force of the
blow, but to press the "thorns" into his head, and thus to add cruelty
to insult.

[Matthew 27:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 27:31</span></span>

As they came out - That is, either out of the governor's palace where he
had been treated with such cruelty and contempt, or out of the gates of
the city, to crucify him.

A man of Cyrene - Cyrene was a city of Libya, in Africa, lying west of
Egypt. There were many Jews there, and they were in the habit, like
others, of going frequently to Jerusalem.

Him they compelled go bear his cross - John says [Joh
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#017) that Jesus went forth "bearing
his cross." Luke says [Luk 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#026) that
they laid the cross on Simon, that he might bear it after Jesus. There
is no contradiction in these accounts. It was a part of the usual
punishment of those who were crucified that they should bear their own
cross to the place of execution. Accordingly, it was laid at first on
Jesus, and he went forth, as John says, bearing it. Weak, however, and
exhausted by suffering and watchfulness, he probably sunk under the
heavy burden, and they laid hold of Simon that he might bear "one end"
of the cross, as Luke says, "after Jesus." The cross was composed of two
pieces of wood, one of which was placed upright in the earth, and the
other crossed it after the form of the figure of a cross. The upright
part was commonly so high that the feet of the person crucified were 2
or 3 feet from the ground.

On the middle of that upright part there was usually a projection or
seat on which the person crucified sat, or, as it were, "rode." This was
necessary, as the hands were not alone strong enough to bear the weight
of the body; as the body was left exposed often many days, and not
unfrequently suffered to remain till the flesh had been devoured by
vultures or putrefied in the sun. The feet were fastened to this upright
piece either by nailing them with large spikes driven through the tender
part, or by being lashed by cords. To the cross-piece at the top, the
hands, being extended, were also fastened, either by spikes or by cords,
or perhaps, in some cases, by both. The hands and feet of our Saviour
were both fastened by spikes. Crosses were also sometimes made in the
form of the letter X, the limbs of the person crucified being extended
to the four parts, and he suffered to die a lingering death in this
cruel manner. The cross used in the Crucifixion of Christ appears to
have been the former. The mention of the cross often occurs in the New
Testament. It was the instrument on which the Saviour made atonement for
the sins of the world. The whole of the Christian's hope of heaven, and
all his peace and consolation in trial and in death, depend on the
sacrifice there made for sin, and on just views and feelings in regard
to the fact and the design of the Redeemer's death. See the notes at
[Joh 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#018).

[Matthew 27:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 27:33</span></span>

Golgotha - This is a Hebrew word, signifying the place of a skull. This
is the word which in Luke is called "Calvary." The original Greek,
there, also means a skull. The word "calvary" is a Latin word meaning
"skull," or place of "skulls." It is not known certainly why this name
was given to this place. Some have supposed that it was because the
mount resembled in shape a human skull. The most probable opinion,
however, is that it was a place of execution; that malefactors were
beheaded there or otherwise put to death, and that their bones remained
unburied or unburned. Golgotha, or Calvary, was probably a small
eminence on the northwest of Jerusalem, without the walls of the city,
but at a short distance. Jesus was put to death out of the city, because
capital punishments were not allowed within the walls. See [Num
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#035); [Kg1
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#013). This was a law among the Romans
as well as the Jews. He also died there, because the bodies of the
beasts slain in sacrifice as typical of him were "burned without the
camp." He also, as the antitype, suffered "without the gate," [Heb
13:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#011). The place which is shown as
Calvary now is within the city, and must also have been within the
ancient walls, and there is no reason to suppose that it is the place
where the Saviour was put to death.

[Matthew 27:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 27:34</span></span>

They gave him vinegar ... - Mark says that, "they gave him to drink wine
mingled with myrrh." The two evangelists mean the same thing. Vinegar
was made of light wine rendered acid, and was the common drink of the
Roman soldiers, and this might be called either vinegar or wine in
common language. "Myrrh" is a bitter substance produced in Arabia, but
is used often to denote anything bitter. The meaning of the name is
"bitterness." See the notes at [Mat
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#011). "Gall" is properly a bitter
secretion from the liver, but the word is also used to denote anything
exceedingly "bitter," as wormwood, etc. The drink, therefore, was
vinegar or sour wine, rendered "bitter" by the infusion of wormwood or
some other very bitter substance. The effect of this, it is said, was to
stupefy the senses. It was often given to those who were crucified, to
render them insensible to the pains of death. Our Lord, knowing this,
when he bad tasted it refused to drink. He was unwilling to blunt the
pains of dying. The "cup" which his "Father" gave him he rather chose to
drink. He came to suffer. His sorrows were necessary for the work of the
atonement, and he gave himself up to the unmitigated sufferings of the
cross. This was presented to him in the early part of his sufferings, or
when he was about to be suspended on the cross. "Afterward," when he was
on the cross and just before his death, vinegar was offered to him
"without the myrrh" - the vinegar which the soldiers usually drank - and
of this he drank. See [Mat 27:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#049), and
[Joh 19:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#028). When Matthew and Mark
say that he "would not drink," they refer to a different thing and a
different time from John, and there is no contradiction.

[Matthew 27:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 27:35</span></span>

And they crucified him - To "crucify" means to put to death on a cross.
The "cross" has been described at [Mat
27:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#032). The usual manner of the
crucifixion was as follows: After the criminal had carried the cross,
attended with every possible gibe and insult, to the place of execution,
a hole was dug in the earth to receive the foot of it. The cross was
laid on the ground; the person condemned to suffer was stripped and was
extended on it, and the soldiers fastened the hands and feet either by
nails or thongs. After they had driven the nails deeply in the wood,
they elevated the cross with the agonizing sufferer on it, and, in order
to fix it more firmly in the earth, they let it fall violently into the
hole which they had dug to receive it. This sudden fall gave to the
person that was nailed to it a violent and convulsive shock, and greatly
increased his sufferings. The crucified person was then suffered to
hang, commonly, until pain, exhaustion, thirst, and hunger ended his
life. Sometimes the sufferings continued for days; and when friendly
death terminated the life, the body was often suffered to remain - a
loathsome object, putrefying in the sun or devoured by birds.

This punishment was deemed the most disgraceful and ignominious that was
practiced among the Romans. It was the way in which slaves, robbers, and
the most notorious and abandoned wretches were commonly put to death. It
was this, among other things, that exposed those who preached the gospel
to so much shame and contempt among the Greeks and Romans. They despised
everything that was connected with the death of one who had been put to
death as a slave and an outlaw.

Since it was the most ignominious punishment known, so it was the most
painful. The following circumstances made it a death of special pain:

1\. The position of the arms and the body was unnatural, the arms being
extended back and almost immovable. The least motion gave violent pain
in the hands and feet, and in the back, which was lacerated with
stripes.

2\. The nails, being driven through the parts of the hands and feet
which abound with "nerves," created the most exquisite anguish.

3\. The exposure of so many wounds to the air brought on a violent
inflammation, which greatly increased the poignancy of the suffering.

4\. The free circulation of the blood was prevented. More blood was
carried out in the arteries than could be returned by the veins. The
consequence was, that there was a great increase of blood in the veins
of the head, producing an intense pressure and violent pain. The same
was true of other parts of the body. This intense pressure in the
blood-vessels was the source of inexpressible misery.

5\. The pain gradually increased. There was no relaxation and no rest.
There was no prospect but death. The sufferer was commonly able to
endure it until the third, and sometimes even to the seventh day. The
intense sufferings of the Saviour, however, were sooner terminated. This
was caused, perhaps, in some measure, by his previous fatigue and
exhaustion, but still more by the intense sufferings of his soul in
bearing our griefs and carrying our sorrows in making an atonement for
the sins of the world.

And parted his garments - It was customary to crucify a person naked.
The clothes of the sufferer belonged to those who were executioners.
John says ([Joh 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023)) that they
divided his garments into four parts, to each soldier a part, but for
his coat they cast lots. See the notes at the place. When Matthew says,
therefore, that they parted his garments, casting lots, it is to be
understood that they "divided" one part of them, and for the other part
of them they cast lots.

That it might be fulfilled ... - The words here quoted are found in [Psa
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018). The whole psalm is usually
referred to Christ, and is a most striking description of his sufferings
and death.

[Matthew 27:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 27:36</span></span>

They watched him there - That is, the four soldiers who had crucified
him. They watched him lest his friends should come and release him.

[Matthew 27:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 27:37</span></span>

And set up over his head - John says [Joh
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#019) that Pilate wrote the title and
put it upon the cross. Probably Pilate wrote it or caused it to be
written, and directed the soldiers to set it up. A man is often said to
do what he directs others to do. It was customary to set up over the
heads of persons crucified the crime for which they suffered, and the
name of the sufferer The accusation on which Jesus had been condemned by
Pilate was his claiming to be the King of the Jews.

This is Jesus, the King of the Jews - The evangelists differ in the
account of this title. Mark [Mar 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#026)
says it was, "The King of the Jews." Luke [Luk
23:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#038), "This is the King of the Jews."
John [Joh 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#019), "Jesus of Nazareth,
the King of the Jews." But the difficulty may be easily removed. John
says that the title was written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. It is not
at all improbable that the inscription "varied" in these languages. One
evangelist may have translated it from the Hebrew, another from the
Greek, a third from the Latin, and a fourth may have translated one of
the inscriptions a little differently from another. Besides, the
evangelists all agree in the main point of the inscription, namely, that
he was the King of the Jews.

[Matthew 27:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 27:38</span></span>

Two thieves crucified ... - Rather two "robbers." Pilate did not reside
in Jerusalem. When he came there on the great feasts, or at other times,
it was, in part, to hold courts for the trial of criminals. These
robbers had been probably condemned at that time; and to show greater
contempt for Jesus, he was crucified between men of that abandoned
character, and on a cross that should have been occupied by their
companion and leader, Barabbas.

[Matthew 27:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mat 27:39</span></span>

Wagging their heads - In token of derision and insult. See [Job
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#004); [Psa
109:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#025).

[Matthew 27:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mat 27:40</span></span>

Thou that destroyest the temple ... - Meaning, Thou that didst boast
that thou couldst do it. This was one of the things that had been
falsely charged on him. It was intended for painful sarcasm and
derision. If he could destroy the "temple," they thought he might easily
come down from the cross.

[Matthew 27:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mat 27:42</span></span>

He saved others - It does not seem probable that they meant to admit
that he had actually saved others, but only that he "pretended" to save
them from death by miracles, or that he claimed to be the Messiah, and
thus affirmed that he "could" save them. This is, therefore, cutting
irony.

If he be the King of Israel ... - It may seem strange to some that Jesus
did not vindicate by a miracle his claims to be the Messiah, and come
down from the cross. But the time had come for him to make an atonement.
He had given full and sufficient proof that he was the Christ. Those who
had rejected him, and who mocked and taunted him, would have been little
likely to admit his claims if he had come down from the cross, since
they had set at naught all his other miracles. They said this for the
purpose of insult; and Jesus chose rather to suffer, though his
character was assailed, than to work a new miracle for their
gratification. He had foretold his death, and the time had come; and
now, amid revilings, and gibes, and curses, and the severe sarcasms of
an angry and apparently triumphant priesthood, he chose to die for the
sins of the world. To this they added "insult" to God, profanely calling
upon him to interpose by miracle and save him, if he was his friend; and
all this when their prophets had foretold this very scene, and when they
were fulfilling the predictions of their own Scriptures. See the Isa. 53
notes, and [Dan 9:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024) notes. So
wonderful is the way by which God causes His word to be fulfilled.

[Matthew 27:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">mat 27:44</span></span>

The thieves also - The robbers, or highwaymen. Luke says [Luk
23:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#039) that one of them did it, and
that the other reproved him and was penitent. The account in Luke may,
however, easily be reconciled with that in Matthew by supposing that "at
first both" of them reviled the Saviour, and that it is of this fact
that Matthew speaks. Afterward one of them relented and became penitent
perhaps from witnessing the patient sufferings of Christ. It is of this
one particularly that Luke speaks. Or it may be that what is true of one
of the criminals is by Matthew attributed to both. The evangelists, when
for the sake of brevity they avoid particularizing, often attribute to
many what is said or done by single persons, meaning no more than that
it was done by some one or more of them, without specifying the one.
Compare [Mar 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#017) with [Mat
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#015); [Mar
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#031) with [Luk
8:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#045); [Luk
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#013) with [Joh
6:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#008).

Cast the same in his teeth - This is a most unhappy translation. It
means in the original simply, they upbraided him or reproached him in
the same manner.

[Matthew 27:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">mat 27:45</span></span>

Now from the sixth hour - That is, from our twelve o'clock. The Jews
divided their day into twelve hours, beginning to count at sunrise.

There was darkness - This could not have been an eclipse of the sun, for
the Passover was celebrated at the time of the full moon, when the moon
is opposite to the sun. Luke says [Luk
23:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#045) that "the sun was darkened," but
it was not by an eclipse. The only cause of this was the interposing
power of God - furnishing testimony to the dignity of the sufferer, and
causing the elements to sympathize with the pains of his dying Son. It
was also especially proper to furnish this testimony when the "Sun of
righteousness" was withdrawing his beams for a time, and the Redeemer of
men was expiring. A thick darkness, shutting out the light of day, and
clothing every object with the gloom of midnight, was the appropriate
drapery with which the world should be clad when the Son of God expired.
This darkness was noticed by one at least of the pagan writers. Phlegon,
a Roman astronomer, speaking of the 14th year of the reign of Tiberius,
which is supposed to be that in which our Saviour died, says "that the
greatest eclipse of the sun that was ever known happened then, for the
day was so turned into night that the stars appeared."

Over all the land - That is, probably, over the whole land of Judea, and
perhaps some of the adjacent countries. The extent of the darkness is
not known.

The ninth hour - Until about three o'clock in the afternoon, at which
time the Saviour is supposed to have died.

[Matthew 27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">mat 27:46</span></span>

Eli, Eli ... - This language is not pure Hebrew nor Syriac, but a
mixture of both, called commonly "Syro-Chaldaic." This was probably the
language which the Saviour commonly spoke. The words are taken from [Psa
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001).

My God, my God ... - This expression is one denoting intense suffering.
It has been difficult to understand in what sense Jesus was "forsaken by
God." It is certain that God approved his work. It is certain that he
was innocent. He had done nothing to forfeit the favor of God. As his
own Son - holy, harmless, undefiled, and obedient - God still loved him.
In either of these senses God could not have forsaken him. But the
expression was probably used in reference to the following
circumstances, namely:

1\. His great bodily sufferings on the cross, greatly aggravated by his
previous scourging, and by the want of sympathy, and by the revilings of
his enemies on the cross. A person suffering thus might address God as
if he was forsaken, or given up to extreme anguish.

2\. He himself said that this was "the power of darkness," [Luk
22:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#053). It was the time when his
enemies, including the Jews and Satan, were suffered to do their utmost.
It was said of the serpent that he should bruise the heel of the seed of
the woman, [Gen 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015). By that has been
commonly understood to be meant that, though the Messiah would finally
crush and destroy the power of Satan, yet he should himself suffer
"through the power of the devil." When he was tempted Luke 4, it was
said that the tempter "departed from him for a season." There is no
improbability in supposing that he might be permitted to return at the
time of his death, and exercise his power in increasing the sufferings
of the Lord Jesus. In what way this might be done can be only
conjectured. It might be by horrid thoughts; by temptation to despair,
or to distrust God, who thus permitted his innocent Son to suffer; or by
an increased horror of the pains of dying.

3\. There might have been withheld from the Saviour those strong
religious consolations, those clear views of the justice and goodness of
God, which would have blunted his pains and soothed his agonies.
Martyrs, under the influence of strong religious feeling, have gone
triumphantly to the stake, but it is possible that those views might
have been withheld from the Redeemer when he came to die. His sufferings
were accumulated sufferings, and the design of the atonement seemed to
require that he should suffer all that human nature "could be made to
endure" in so short a time.

4\. Yet we have reason to think that there was still something more than
all this that produced this exclamation. Had there been no deeper and
more awful sufferings, it would be difficult to see why Jesus should
have shrunk from these sorrows and used such a remarkable expression.
Isaiah tells us [Isa 53:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004) that "he
bore our griefs and carried our sorrows; that he was wounded for our
transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities; that the chastisement of
our peace was laid upon him; that by his stripes we are healed." He hath
redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us [Gal
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013); he was made a sin-offering [Co2
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021); he died in our place, on our
account, that he might bring us near to God. It was this, doubtless,
which caused his intense sufferings. It was the manifestation of God's
hatred of sin, in some way which he has not explained, that he
experienced in that dread hour. It was suffering endured by Him that was
due to us, and suffering by which, and by which alone, we can be saved
from eternal death.

[Matthew 27:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">mat 27:47</span></span>

This man calleth for Elias - This was done purposely to deride him and
his pretensions to be the Messiah. The words "Eli, Eli," they might
easily pretend that they understood to mean Elias, or so pervert them.
The taunt would be more cutting, because it was the universal belief of
the Jews, as well as the doctrine of Christ, that "Elias" would come
before the Messiah. They derided him now, as calling upon "Elias" when
God would not help him; still keeping up the pretensions to being the
Messiah, and invoking "Elijah" to come from the dead to aid him. Or it
is possible that this might have been said by some bystanders who did
not understand the language in which he spoke, or who might not have
been near enough to hear him distinctly.

[Matthew 27:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">mat 27:48</span></span>

One of them ran - John [Joh 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#028) says
that this was in consequence of Jesus' saying "I thirst." One of the
effects of crucifixion was excessive thirst.

Took a sponge - A sponge is a well-known porous substance that easily
absorbs water. It was used in this case because, Jesus being elevated,
it was difficult to convey a cup to his lips.

Filled it with vinegar - This was the common drink of Roman soldiers. It
was a light wine, turned sour and mixed with water. John says [Joh
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#029) there was a vessel set full of
vinegar, probably for the use of the soldiers who watched his
crucifixion.

And put it on a reed - John says it was put upon "hyssop." The "hyssop"
was a "shrub," growing so large sometimes as to be called a "tree," [Kg1
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#033). The stalk of this was what
Matthew calls a "reed." The sponge fastened to this could easily be
extended to reach the mouth of "Jesus." This vinegar Jesus drank, for it
was not intended to "stupefy" him or blunt his sense of pain, like the
"wine" and myrrh.

[Matthew 27:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">mat 27:49</span></span>

The rest said ... - Still deriding his sufferings, and refusing to allow
even the poor consolation of a drink, to assuage the thirst of the
Saviour of the world in his dying agonies.

[Matthew 27:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">mat 27:50</span></span>

Cried again with a loud voice - He cried, "It is finished," [Joh
19:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#030). It was in the height of his
agony, probably attended with deep groaning, and uttered amid sorrows
which were never else experienced in our world. It finished the work of
atonement, made the way of salvation possible, rolled away the curse
from guilty people, and opened the kingdom of heaven to all true
believers.

Yielded up the ghost - This, though a literal translation, is unhappy.
It means resigned his spirit, or "expired." The same phrase is used by
the Septuagint in describing the death of Rachel. [Gen
35:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#018).

[Matthew 27:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">mat 27:51</span></span>

The vail of the temple - This was doubtless the veil, curiously
performed, which separated the holy from the most holy place, dividing
the temple into two apartments, [Exo
26:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#031).

In twain - In two pieces or parts. This was the time of day when the
priest was burning incense in the holy place, and it is probable that he
witnessed it. The most holy place has been usually considered as a type
of heaven, and the tearing of the veil to signify that the way to heaven
was now open to all - the great High Priest, the Lord Jesus, being about
to enter in as the forerunner of his people. However, about the design
of the tearing of the veil, the Scriptures are silent, and conjecture is
useless.

And the earth did quake - Or shook. Earthquakes are violent convulsions
of the ground, caused commonly by confined and rarefied air. This was
probably, however, a miraculous convulsion of the earth, in attestation
of the truth that the sufferer was the Messiah, the Son of God, and as
an exhibition of wrath at the crimes of those who put him to death. It
was not confined to Judea, but was felt in other countries. It is
mentioned by Roman writers.

The rocks rent - That is, were torn asunder. Rocks are still seen at
Mount Calvary thus rent asunder, which are said to be the ones that were
convulsed when the Saviour died.

[Matthew 27:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">mat 27:52</span></span>

And the graves were opened - "Graves" or sepulchres were most commonly
made, among the Jews, in solid rocks or in caves of rocks. The rending
of the rocks, therefore, would lay them open. The graves were opened by
this earthquake, but the dead in them did not rise until after his
resurrection.

And many bodies of the saints arose - Of course, it is not known who
these were, nor what became of them. It is probable that they were
persons who had recently died, and they appear to have been known in
Jerusalem; at least, had the ancient saints risen, they would not have
been known, and would not so soon have been credited as those who had
recently died.

Which slept - Which had died. The death of saints is often called
"sleep," [Dan 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002); [Co1
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#018); [Th1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#015).

[Matthew 27:53](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">mat 27:53</span></span>

And came out of the graves after his resurrection - The narrative of
Matthew does not determine whether they came to life before Jesus rose,
and remained in the tombs, or came to life after he died. The latter is
probably the correct opinion. There is nothing said of the reason why
they were raised. It is not improbable to suppose that it was, amid the
other wonders attending the death of Jesus, to convince the Jews that he
was the Messiah. Perhaps some who had been his open friends were raised
up now as an attestation that he in whom they had believed was the
Christ. What became of them after they had entered into the city whether
they again died or ascended to heaven, is not revealed, and conjecture
is vain.

The holy city - Jerusalem, called holy because the temple was there,
because it was devoted to God, and because it was the place of religious
solemnities.

[Matthew 27:54](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">mat 27:54</span></span>

Now when the centurion ... - Centurion, a captain of a hundred soldiers.
He was here placed over the band that attended the crucifixion.

They feared greatly - They regarded these things as proof that God was
angry, and they were terrified at the prospect that vengeance was coming
on them.

Truly this was the Son of God - They had heard, probably, that Jesus
professed to be the Son of God. Seeing these wonders, they believed that
God was now attesting the truth of his professions. The centurion was a
pagan, and had probably no very distinct notions of the phrase "the Son
of God" - perhaps understanding by it only that he was like the pagan
heroes who had been deified; but he certainly regarded these wonders as
proof that he was "what he professed to be." In the original it is "a
son of a god;" an expression perfectly suitable to a polytheist, who
believed in the existence of many gods. Mark [Mar
15:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#039) says that they affirmed that
"this man was the Son of God." Luke [Luk
23:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#047), that they said, "Certainly this
was a righteous man.' These things were said by "different persons," or
at different periods of his sufferings - one evangelist having recorded
one saying, and another another.

[Matthew 27:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">mat 27:55</span></span>

Beholding afar off - These women were probably not suffered to come near
the cross because it was surrounded by soldiers. They witnessed with
intense feelings his sufferings from some convenient place as near as
they could approach.

Ministering unto him - Attending him and providing for his wants. While
multitudes of people joined in the cry, "Crucify him!" and forsook him
in his trying moments, it does not appear that any of his female
followers were thus unfaithful. In the midst of all his trials, and all
the Contempt poured upon him, they adhered to their Redeemer. Never did
female constancy shine more brightly, and never was a happier example
set for all who should afterward believe on him!

[Matthew 27:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">mat 27:56</span></span>

Mary Magdalene - Mary of Magdala. She had a special cause of attachment
to the Saviour, having been relieved by him of a most dreadful calamity
and restored to her right mind, after being possessed by seven devils.
See the notes at [Luk 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#002).

And the mother of Zebedee's children - That is, of James and John, [Mat
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#002). Her name was Salome, [Mar
15:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#040).

[Matthew 27:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">mat 27:57</span></span>

When the even was come - That is, some time after three o'clock in the
afternoon. Before this, the Jews had besought Pilate that the legs of
those who were crucified might be broken and the bodies be taken down,
that they might not remain on the cross during the Sabbath. The
soldiers, coming to Jesus for that purpose, found that he was already
dead, contrary to their expectation. A soldier, however, thrust a spear
into his side, and there was furnished the fullest proof that he had
expired. See the notes at [Joh
19:31-37](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#031).

A rich man of Arimathea - It is uncertain where Arimathea was. There
were several cities of that name in Judea. It is commonly supposed to be
the same as Rama. See the notes at [Mat
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#017). Luke says that this was a "city
of the Jews," and it is probable, therefore, that it was in the tribe of
Benjamin, and but a short distance from Jerusalem. This man sustained a
high character. He was an "honorable counsellor, who also waited for the
kingdom of God" [Mar 15:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#043); he was "a
good man and a just" [Luk 23:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#050); he
had nobly set himself against the wicked purposes of the Sanhedrin [Luk
23:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#051); he was a disciple of Jesus,
though he was not openly his follower, because he feared the Jews, [Joh
19:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#038).

[Matthew 27:58](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#058)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">mat 27:58</span></span>

He went to Pilate - Because no one had a right to remove the body but by
authority of the magistrate. Jesus was condemned to be crucified,
usually a long and most bitter death, and in common cases it would have
been unlawful to have removed the body so soon.

[Matthew 27:59](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#059)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_059">mat 27:59</span></span>

"He wrapped it in a clean linen cloth." John adds that this was done
"with spices" [Joh 19:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#040). The Jews
were accustomed to use myrrh, aloes, and other aromatics in large
quantities when they buried their dead. When they were not regularly
embalmed, which was a long and tedious process, they enclosed the spices
in the folds of the linen, or wrapped the body in it. Spices were
sometimes used in such quantities as to form a "heap or bed," on which
the dead body was laid. Thus it is said of Asa [Ch2
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#014), "they laid him in the bed which
was filled with sweet odors and spices," etc. There not being time
properly to embalm the body of Jesus, he was buried in this manner. The
women who attended him, either not being aware of this, or desirous of
showing a further regard for him, returned from the sepulchre and
prepared other spices with which to embalm him on the first day of the
week, [Luk 23:56](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#056); [Luk
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#001).

[Matthew 27:60](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">mat 27:60</span></span>

In his own new tomb - John says [Joh
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#041) that this was in a garden that
was "in" or "near" the place where he was crucified. This tomb Joseph
had prepared for himself, as was not uncommon among the Jews. Compare
the notes at [Isa 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#016). In this tomb
Luke and John inform us that no man had been laid. This was so ordered,
in the providence of God, doubtless, that there might be no suspicion
about his identity when he rose; that it might not be alleged that
another person had risen, or that he was raised by touching the bones of
some prophet, as happened to the corpse that touched the bones of
Elisha, [Kg2 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#021). Farther, by being
buried here an important prophecy was remarkably fulfilled [Isa
53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009); "He made his grave - with the
rich in his death." The fulfillment of this is the more remarkable,
because during his life he associated with the poor and was himself
poor. See the notes at [Isa 53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009).
"Which he had hewn out in the rock." This was a common way of
constructing tombs in Judea. See the notes at [Mat
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#028). Being cut out of a rock, there
was no way by which the disciples could have access to it but by the
entrance, at which the guard was placed, and consequently it was
impossible for them to steal him away. The sepulchre, thus secure, was
rendered more so by rolling a great stone at its entrance; all possible
precautions thus being used, in the providence of God, against
imposition and deceit.

[Matthew 27:62](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#062)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_062">mat 27:62</span></span>

Now the next day, that followed the days of the preparation - The first
day of the feast of the Passover was called the day of "preparation,"
because all things were on that day got in readiness for the observances
of the paschal week. The Jewish day closed at sunset, and the Sabbath at
that time commenced. The "next day" mentioned here does not mean the
following day in our acceptation of the word, or the following
"morning," but the next day in the Jewish way of speaking - that is,
after the next day had commenced, or after sundown. To suppose them to
have waited until the next morning would be absurd, as the disciples
would be as likely to steal him away the first night as the second.

[Matthew 27:63](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#063)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">mat 27:63</span></span>

We remember - They had either heard him say this, or, more probably, had
understood that this was one of his doctrines.

That deceiver - One of the charges against him was that he deceived the
people, [Joh 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#012). By this title they
still chose to designate him, thinking that his death had fully
confirmed the truth of the charges against him.

[Matthew 27:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#064)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_064">mat 27:64</span></span>

Until the third day - That is, during two nights and the intervening
day. This proves that when the Jews spoke of "three days," they did not
of necessity mean three "whole days," but parts of three days, as was
the case in our Saviour's lying in the grave. See the notes at [Mat
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#040).

The last error shall be worse than the first - That is, the last
"deception," or the taking him from the tomb, pretending that he rose,
will have a wider influence among the people than the first, or his
pretending to be the Messiah.

[Matthew 27:65](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#065)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_065">mat 27:65</span></span>

Ye have a watch - The Jews had a guard of Roman soldiers, who kept watch
in the tower of Antonia, on the northwest of the temple. Pilate either
referred to these, or to the "watch" that attended the crucifixion - the
whole "band" that had been appointed for that. As the torments of
crucifixion sometimes lasted many days, the band had been probably
granted to them during that time, and they were therefore still at the
direction of the chief priests.

[Matthew 27:66](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#066)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_066">mat 27:66</span></span>

Sealing the stone - The sepulchre was made sure by affixing the large
stone to the entrance in such a way that it could not be removed without
detection. It was sealed. In what way this was done cannot now be
certainly told. The cave in which Daniel was cast was fastened in the
same manner, and sealed with the king's signet [Dan
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#017), perhaps by fastening the stone
in its place with cords, and bringing them together and uniting them
with wax, and impressing on that the seal of the king. In this way,
letters and books were anciently sealed. Possibly on the sepulchre of
Jesus was impressed in this manner the seal of Pilate - the seal of
office - making it doubly sure; or it may be that the stone was fitted
into the tomb with clay or cement, and on that was impressed the seal of
Pilate.

Setting a watch - That is, as large a number of soldiers as they judged
necessary to secure the tomb.

We cannot but be struck with the wisdom of God in ordering the
circumstances of the Saviour's burial in such a manner as to avoid the
possibility of deception. Had all this been done by his "friends," it
might have been said that they only pretended to secure the tomb, and
only pretended that he was dead. But he was adjudged to be dead "by the
Jews themselves;" Pilate was satisfied that that was the fact; they had
their own way about his burial; he was buried alone; the place of his
sepulchre was made sure, "expressly to prevent his being removed;" and
they placed around him a guard, in their own judgment large enough to
prevent his being taken away by force or strength. His very enemies,
therefore, took every possible precaution to place his resurrection
beyond the possibility of suspicion of fraud and imposture, and those
precautions were the very means of furnishing the most striking proof
that his death, burial, and resurrection were not impositions, but most
affecting, awful, and yet cheering realities.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 28](mat028)

</div>
