<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat015)  [Next](mat017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#001)

[Matthew 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 16:1</span></span>

See also [Mar 8:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#011).

The Pharisees also, and the Sadducees - See the notes at [Mat
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007).

Tempting - That is, trying him - feigning a desire to see evidence that
he was the Messiah, but with a real desire to see him make the attempt
to work a miracle and fail, so that they might betray him and ruin him.

A sign from heaven - Some miraculous appearance in the sky. Such
appearances had been given by the prophets; and they supposed, if he was
the Messiah, that his miracles would not all be confined to the earth,
but that he was able to give some signal miracle from heaven. Samuel had
caused it to thunder [Sa1 12:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#016);
Isaiah had caused the shadow to go back ten degrees on the dial of Ahaz
[Isa 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#008); and Moses had sent manna
from heaven, [Exo 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#004); [Joh
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#031). It is proper to say, that though
Christ did not choose then to show such wonders, yet far more stupendous
signs from heaven than these were exhibited at his death.

[Mat 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#002), [Mat
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#003)

He answered ... - The meaning of this answer is, There are certain
indications by which you judge about the weather.

In the evening you think you can predict the weather tomorrow. You have
evidence in the redness of the sky by which you judge. So there are
sufficient indications on which you should judge concerning me and these
times. My miracles, and the state of affairs in Judea, are an indication
by which you should judge.

Is red - Almost all nations have observed this as an indication of fair
weather.

In the morning ...the sky is red and lowering - That is, there are
threatening clouds in the sky, which are made red by the rays of the
rising sun. This, in Judea, was a sign of a tempest. In other places,
however, the signs of a storm may be different.

The face of the sky - The appearance of the sky.

[Mat 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#004)

A wicked and adulterous generation ... - See the notes at [Mat
12:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#038). Mark adds [Mar
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#012) that he signed deeply in spirit.
He did not say this without feeling; he was greatly affected with their
perverseness and obstinacy.

[Matthew 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 16:5</span></span>

The account in these verses is also recorded in [Mar
8:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#013).

[Mat 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#005)

And when his disciples were come to the other side - That is, to the
other side of the Sea of Galilee.

Mark says that he entered into a ship again, and departed to the other
side. The conversation with the Pharisees and Sadducees had been on the
western side of the Sea of Galilee. See the notes at [Mat
15:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#039). They crossed from that side
again to the east.

Had forgotten to take bread - That is, had forgotten to lay in a
sufficient supply. They had, it seems, not more than one loaf, [Mar
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#014).

[Mat 16:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#006)

Take heed ... - That is, be cautious, be on your guard.

The leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees - Leaven is used in making
bread.

It passes secretly, silently, but certainly through the mass of dough.
See the notes at [Mat 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#033). "None can
see its progress." So it was with the doctrines of the Pharisees. They
were insinuating, artful, plausible. They concealed the real tendency of
their doctrines; they instilled them secretly into the mind, until they
pervaded all the faculties like leaven.

They reasoned ... - The disciples did not understand him as referring to
the doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadducees, because the word "leaven"
was not often used among the Jews to denote doctrines, no other instance
of this use of the word occurring in the Scriptures. Besides, the Jews
had many particular rules about the leaven (yeast) which might be used
in making bread. Many held that it was not lawful to eat bread made by
the Gentiles; and the disciples, perhaps, supposed that he was
cautioning them not to procure a supply from the Pharisees and
Sadducees.

O ye of little faith! - Jesus, in reply, said that they should not be so
anxious about the supply of their temporal wants. They should not have
supposed, after the miracles that he had performed in feeding so many,
that he would caution them to be anxious about procuring bread for their
necessities. It was improper, then, for them to reason about a thing
like that, but they should have supposed that he referred to something
more important. The miracles had been full proof that he could supply
all their wants without such anxiety.

[Mat 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#012)

Then understood they ... - After this explanation they immediately saw
that he referred to the doctrines of the Pharisees and Sadducees.

Erroneous doctrines are like leaven in the following respects:

1\. They are at first slight and unimportant in appearance, just as
leaven is small in quantity as compared with the mass that is to be
leavened.

2\. They are insinuated into the soul unawares and silently, and are
difficult of detection.

3\. They act gradually.

4\. They act most certainly.

5\. They will pervade all the soul, and bring all the faculties under
their control.

[Matthew 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 16:13</span></span>

See also [Mar 8:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#027), and [Luk
9:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#018).

Cesarea Philippi - There were two cities in Judea called Caesarea. One
was situated on the borders of the Mediterranean (See the notes at [Act
8:40](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#040)), and the other was the one
mentioned here. This city was greatly enlarged and ornamented by Philip
the tetrarch, son of Herod, and called Caesarea in honor of the Roman
emperor, Tiberius Caesar. To distinguish it from the other Caesarea the
name of Philip was added to it, and it was called Caesarea Philippi, or
Caesarea of Philippi. It was situated in the boundaries of the tribe of
Naphtali, at the foot of Mount Hermon. It is now called Panias or
Banias, and contains (circa 1880's) about 200 houses, and is inhabited
chiefly by Turks. The word "coasts" here now usually applied to land in
the vicinity of the sea - means "borders" or "regions." He came into the
part of the country which appertained to Cesarea Philippi. He was
passing northward from the region of Bethsaida, on the coasts of Magdala
[Mat 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#039), where the transactions
recorded in the previous verses had occurred.

When Jesus came - The original is, "when Jesus was coming." Mark says
[Mar 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#027) that this conversation took
place when they were in the way, and this idea should have been retained
in translating Matthew. While in the way, Jesus took occasion to call
their attention "to the truth that he was the Messiah." This truth it
was of much consequence that they should fully believe and understand;
and it was important, therefore, that he should often learn their views,
to establish them if right, and correct them if wrong. He began,
therefore, by inquiring what was the common report respecting him.

Whom do men say ... - This passage has been variously rendered. Some
have translated it, "Whom do men say that I am? the Son of man?" Others,
"Whom do men say that I am - I, who am the Son of man - i. e., the
Messiah?" The meaning is nearly the same. He wished to obtain the
sentiments of the people respecting himself.

[Mat 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#014)

And they said ... - See the notes at [Mat
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#014). They supposed that he might be
John the Baptist, as Herod did, risen from the dead. See [Mat
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#002). He performed many miracles, and
strongly resembled John in his manner of life, and in the doctrines
which he taught.

[Mat 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016)

And Simon Peter answered ... - Peter, expressing the views of the
apostles, with characteristic forwardness answered the question proposed
to them by Jesus: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God."

The Christ - The Messiah, the "Anointed" of God. See the notes at [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001).

The Son - That is, the Son by way of eminence - in a special sense. See
the notes at [Mat 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#017). This
appellation was understood as implying divinity, [Joh
10:29-36](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029).

Of the living God - The term "living" was given to the true God to
distinguish him from idols, that are dead, or lifeless blocks and
stones. He is also the Source of life, temporal, spiritual, and eternal.
The word "living" is often given to him in the Old Testament, [Jos
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#010); [Sa1
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#026), [Sa1
17:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#036); [Jer
10:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#009), etc. In this noble confession
Peter expressed the full belief of himself and of his brethren that he
was the long-expected Messiah. Other people had very different opinions
of him, but they were satisfied, and were not ashamed to confess it.

[Mat 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017)

And Jesus answered, Blessed art thou ... - Simon Bar-jona is the same as
Simon son of Jona. Bar is a Syriac word signifying son. The father of
Peter, therefore, was Jona, or Jonas, [Joh
1:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#042); [Joh
21:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#016).

Blessed - That is, happy, honored, evincing a proper spirit, and
entitled to the approbation of God.

For flesh and blood - This phrase usually signifies man (see [Gal
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016); [Eph
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)), and it has been commonly
supposed that Jesus meant to say that man had not revealed it, but he
seems rather to have referred to himself. "This truth you have not
learned from my lowly appearance, from my human nature, from my apparent
rank and standing in the world. You, Jews, were expecting to know the
Messiah by his external splendor; his pomp and power as a man; but you
have not learned me in this manner. I have shown no such indication of
my Messiahship. Flesh and blood have not shown it. In spite of my
appearance, my lowly state - my lack of resemblance to what you have
expected, you have learned it as from God." They had been taught this by
Jesus' miracles, his instructions, and by the direct teachings of God
upon their minds. To "reveal" is to make known, or communicate something
that was unknown or secret.

[Mat 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)

And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter - The word "Peter," in
Greek, means "a rock." It was given to Simon by Christ when he called
him to be a disciple, [Joh 1:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#042)

Cephas is a Syriac word, meaning the same as Peter - a rock, or stone.
The meaning of this phrase may be thus expressed: "Thou, in saying that
I am the Son of God, hast called me by a name expressive of my true
character. I, also, have given to thee a name expressive of your
character. I have called you Peter, a rock, denoting firmness, solidity,
stability, and your confession has shown that the name is appropriate. I
see that you are worthy of the name, and will be a distinguished support
of my religion."

And upon this rock ... - This passage has given rise to many different
interpretations. Some have supposed that the word "rock" refers to
Peter's confession, and that Jesus meant to say, upon this rock, this
truth that thou hast confessed, that I am the Messiah and upon
confessions of this from all believers, I will build my church.
Confessions like this shall be the test of piety, and in such
confessions shall my church stand amid the flames of persecution, the
fury of the gates of hell. Others have thought that Jesus referred to
himself. Christ is called a rock, [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016); [Pe1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#008). And it has been thought that he
turned from Peter to himself, and said, "Upon this rock, this truth that
I am the Messiah - upon myself as the Messiah, I will build my church."
Both these interpretations, though plausible, seem forced upon the
passage to avoid the main difficulty in it. Another interpretation is,
that the word "rock" refers to Peter himself.

This is the obvious meaning of the passage; and had it not been that the
Church of Rome has abused it, and applied it to what was never intended,
no other interpretation would have been sought for. "Thou art a rock.
Thou hast shown thyself firm, and suitable for the work of laying the
foundation of the church. Upon thee will I build it. Thou shalt be
highly honored; thou shalt be first in making known the gospel to both
Jews and Gentiles." This was accomplished. See Acts 2:14-36, where he
first preached to the Jews, and Acts 10, where he preached the gospel to
Cornelius and his neighbors, who were Gentiles. Peter had thus the honor
of laying the foundation of the church among the Jews and Gentiles; and
this is the plain meaning of this passage. See also [Gal
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009). But Christ did not mean, as the
Roman Catholics say he did, to exalt Peter to supreme authority above
all the other apostles, or to say that he was the only one upon whom he
would rear his church. See Acts 15, where the advice of James, and not
that of Peter, was followed. See also [Gal
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011), where Paul withstood Peter to
his face, because he was to be blamed - a thing which could not have
happened if Christ (as the Roman Catholics say) meant that Peter was
absolute and infallible. More than all, it is not said here, or anywhere
else in the Bible, that Peter would have infallible successors who would
be the vicegerents of Christ and the head of the church. The whole
meaning of the passage is this: "I will make you the honored instrument
of making known my gospel first to Jews and Gentiles, and I will make
you a firm and distinguished preacher in building my church."

Will build my church - This refers to the custom of building in Judea
upon a rock or other very firm foundation. See the notes at [Mat
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024). The word "church" literally
means "those called out," and often means an assembly or congregation.
See [Act 19:32](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#032), Greek; [Act
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#038). It is applied to Christians as
being "called out" from the world. It means sometimes the whole body of
believers, [Eph 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022); [Co1
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#032). This is its meaning in this
place. It means, also, a particular society of believers worshipping in
one place, [Act 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#001); [Act
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#031); [Co1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#002), etc.; sometimes, also, a society
in a single house, as [Rom 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#005). In
common language it means the church visible - i. e., all who profess
religion; or invisible, i. e., all who are real Christians, professors
or not.

And the gates of hell ... - Ancient cities were surrounded by walls. In
the gates by which they were entered were the principal places for
holding courts, transacting business, and deliberating on public
matters. See the notes at [Mat 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013).
Compare the notes at [Job 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#007). See
also [Deu 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#004); [Sa1
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#018); [Jer
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#010); [Gen
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#001); [Psa
69:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#012); [Psa
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#014); [Pro
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#021). The word "gates," therefore, is
used for counsels, designs, machinations, evil purposes.

"Hell" means, here, the place of departed spirits, particularly evil
spirits; and the meaning of the passage is, that all the plots,
stratagems, and machinations of the enemies of the church would not be
able to overcome it a promise that has been remarkably fulfilled.

[Mat 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)

And I will give unto thee ... - A key is an instrument for opening a
door.

He that is in possession of it has the power of access, and has a
general care of a house. Hence, in the Bible, a key is used as a symbol
of superintendence an emblem of power and authority. See the [Isa
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#022) note; [Rev
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#018); [Rev
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#007) notes. The kingdom of heaven here
means, doubtless, the church on earth. See the notes at [Mat
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002). When the Saviour says, therefore,
he will give to Peter the keys of the kingdom of heaven, he means that
he will make him the instrument of opening the door of faith to the
world the first to preach the gospel to both Jews and Gentiles. This was
done, Acts 2:14-36; 10. The "power of the keys" was given, on this
occasion, to Peter alone, solely for this reason; the power of "binding
and loosing" on earth was given to the other apostles with him. See [Mat
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018). The only pre-eminence, then,
that Peter had was the honor of first opening the doors of the gospel to
the world.

Whatsoever thou shalt bind ... - The phrase "to bind" and "to loose" was
often used by the Jews. It meant to prohibit and to permit. To bind a
thing was to forbid it; to loose it, to allow it to be done. Thus, they
said about gathering wood on the Sabbath day, "The school of Shammei
binds it" - i. e., forbids it; "the school of Hillel looses it" - i. e.,
allows it. When Jesus gave this power to the apostles, he meant that
whatsoever they forbade in the church should have divine authority;
whatever they permitted, or commanded, should also have divine authority
- that is, should be bound or loosed in heaven, or meet the approbation
of God. They were to be guided infallibly in the organization of the
church:

1\. by the teaching of Christ, and,

2\. by the teaching of the Holy Spirit.

This does not refer to persons, but to things - "whatsoever," not
whosoever. It refers to rites and ceremonies in the church. Such of the
Jewish customs as they should forbid were to be forbidden, and such as
they thought proper to permit were to be allowed. Such rites as they
should appoint in the church were to have the force of divine authority.
Accordingly, they commanded the Gentile converts to "abstain from
pollutions of idols, and from fornication, and from things strangled,
and from blood" [Act 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020); and, in
general, they organized the church, and directed what was to be observed
and what was to be avoided. The rules laid down by them in the Acts of
the Apostles and in the Epistles, in connection with the teachings of
the Saviour as recorded in the evangelists, constitute the only law
binding on Christians in regard to the order of the church, and the
rites and ceremonies to be observed in it.

[Mat 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#020)

Then charged ... - That is, he commanded them.

[Mar 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#030) and Luke [Luk
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#021) say (in Greek) that he strictly
or severely charged them. He laid emphasis on it, as a matter of much
importance. The reason of this seems to be that his time had not fully
come; that he was not willing to rouse the Jewish malice, and to
endanger his life, by having it proclaimed that he was the Messiah. The
word "Jesus" is wanting in many manuscripts, and should probably be
omitted: "Then he charged them strictly to tell no man that he was the
Christ or Messiah."

[Matthew 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 16:21</span></span>

See also [Mar 7:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#031); [Luk
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#022). "From that time forth." This was
the first intimation that he gave that he was to die in this cruel
manner. He had taken much pains to convince them that he was the
Messiah; he saw by the confession of Peter that they were convinced, and
he then began to prepare their minds for the awful event which was
before him. Had he declared this when he first called them they would
never have followed him. Their minds Were not prepared for it. They
expected a temporal, triumphant prince as the Messiah. He first,
therefore, convinced them that he was the Christ, and then, with great
prudence, began to correct their apprehensions of the proper character
of the Messiah.

Elders - The men of the great council or Sanhedrin. See the notes at
[Mat 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007).

Chief priests and scribes - See the notes at [Mat
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007).

[Mat 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#022)

Then Peter took him - This may mean either that he interrupted him, or
that he took him aside, or that he took him by the hand as a friend.

This latter is probably the true meaning. Peter was strongly attached to
him. He could not bear to think of Jesus' death. He expected, moreover,
that he would be the triumphant Messiah. In his ardor, and confidence,
and strong attachment, he seized him by the hand as a friend, and said,
"Be it far from thee." This phrase might have been translated, "God be
merciful to thee; this shall not be unto thee." It expressed Peter's
strong desire that it might not be. The word "rebuke" here means to
admonish or earnestly to entreat, as in [Luk
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#003). It does not mean that Peter
assumed authority over Christ, but that he earnestly expressed his wish
that it might not be so. Even this was improper. He should have been
submissive, and not have interfered.

[Mat 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#023)

Get thee behind me, Satan - The word "Satan" literally means "an
adversary," or one who opposes us in the accomplishment of our designs.

It is applied to the devil commonly, as the opposer or adversary of man;
but there is no evidence that the Lord Jesus meant to apply this term to
Peter, as signifying that he was Satan or the devil, or that he used the
term in anger. He may have used it in the general sense which the word
bore as an adversary or opposer; and the meaning may be, that such
sentiments as Peter expressed then were opposed to him and his plans.
His interference was improper. His views and feelings stood in the way
of the accomplishment of the Saviour's designs. There was, undoubtedly,
a rebuke in this language, for the conduct of Peter was improper; but
the idea which is commonly attached to it, and which, perhaps, our
translation conveys, implies a more severe and harsh rebuke than the
Saviour intended, and than the language which he used would express.

Thou art an offence - That is, a stumbling-block. Your advice and wishes
are in my way. If followed, they would prevent the very thing for which
I came.

Thou savourest not - Literally, thou thinkest not upon; or your language
and spirit are not such as spring from a supreme regard to the will of
God, or from proper views of him, but such as spring from the common
views entertained by people. You think that those things should not be
done which God wishes to be done. You judge of this matter as people do
who are desirous of honor; and not as God, who sees it best that I
should die, to promote the great interests of mankind.

[Matthew 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 16:24</span></span>

This discourse is also recorded in [Mar
8:34-38](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#034); [Mar
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#001); and [Luk
9:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#023).

Let him, deny himself - That is, let him surrender to God his will, his
affections, his body, and his soul. Let him not seek his own happiness
as the supreme object, but be willing to renounce all, and lay down his
life also, if required.

Take up his cross - See the notes at [Mat
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#038).

[Mat 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#025)

Whosoever will save his life ... - See the notes at [Mat
10:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#039).

[Mat 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#026)

For what is a man profited ... - To gain the whole world means to
possess it as our own - all its riches, its honors, and its pleasures.

"To lose his own soul" means to be cast away, to be shut out from
heaven, to be sent to hell. Two things are implied by Christ in these
questions:

1\. That they who are striving to gain the world, and are unwilling to
give it up for the sake of religion, will lose their souls; and,

2\. That if the soul is lost, nothing can be given in exchange for it,
or that it can never afterward be saved. There is no redemption in hell.

[Mat 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#027)

For the Son of man ... - That is, he will return to judge the world.

He will come in glory the glory of his Father the majesty with which God
is accustomed to appear, and which befits God. He will be attended by
angels. He will judge all people.

Reward - The word "reward" means recompense. He will deal with them
according to their character. The righteous he will reward in heaven
with glory and happiness. The wicked he will send to hell, as a reward
or recompense for their evil works. This fact, that he will come to
judgment, he gives as a reason why we should be willing to deny
ourselves and follow him. Even though it should be now attended with
contempt and suffering, yet then he will reward his followers for all
their shame and sorrow, and receive them to his kingdom. He adds [Mar
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#038), that if we are ashamed of him
here, he will be ashamed of us there. That is, if we reject and disown
him here, he will reject and disown us there.

[Mat 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#028)

Verily I say unto you ... - To encourage them, he assured them that,
though his kingdom was now obscure and despised - though he was cast out
and little known - yet the time was near when he would be regarded in a
different manner, and his kingdom be established with great power.

This cannot refer to the end of the world, and there is no need of
referring it to the destruction of Jerusalem.

Taste of death - That is, die. Before they die they shall see this.

Son of man coming in his kingdom - Mark and Luke have explained this:
[Mar 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#001), "Until they have seen the
kingdom of God come with power;" [Luk
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#027), "Till they see the kingdom of
God." The meaning evidently is, "till they shall see my kingdom," i. e.,
my church, now small, feeble, and despised, greatly enlarged,
established, and spreading with great rapidity and extent. All this was
accomplished. All these apostles, except Judas, lived to see the wonders
of the day of Pentecost; some of them, John particularly, saw the Jewish
nation scattered, the temple destroyed, the gospel established in Asia,
Rome, Greece, and in a large part of the known world.

Remarks On Matthew 16

1\. People will often judge far more correctly about natural than about
spiritual things, [Mat 16:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#001). In
respect to natural objects they are watchful. In them they feel a deep
interest, and they watch for every sign that may affect their interest.
They are too much concerned to judge falsely. But they feel no such
interest in religious things. Hence, it happens that people who have
good sense and much wisdom in regard to worldly concerns, are often
exceedingly foolish in regard to religion. They believe reports
respecting religion, revivals, and missions, which they would despise on
any other subject. They read and believe newspapers and other
publications, which they would hold in contempt on any other topic but
religion. They give a degree of weight to arguments against the Bible,
and against the doctrines of the gospel, to which they would attach
little or no importance on any other subject. They sustain themselves in
infidelity by arguments which they would regard as of no force if the
same kind of reasoning was urged in defense of anything else.

2\. It is of importance to watch the signs of the times, [Mat
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#003). In the days of Christ it was the
duty of the people to look at the evidence that he was the Messiah. The
proofs were clear that he was the Messiah. It is also important to look
at the signs of the times in which we live. They are clear also. Much is
doing; and the diffusion of the Bible, the labors among the pagan, the
distribution of tracts, and perhaps, above all, the institution of
Sunday schools, betoken an eventful age, and are an indication that
brighter days are about to dawn on the world. We should watch these
signs that we may rejoice; that we may pray with more fervor, and that
we may do our part to advance the kingdom of God. Little children should
grow up believing that they live in an important age; that they enjoy
many special privileges, and that they may and must do much to spread
the gospel through the earth. Even in childhood, they should pray, and
they should give to benefit others; and, most of all, they should give
themselves to Christ, that they may benefit others with a right spirit.

3\. Sinners should be addressed with deep feeling and faithfulness, [Mar
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#012). Jesus sighed deeply. So should
we. We should not be harsh, or sour, or cold and unfeeling when we
address our fellow-men about eternity. We should weep over them, and
pray for them, and speak to them, not as if we were better than they,
but with an earnest desire for their salvation. Compare [Act
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#031); [Phi
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#018).

4\. People easily mistake plain instruction, [Mat
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#007). And especially is this the case
where there is any chance of giving a worldly turn to the instruction.
If people's thoughts - even those of Christians were more off from the
world, and they thought less of the supply of their temporal wants, they
would understand the truths of religion much better than they do. No man
can understand the doctrines of religion aright whose principal concern
is what he shall eat, and drink, and wear. Hence, even Christians are
often strangely ignorant of the plainest truths of religion; and hence
the importance of teaching those truths to children before their
thoughts become engrossed by the world; and hence, too, the importance
of Sunday schools.

5\. We should not have undue anxiety about the supply of our wants.
Christ supplied many thousands by a word, and he can easily supply us,
[Mat 16:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#009).

6\. We should learn, from his past goodness, to trust him for the
future, [Mat 16:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#009).

7\. We should be on our guard against error, [Mat
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#011). It is sly, artful, plausible,
working secretly, but effectually. We should always be cautious of what
we believe, and examine it by the word of God. False doctrines are often
made as much like the truth as possible, for the very purpose of
deceiving. "Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light," [Co2
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014).

8\. It is important to ascertain our views of Christ, [Mat
16:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#013). Our all depends on this. If
we do not think and feel right respecting him we cannot be safe. We
should often, then, ask ourselves - we should ask one another - what we
think of Christ.

9\. It is our duty to profess attachment to Christ. It should be done
boldly, and always, [Mat 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016). We
should never be ashamed of him. And to do this, we should always, in our
own hearts, believe that he is the Christ, the Son of the living God.

10\. We should esteem it a great happiness and honor to be enabled thus
to show our attachment to him. The world may not honor us, but God will,
and He will pronounce us blessed, [Mat
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017).

11\. God only reveals to people right views of Christ, [Mat
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017). This he does by his word and
Spirit. We should, then search the Bible; and we should pray much that
God would reveal his Son in us, and enable us boldly to confess him
before people.

12\. The church is safe, [Mat 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018).
It may be small - it may be feeble - it may weep much - it may be much
opposed and ridiculed - it may have mighty enemies - the rich and the
great may set themselves against it - but it is safe. It is founded upon
a rock. Its enemies shall never be able to overcome it. Jesus has
promised it, and in all ages he has shown that he has remembered his
promise. It has not been suffered to become extinct. It has been
persecuted, opposed, ridiculed, and almost driven from the world; but a
few have been found who have loved the Lord; and soon the flame has
kindled, and the church has shone forth "fair as the sun, clear as the
moon, and terrible as any army with banners." So it is still. Feeble
churches may mourn much - iniquity may abound - the few pious people may
weep in secret places, but Jesus hears their groans and counts their
tears, and they and the church are safe. He is their friend, and all the
powers of hell shall not prevail against his church.

13\. The importance of prudence in delivering truth, [Mat
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#021). It should be well-timed - it
should be when people are prepared to receive it. Especially is this
true of young converts. They have need of milk, and not of strong meat.
They should not be surprised that many doctrines of the Bible are
mysterious now, but they will fully comprehend them hereafter. Peter, a
young convert, did not understand the plain doctrine that Jesus must die
for sin, yet it was made clear to him later, and, most cordially, he
loved it.

14\. It is highly wicked and improper to attempt to counsel God, or to
think that we understand things better than he does, [Mat
16:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#022). God's plan is the best plan;
and though it does not fall within our views of "wisdom," yet we should
be still. It is all wise. What He does we do not know now, yet we shall
know hereafter.

15\. We see what religion requires, [Mat
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#024). We must deny ourselves. We must
submit to trials. We must do our duty. We must welcome persecution, [Mat
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010). We must be, in all places, among
all people, and in every employment, Christians, no matter what may
happen. Come poverty, disease, persecution, death, it is ours to take up
the cross and do our duty. So, apostles, and martyrs, and the Saviour
himself have gone before us, and we must follow in their steps:

"Shall I be carried to the skies

On flowery beds of ease,

While others fought to win the prize

And sailed through bloody seas?

"Sure I must fight if I would reign;

Increase my courage, Lord,

To bear the cross, endure the shame,

Supported by Thy Word."

16\. How foolish are the people of this world! [Mat
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#026). In a little time how worthless
will be all their wealth! It is gained by anxiety, and toil, and tears.
It never satisfies. It harasses them with constant care. It smooths no
wrinkles on their brow, alleviates no pain when they are sick, saves no
friend from death, gives no consolation in regard to the future, and may
be left at any moment. Others will soon possess, and perhaps scatter in
dissipation, what they have obtained by so much toil. See [Psa
39:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006). And while they scatter or enjoy
it, where shall the soul of him be who spent all his probation to obtain
it? Alas! Lost, lost, lost - forever lost! And no wealth, no man, no
devil, no angel, can redeem him, or be given for his soul. The harvest
will be past, the summer ended, and he not saved. In gaining the world
he made two things certain - disappointment and trouble here, and an
eternity of woe hereafter. How foolish and wicked is man!

17\. The righteous should rejoice that Jesus will come again to our
world. He will reward them, [Mat
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#027). He will come as their friend,
and they shall ascend with him to heaven.

18\. The wicked should weep and wail that Jesus will come again to our
world. He will punish them for their crimes, [Mat
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#027). They cannot escape. See [Rev
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#007).

19\. It will not be long before he will come, [Mat
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#028). At any rate, it will not be
long before we shall meet him. Death is near; and then we must stand
before him, and give an account of the deeds done in the body.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 17](mat017)

</div>
