<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat025)  [Next](mat027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 26:0</span></span>

Matthew 26:1-16

See also [Mar 14:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#001); [Luk
22:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#001); [Joh
12:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001).

[Matthew 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 26:2</span></span>

After two days is - the feast of the Passover.

See the notes at [Mat 12:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#001). The
festival of the Passover was designed to preserve among the Jews the
memory of their liberation from Egyptian servitude, and of the safety of
their first-born in that night when the firstborn of the Egyptians
perished, Exo. 12. The name "Passover" was given to the feast because
the Lord "passed over" the houses of the Israelites without slaying
their first-born, while the Egyptians were cut off, [Exo
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#013). It was celebrated seven days,
namely, from the 15th to the 21st of the month Abib or Nisan (April),
[Exo 12:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015); [Exo
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#015). During all this period the
people ate unleavened bread, and hence the festival was sometimes called
the "feast of unleavened bread," [Exo
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#018); [Lev
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#006). On the evening of the fourteenth
day, all the leaven or yeast in the family was removed with great care,
as it is to the present time - a circumstance to which the apostle
alludes in [Co1 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007).

On the tenth day of the month the master of a family separated a lamb or
a goat of a year old from the flock [Exo
12:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#001), which he killed on the 14th
day before the altar, [Deu 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#002), [Deu
16:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#005). The lamb was commonly slain at
about 3 o'clock p. m.. The blood of the paschal lamb was, in Egypt,
sprinkled on the door-posts of the houses; afterward it was poured by
the priests at the foot of the altar, [Exo
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#007). The lamb thus slain was roasted
whole, with two spits thrust through it - one lengthwise and one
transversely - crossing each other near the forelegs, so that the animal
was in a manner, crucified. Not a bone of it might be broken - a
circumstance strongly representing the sufferings of our Lord Jesus, the
Passover slain for us, [Joh 19:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#036);
[Co1 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007). Thus roasted, the lamb was
served up with wild and bitter herbs, Not fewer than ten, nor more than
twenty persons, were admitted to these sacred feasts. At first it was
observed with their loins girt about, with sandals on their feet, and
with all the preparations for an immediate journey. This, in Egypt, was
significant of the haste with which they were about to depart from the
land of bondage. The custom was afterward retained.

The order of the celebration of this feast was as follows: The ceremony
commenced with drinking a cup of wine mingled with water, after having
given thanks to God for it. This was the "first cup." Then followed the
"washing of hands," with another short form of thanksgiving to God. The
table was then supplied with the provisions, namely, the bitter salad,
the unleavened bread, the lamb, and a thick sauce composed of dates,
figs, raisins, vinegar, etc. They then took a small quantity of salad,
with another thanksgiving, and ate it; after which, all the dishes were
removed from the table, and a second cup of wine was set before each
guest, as at first. The dishes were removed, it is said, to excite the
curiosity of children, and to lead them to make inquiry into the cause
of this observance. See [Exo 12:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#026).
The leading person at the feast then began and rehearsed the history of
the servitude of the Jews in Egypt, the manner of their deliverance, and
the reason of instituting the Passover. The dishes were then returned to
the table, and he said, "This is the Passover which we eat, because that
the Lord passed over the houses of our fathers in Egypt;" and then,
holding up the salad and the unleavened bread, he stated the design,
namely, that the one represented the bitterness of the Egyptian bondage,
and the other the suddenness of their deliverance.

This done, he repeated [Psa 113:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#001);
[Psa 114:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001), offered a short prayer,
and all the company drank the wine that had been standing some time
before them. This was the "second cup." The hands were then again
washed, and the meal then eaten with the usual forms and solemnities;
after which they washed the hands again, and then drank another cup of
wine, called "the cup of blessing," because the leader was accustomed in
a particular manner, over that cup, to offer thanks to God for his
goodness. This is the cup which our Saviour is supposed to have taken
when he instituted the Lord's Supper, called by Paul "the cup of
blessing," [Co1 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#016). There was still
another cup, which was drunk when they were about to separate, called
the "Hallel," because in connection with it they were accustomed to
repeat the lesser Hallel, or Ps. 115; 116; [Psa
117:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001); 118. In accordance with this,
our Saviour and his disciples sang a hymn as they were about to go to
the Mount of Olives, [Mat 26:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#030). It is
probable that our Saviour complied with these rites according to the
custom of the Jews. While doing it, he signified that the typical
reference of the Passover was about to be accomplished, and he
instituted in place of it "the supper" - the communion - and, of course,
the obligation to keep the Passover then ceased.

The Son of man is betrayed - Will be betrayed. He did not mean to say
that they then knew that he would be betrayed, for it does not appear
that they had been informed of the precise time; but they knew that the
Passover was at hand, and he then informed them that he would be
betrayed.

To be crucified - To be put to death on the cross. See the notes at [Mat
27:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#035).

[Mat 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#003)

Then assembled ... - This was a meeting of the great council or
Sanhedrin.

See the notes at [Mat 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022).

The palace - The original word properly denotes the Hall or large area
in the center of the dwelling, called the court. See the notes at [Mat
9:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#001). It may be understood, however,
as referring to the palace itself.

The high priest - Holding the office that was first conferred on Aaron,
Exo. 28. The office was at first hereditary, descending on the oldest
son, [Num 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#010). Antiochus Epiphanes
(160 BC), when he had possession of Judea, sold the office to the
highest bidder. In the year 152 BC, Alexander, King of Syria, conferred
the office on Jonathan (1 Macc. 10:18-20), whose brother Simon was,
afterward created by the Jews both prince and high priest, 1 Macc.
14:35-47. His posterity, who at the same time sustained the office of
kings, occupied the station of high priest until the time of Herod, who
changed the incumbents of the office at pleasure - a liberty which the
Romans ever afterward exercised without any restraint. The office was
never more fluctuating than in the time of our Saviour. Hence, it is
said that Caiaphas was high priest "for that year," [Joh
11:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#051). Persons who had been high
priests, and had been removed from office, still retained the name.
Hence, more than one high priest is sometimes mentioned, though strictly
there was but one who held the office.

[Mat 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#004)

By subtlety - By guile, deceit, or in some secret manner, so that the
people would not know it.

Jesus was regarded by the people as a distinguished prophet, and by most
of them, probably, as the Messiah; and the Sanhedrin did not dare to
take him away openly, lest the people should rise and rescue him. They
were probably aware that he had gone out to Bethany, or to some place
adjacent to the city; and as he passed his nights there and not in the
city, there was need of guile to ascertain the place to which he had
retired, and to take him.

[Mat 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#005)

Not on the feast-day - Not during the feast.

The feast lasted for seven days. A vast multitude attended from all
parts of Judea. Jerusalem is said to have contained at such times "three
million people." Amid such a multitude there were frequent tumults and
seditions, and the Sanhedrin was justly apprehensive there "would" be
now, if, in open day and in the temple, they took away a teacher so
popular as Jesus, and put him to death. They therefore sought how they
might do it secretly and by guile.

[Mat 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#006)

In Bethany - See the notes at [Mat
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001).

Simon the leper - Simon, who had been a leper.

Leper - See the notes at [Mat 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#001). It
was unlawful to eat with persons that had the leprosy, and it is more
than probable, therefore, that this Simon had been healed - perhaps by
our Lord himself. John [Joh 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001) says
that this was the house where Lazarus was, who had been raised from the
dead. Probably Lazarus was a relative of Simon's, and was living with
him. Further, he says that they made a supper for Jesus, and that Martha
served. He says that this was six days before the Passover. From the
order in which Matthew and Mark mention it, it would have been supposed
that it was but two days before the Passover, and after the cleansing of
the temple; but it is to be observed,

1\. that Matthew and Mark often neglect the exact order of the events
that they record.

2\. that they do not "affirm" at what time this was. They leave it
indefinite, saying that "while" Jesus was in Bethany he was anointed by
Mary.

3\. that Matthew introduced it here for the purpose of giving a
"connected" account of the conduct of "Judas." "Judas" complained at the
waste of the ointment [Joh 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#004), and
one of the effects of his indignation, it seems, was to betray his Lord.

[Mat 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#007)

There came to him a woman - This woman was Mary, the sister of Lazarus
and Martha, [Joh 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#003).

Having an alabaster box - The "alabaster" is a species of marble,
distinguished for being light, and of a beautiful white color, almost
transparent.

It was much used by the ancients for the purpose of preserving various
kinds of ointment in.

Of very precious ointment - That is, of ointment of "great value;" that
was rare and difficult to be obtained. Mark [Mar
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#003) and John [Joh
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#003) say that it was ointment of
spikenard. In the original it is "nard." It was procured from an herb
growing in the Indies, chiefly obtained from the root, though sometimes
also from the bark. It was liquid, so as easily to flow when the box or
vial was open, and was distinguished particularly for an agreeable
smell. See [Sol 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#012). The ancients
were much in the habit of "anointing or perfuming" their bodies, and the
nard was esteemed one of the most precious perfumes. John says there was
a "pound" of this, [Joh 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#003). The
"pound" in use among the Jews was the Roman, of twelve ounces, answering
to our troy weight. That there was a large quantity is further evident
from the fact that Judas says it might have been sold for 300 pence
(about 9 British pounds), and that the "house" was filled with the odor
of the ointment (John).

And poured it on his head - They were accustomed chiefly to anoint the
head or hair. John says [Joh 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#003) that
she poured it on the "feet" of Jesus, and wiped them with her hair.
There is, however, no contradiction. She probably poured it "both" on
his head and his feet. Matthew and Mark having recorded the former,
John, who wrote his gospel in part to record events omitted by them,
completes the account by saying that the ointment was also poured on the
feet of the Saviour. To pour ointment on the "head" was common. To pour
it on the "feet" was an act of distinguished "humility" and of
attachment to the Saviour, and therefore deserved to be particularly
recorded.

As he sat at meat - That is, at supper. In the original, as he
"reclined" at supper. The ancients did not sit at their meals, but
"reclined" at length on couches. See the notes at [Mat
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#006). She came up, therefore, "behind
him" as he lay reclined at the table, and, bending down over the couch,
poured the ointment on his head and his feet, and, probably kneeling at
his feet, wiped them with her hair.

[Mat 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#008)

They had indignation - John says that "Judas expressed" indignation.

Probably some of the others felt indignation, but Judas only gave vent
to his feelings. The reason why Judas was indignant was, that he had the
"bag" [Joh 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#006) - that is, the
"purse," or repository of articles "given" to the disciples and to the
Saviour. He was a thief, and was in the habit, it seems, of taking out
and appropriating to his own use what was put in for them in common The
leading trait of Judas's character was avarice, and no opportunity was
suffered to pass without attempting by base and wicked means to make
money. In his example an avaricious man may learn the true nature and
the effect of that groveling and wicked passion. It led him to commit
the enormous crime of betraying his Lord to death, and it will always
lead its possessor to guilt. No small part of the sins of the world can
be traced to avarice, and many, and many a time since the days of Judas
has the Lord Jesus been betrayed among his professed friends by the same
base propensity.

Is this waste - This "loss" or "destruction" of property. They could see
no use in it, and they therefore supposed it was lost.

[Mat 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#009)

Sold for much - Mark and John say for three hundred pence - that is, for
about 9 British pounds.

This, to them, was a large sum. Mark says they complained against her.
There was also an "implied" murmuring against the Saviour for suffering
it to be done. The grumbling was, however, without cause. It was the
"property" of Mary. She had a right to dispose of it as she pleased,
answerable not to them, but to God. "They" had no right over it, and no
cause of complaint if it had been wasted. So Christians now are at
liberty to dispose of their property as they please, either in
distributing the Bible, in supporting the gospel, in sending it to pagan
nations, or in aiding the poor. The people of the world, like Judas,
regard it as "wasted." Like Judas, they are indignant. They say it might
be disposed of in a better way. Yet, like Judas, they are interfering in
that which concerns them not. Like other people, Christians have a right
to dispose of their property as they please, answerable only to God. And
though an avaricious world esteems it to be "wasted," yet, if their Lord
commands it, it will be found to be the "only way" in which it was right
for them to dispose of that property, and will be found not to have been
in vain.

[Mat 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#010)

Trouble ye the woman - That is, disturb her mind by insinuations, as if
she had done wrong.

A good work on me - She has done it with a mind grateful, and full of
love to me.

The work was good, also, as it was preparative for his death, [Mat
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#012).

[Mat 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#011)

For ye have the poor ... - Mark adds, "Whensoever ye will, ye may do
them good." It was right that they should regard the poor.

It was a plain precept of religion (see [Psa
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001); [Pro
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#021); [Pro
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#007); [Gal
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#010)), and our Saviour would not
prohibit it, but do all that was possible to excite his followers to the
duty. But every duty should be done in its place, and the duty "then"
incumbent was that which Mary had performed. They would afterward have
abundant occasion to show their regard for the poor.

Me ye have not always - He alludes here to his dying, and his going away
to heaven. He would still be their friend and their Saviour, but would
not be physically always present with them, so that they could show
kindness "in this way" to him.

[Mat 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#012)

She did it for my burial - It is not to be supposed that Mary understood
clearly that he was then about to die - for the apostles, it seems, did
not fully comprehend it, or that she intended it for his burial; but she
had done it as an act of kindness and love, to show her regard for her
Lord.

He said that it was a proper preparation for his burial. In ancient
times, bodies were anointed and embalmed for the purpose of the
sepulchre. Jesus said that this was "really" a preparation for that
burial; a fitting him in a proper manner for the tomb.

[Mat 26:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#013)

A memorial - Anything to produce "remembrance." This would be told to
her honor and credit, as a memorial of her piety and self-denial; and it
is right that the good deeds of the pious should be recorded and had in
recollection.

[Mat 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#014)

Then one of the twelve ... - Luke says that Satan entered into Judas.

That is, Satan tempted (instigated) him to do it. Probably he tempted
Judas by appealing to his avarice, his ruling passion, and by suggesting
that now was a favorable opportunity to make money rapidly by selling
his Lord.

Judas Iscariot - See the notes at [Mat
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#004).

Unto the chief priests - The high priest, and those who had been high
priests. The ruling men of the Sanhedrin. Luke adds that he went also
"to the captains" [Luk 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#004). It was
necessary, on account of the great wealth deposited there, and its great
sacredness, to guard the temple by night. Accordingly, men were
stationed around it, whose leaders or commanders were called "captains,"
[Act 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#001). These men were commonly of
the tribe of Levi, were closely connected with the priests, were men of
influence, and Judas went to them, therefore, as well as to the priests,
to offer his services in accomplishing what they so much desired to
secure. Probably his object was to get as much money as possible, and he
might therefore have attempted to make a bargain with several of them
apart from each other.

[Mat 26:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#015)

And they covenanted with him - Made a bargain with him.

Agreed to give him. Mark says they "promised" to give him money. They
did not pay it to him "then," lest he should deceive them. When the deed
was done, and before he was made sensible of its guilt, they paid him.
See [Mat 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#003); [Act
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#018).

Thirty pieces of silver - Mark and Luke do not mention the sum. They say
that they promised him "money" - in the original, "silver." In Matthew,
in the original, it is thirty "silvers, or silverlings." This was the
price "of a slave" (see [Exo 21:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#032)),
and it is not unlikely that this sum was fixed on by them to show their
"contempt" of Jesus, and that they regarded him as of little value.
There is no doubt, also, that they understood that such was the anxiety
of Judas to obtain money, that he would betray his Lord for any sum. The
money usually denoted by "pieces" of silver, when the precise sum is not
mentioned, is a shekel - a silver Jewish coin amounting to about 50
cents, or 2 shillings, 3d. The whole sum, therefore, for which Judas
committed this crime was 15, or 3 pounds, 7 shillings, 6d (circa
1880's).

[Mat 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#016)

Sought opportunity to betray him - Luke adds, "in the absence of the
multitude." This was the chief difficulty - to deliver him into the
hands of the priests so as not to have it known by the people, or so as
not to excite tumult.

The "opportunity" which he sought, therefore, was one in which the
multitude would not see him, or could not rescue the Saviour.

To betray him - The word "betray" commonly means to deliver into the
hands of an enemy by treachery or breach of trust; to do it while
friendship or faithfulness is "professed." All this took place in the
case of Judas. But the word in the original does not necessarily imply
this. It means simply to "deliver up," or to give into their hands. He
sought opportunity "how he might deliver him up to them," agreeably to
the contract.

[Matthew 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 26:17</span></span>

See also [Mar 14:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#012); [Luk
22:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#007).

[Mat 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#017)

The first day ... - The feast continued "eight" days, including the day
on which the paschal lamb was killed and eaten, [Exo
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015). That was the fourteenth day of
the month Abib, answering to parts of our March and April.

Of unleavened bread - Called so because during those eight days no bread
made with yeast or leaven was allowed to be eaten. Luke says, "in which
the passover must be killed" - that is, in which the "paschal lamb," or
the lamb eaten on the occasion, was killed. The word in the original,
translated "Passover," commonly means, not the "feast" itself, but the
"lamb" that was killed on the occasion, [Exo
12:43](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#043); [Num
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#011); [Joh
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028). See also [Co1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007), where Christ, "our Passover," is
said to be slain for us; that is, our paschal lamb, so called on account
of his innocence, and his being offered as a victim or "sacrifice" for
our sins.

[Mat 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#018)

Go into the city to such a man - That is, Jerusalem, called the city by
way of eminence.

Luke says that the disciples whom he sent were Peter and John. The man
to whom they were to go he did not mention by name, but he told them
that when they came into the city, a man would meet them bearing a
pitcher of water. See Mark and Luke. Him they were to follow, and in the
house which he entered they would find a room prepared. The name of the
man was not mentioned. The "house" in which they were to keep the
Passover was not mentioned. The reason of this probably was, that Christ
was desirous of concealing from "Judas" the place where they would keep
the Passover. He was acquainted with the design of Judas to betray him.
He knew that if Judas was acquainted with the place "beforehand," he
could easily give information to the chief priests, and it would give
them a favorable opportunity to surprise them, and apprehend "him"
without making a tumult. Though it was certain that he would not be
delivered up before the time appointed by the Father, yet it was proper
"to use the means" to prevent it. There can be little doubt that Jesus
was acquainted with this man, and that he was a disciple. The direction
which he gave his disciples most clearly proves that he was omniscient.
Amid so great a multitude going at that time into the city, it was
impossible to know that "a particular man would be met" - a man bearing
a pitcher of water - unless Jesus had all knowledge, and was therefore
divine.

The Master saith - This was the name by which Jesus was probably known
among the disciples, and one which he directed them to give him. See
[Mat 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#008), [Mat
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#010). It means, literally, "the
teacher," as opposed to "the disciple," or learner; not the "master," as
opposed to the "servant or slave." The fact that they used this name as
if the man would know whom they meant, and the fact that the man
understood them and made no further inquiries, shows that he was
acquainted with Jesus, and was probably himself a disciple.

My time is at hand - That is, "is near." By "his time," here, may be
meant either his time to eat the Passover, or the time of his death. It
has been supposed by many that Jesus, in accordance with a part of the
Jews who rejected traditions, anticipated the usual observance of the
Passover, or kept it one day sooner. The Pharisees had devised many
forms of ascertaining when the month commenced. They placed witnesses
around the heights of the temple to observe the first appearance of the
new moon; they examined the witnesses with much formality, and
endeavored also to obtain the exact time by astronomical calculations.
Others held that the month properly commenced when the moon was visible.
Thus, it is said a difference arose between them about the time of the
Passover, and that Jesus kept it one day sooner than most of the people.
The foundation of the opinion that he anticipated the usual time of
keeping the Passover is the following:

1\. In [Joh 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028), it is said that on
the day on which our Lord was crucified, and of course the day after he
had eaten the Passover, the chief priests would not go into the
judgment-hall lest they should be defiled, "but that they might eat the
passover," evidently meaning that it was to be eaten that day.

2\. In [Joh 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#014), the day on which he
was crucified is called "the preparation of the passover" - that is, the
day on which it was prepared to be eaten in the evening.

3\. In [Joh 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#031), the day in which
our Lord lay in the grave was called the great day of the Sabbath - "a
high day;" that is, the day after the Passover was killed, the Sabbath
occurring on the first day of the feast properly, and therefore a day of
special solemnity; yet our Saviour had partaken of it two days before,
and therefore the day before the body of the people. If this opinion be
true, then the phrase "my time is at hand means my time for keeping the
Passover is near. Whether this opinion be true or not, there may be a
reference also to his death. The man with whom they were to go was
probably a disciple of his, though perhaps a secret one. Jesus might
purpose to keep the Passover at his house, that he might inform him more
particularly respecting his death, and prepare him for it. He sent,
therefore, to him and said, "I will keep the passover 'at thy house.'"

Mark and Luke add that he would show them "a large upper room, furnished
and prepared." Ancient writers remark that, at the time of the great
feasts, the houses in Jerusalem were all open to receive guests - that
they were in a manner common to the people of Judea; and there is no
doubt, therefore, that the master of a house would have it ready on such
occasions for company. It is possible, also, that there might have been
an agreement between this man and our Lord that he would prepare his
house for him, though this was unknown to the disciples. The word
rendered "furnished" means, literally, "spread;" that is, "spread" with
carpets, and with "couches" on which to recline at the table, after the
manner of the East. See the notes at [Mat
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#006).

[Mat 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#019)

They made ready the passover - That is, they procured a lamb, multitudes
of which were kept for sale in the temple; they had it killed and flayed
by the priests, and the blood poured by the altar; they roasted the
lamb, and prepared the bitter herbs, the sauce, and the unleavened
bread.

This was done, it seems, while our Lord was absent, by the two
disciples.

[Matthew 26:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 26:20</span></span>

When the even was come - The lamb was killed "between the evenings,"
[Exo 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006) (Hebrew) - that is between
three o'clock, p. m., and nine in the evening. The Jews reckoned two
evenings - one from three o'clock p. m. to sunset, the other from sunset
to the close of the first watch in the night, or nine o'clock p. m. The
paschal supper was commonly eaten after the setting of the sun, and
often in the night, [Exo 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#008).

He sat down - At first the supper was eaten standing, with their loins
girded and their staff in their hand, denoting the haste with which they
were about to flee from Egypt. Afterward, however, they introduced the
practice, it seems, of partaking of this as they did of their ordinary
meals. The original word is, "he reclined" - that is, he placed himself
on the couch in a reclining posture, in the usual manner in which they
partook of their meals. See the notes at [Mat
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#006). While reclining there at the
supper, the disciples had a dispute which should be the greatest. See
the notes at [Luk 22:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#024). At this
time, also, before the institution of the Lord's supper, Jesus washed
the feet of his disciples, to teach them humility. See the notes at John
13:1-20.

[Matthew 26:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 26:21</span></span>

As they did eat ... - The account contained in these verses is also
recorded in [Mar 14:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#018); [Luk
22:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#021); [Joh
13:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#021). John says that before Jesus
declared that one of them should betray him, "he was troubled in spirit,
and testified;" that is, he "felt deeply" in view of the greatness of
the crime that Judas was about to commit, and the sufferings that he was
to endure, and "testified," or gave utterance to his inward feelings of
sorrow.

[Mat 26:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#022)

They were exceeding sorrowful - John says [Joh
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#022) "they looked one on another,
doubting of whom he spake" - that is, they anxiously looked one at
another, conscious each one, except Judas, of no such intention, and
each one beginning to examine himself to find whether he was the person
intended.

This showed their innocence, and their attachment to Jesus. It showed
how sensitive they were to the least suspicion of the kind. It showed
that they were willing to know themselves, thus evincing the spirit of
the true Christian. Judas only was silent, and was the last to make the
inquiry, and that after he had been plainly pointed out [Mat
26:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#025), thus showing:

1\. that guilt is slow to suspect itself;

2\. that it shrinks from the light;

3\. that it was his purpose to conceal his intention; and,

4\. that nothing but the consciousness that his Lord knew his design
could induce him to make inquiry.

The guilty would, if possible, always conceal their crimes. The innocent
are ready to suspect that they may have done wrong. Their feelings are
tender, and they inquire with solicitude whether there may not be
something in their bosoms, unknown to themselves, that may be a
departure from right feeling.

[Mat 26:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#023)

He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish - The Jews, at the
observance of this ordinance, used a bitter sauce, made of bunches of
raisins, mixed with vinegar and other seasoning of the like kind, which
they said represented the clay which their fathers were compelled to use
in Egypt in making brick, thus reminding them of their bitter bondage
there.

This was probably the dish to which reference is made here. It is not
improbable that Judas reclined near to our Saviour at the feast, and by
his saying it was one that dipped "with him" in the dish, he meant one
that was near to him, designating him more particularly than he had done
before. John adds ([Joh 13:23-30](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#023); see
the notes at that place), that "there was leaning on Jesus' bosom one of
his disciples whom Jesus loved" - referring to himself; that Simon Peter
beckoned to him to ask Jesus more particularly who it was; that Jesus
signified who it was by giving "Judas a sop" - that is, a piece of
"bread" or "meat" dipped in the thick sauce; and that Judas, having
received it, went out to accomplish his wicked design of betraying him.
Judas was not, therefore, present at the institution of the Lord's
Supper.

[Mat 26:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#024)

The Son of man, goeth - That is, the Messiah - the Christ. See the notes
at [Mat 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#020).

Goeth - Dies, or will die. The Hebrews often spoke in this manner of
death, [Psa 39:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#013); [Gen
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#002).

As it is written of him - That is, as it is "written" or prophesied of
him in the Old Testament. Compare [Psa
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009) with [Joh
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018). See also [Dan
9:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026); [Isa
53:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004). Luke [Luk
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#022) says, "as it was determined." In
the Greek, as it was "marked out by a boundary" - that is, in the divine
purpose. It was the previous intention of God to give him up to die for
sin, or it could not have been certainly predicted. It is also declared
to have been by his "determinate counsel and foreknowledge." See the
notes at [Act 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023).

Woe unto that man ... - The crime is great and awful, and he will be
punished accordingly. He states the greatness of his misery or "woe" in
the phrase following.

It had been good ... - That is, it would have been better for him if he
had not been born; or it would be better now for him if he was to be as
"if" he had not been born, or if he was annihilated. This was a
proverbial mode of speaking among the Jews in frequent use. In relation
to Judas, it proves the following things:

1\. that the crime which he was about to commit was exceedingly great;

2\. that the misery or punishment due to it would certainly come upon
him;

3\. that he would certainly deserve that misery, or it would not have
been threatened or inflicted; and,

4\. that his punishment would be eternal.

If there should be any period when the sufferings of Judas should end,
and he be restored and raised to heaven, the blessings of that
"happiness without end" would infinitely overbalance all the sufferings
he could endure in a limited time, and consequently it would not be true
that it would have been better for him not to have been born. Existence,
to him, would, on the whole, be an infinite blessing. This passage
proves further that, in relation to one wicked man, the sufferings of
hell will be eternal. If of one, then it is equally certain and proper
that all the wicked will perish forever.

If it be asked how this crime of Judas could be so great, or could be a
crime at all, when it was determined beforehand that the Saviour should
be betrayed and die in this manner, it may be answered:

1\. That the crime was what it was "in itself," apart from any
determination of God. It was a violation of all the duties he owed to
God and to the Lord Jesus - awful ingratitude, detestable covetousness,
and most base treachery. As such it deserved to be punished.

2\. The previous purpose of God did not force Judas to do this. In it he
acted freely. He did just what his wicked heart prompted him to do.

3\. A previous knowledge of a thing, or a previous purpose to permit a
thing, does not alter its "nature," or cause it to be a different thing
from what it is.

4\. God, who is the best judge of the nature of crime, holds all that
was done in crucifying the Saviour, though it was by his determinate
counsel and foreknowledge, "to be by wicked hands," [Act
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023). This punishment of Judas proves,
also, that sinners cannot take shelter for their sins in the decrees of
God, or plead them as an excuse. God will punish crimes for what they
"are in themselves." His own deep and inscrutable purposes in regard to
human actions will not change "the nature" of those actions, or screen
the sinner from the punishment which he deserves.

[Matthew 26:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 26:25</span></span>

Thou hast said - That is, thou hast said the truth. It is so. Thou art
the man. Compare [Mat 26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064) with [Mar
14:62](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#062).

[Matthew 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 26:26</span></span>

See also [Mar 14:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#022); [Luk
22:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#015); [Co1
11:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#023).

[Mat 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026)

As they were eating - As they were eating the paschal supper, near the
close of the meal.

Luke adds that he said, just before instituting the sacramental supper,
"With desire have I desired to eat this passover with you before I
suffer." This is a Hebrew manner of expression, signifying "I have
greatly desired." He had desired it, doubtless:

\(1\) that he might institute the Lord's Supper, to be a perpetual
memorial of him;

\(2\) that he might strengthen them for their approaching trials;

\(3\) that he might explain to them the true nature of the Passover;
and,

\(4\) that he might spend another season with them in the duties of
religion. Every "Christian, about to die will also seek opportunities of
drawing specially near to God, and of holding communion with him and
with his people.

Jesus took bread - That is, the unleavened bread which they used at the
celebration of the Passover, made into thin cakes, easily broken and
distributed.

And blessed it - Or sought a blessing on it; or "gave thanks" to God for
it. The word rendered "blessed" not unfrequently means "to give thanks."
Compare [Luk 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#016) and [Joh
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#011). It is also to be remarked that
some manuscripts have the word rendered "gave thanks," instead of the
one translated "blessed." It appears from the writings of Philo and the
Rabbis that the Jews were never accustomed to eat without giving thanks
to God and seeking his blessing. This was especially the case in both
the bread and the wine used at the Passover.

And brake it - This "breaking" of the bread represented the sufferings
of Jesus about to take place - his body "broken" or wounded for sin.
Hence, Paul [Co1 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#024) adds, "This is
my body which is broken for you;" that is, which is about to be broken
for you by death, or wounded, pierced, bruised, to make atonement for
your sins.

This is my body - This represents my body. This broken bread shows the
manner in which my body will be broken; or this will serve to recall my
dying sufferings to your remembrance. It is not meant that his body
would be literally "broken" as the bread was, but that the bread would
be a significant emblem or symbol to recall to their recollection his
sufferings. It is not improbable that our Lord pointed to the broken
bread, or laid his hands on it, as if he had said, "Lo, my body!" or,
"Behold my body! - that which "represents" my broken body to you." This
"could not" be intended to mean that that bread was literally his body.
It was not. His body was then before them "living." And there is no
greater absurdity than to imagine his "living body" there changed at
once to a "dead body," and then the bread to be changed into that dead
body, and that all the while the "living" body of Jesus was before them.

Yet this is the absurd and impossible doctrine of the Roman Catholics,
holding that the "bread" and "wine" were literally changed into the
"body and blood" of our Lord. The language employed by the Saviour was
in accordance with a common mode of speaking among the Jews, and exactly
similar to that used by Moses at the institution of the Passover [Exo
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011); "It" - that is, the lamb - "is
the Lord's Passover." That is, the lamb and the feast "represent" the
Lord's "passing over" the houses of the Israelites. It serves to remind
you of it. It surely cannot be meant that that lamb was the literal
"passing over" their houses - a palpable absurdity - but that it
represented it. So Paul and Luke say of the bread, "This is my body
broken for you: this do in remembrance of me." This expresses the whole
design of the sacramental bread. It is to call to "remembrance," in a
vivid manner, the dying sufferings of our Lord. The sacred writers,
moreover, often denote that one thing is represented by another by using
the word is. See [Mat 13:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#037); "He that
soweth the good seed is the Son of man" - that is, represents the Son of
man. [Gen 41:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#026); "the seven good kine
are seven years" - that is, "represent" or signify seven years. See also
[Joh 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001), [Joh
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005); [Gen
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#010). The meaning of this important
passage may be thus expressed: "As I give this broken bread to you to
eat, so will I deliver my body to be afflicted and slain for your sins."

[Mat 26:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#027)

And he took the cup - That is, the cup of wine which was used at the
feast of the Passover, called the cup of "Hallel," or praise, because
they commenced then repeating the "Psalms" with which they closed the
Passover.

See [Mat 26:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#030). This cup, Luke says,
he took "after supper" - that is, after they had finished the ordinary
celebration of "eating" the Passover. The "bread" was taken "while" they
were eating, the cup after they had done eating.

And gave thanks - See the notes at [Mat
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026).

Drink ye all of it - That is, "all of you, disciples, drink of it;" not,
"drink all the wine."

[Mat 26:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028)

For this is my blood - This "represents" my blood, as the bread does my
body.

Luke and Paul vary the expression, adding what Matthew and Mark have
omitted. "This cup is the new testament in my blood." By this cup he
meant the wine in the cup, and not the cup itself. Pointing to it,
probably, he said, "This - 'wine' - represents my blood about to be,
shed." The phrase "new testament" should have been rendered "new
covenant," referring to the "covenant or compact" that God was about to
make with people through a Redeemer. The "old" covenant was that which
was made with the Jews by the sprinkling of the blood of sacrifices. See
[Exo 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008); "And Moses took the blood
and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the
covenant which the Lord hath made with you," etc. In allusion to that,
Jesus says, this cup is the new "covenant" in my blood; that is, which
is "ratified, sealed, or sanctioned by my blood." In ancient times,
covenants or contracts were ratified by slaying an animal; by the
shedding of its blood, imprecating similar vengeance if either party
failed in the compact. See the notes at [Heb
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#016). So Jesus says the covenant which
God is about to form with people the new covenant, or the gospel economy
is sealed or ratified with my blood.

Which is shed for many for the remission of sins - In order that sins
may be remitted, or forgiven. That is, this is the appointed way by
which God will pardon transgressions. That blood is efficacious for the
pardon of sin:

1\. Because it is "the life" of Jesus, the "blood" being used by the
sacred writers as representing "life itself," or as containing the
elements of life, [Gen 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004); [Lev
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#014). It was forbidden, therefore, to
eat blood, because it contained the life, or was the life, of the
animal. When, therefore, Jesus says that his blood was shed for many, it
is the same as saying that His life was given for many. See the notes at
[Rom 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025).

2\. His life was given for sinners, or he died in the place of sinners
as their substitute. By his death on the cross, the death or punishment
due to them in hell may be removed and their souls be saved. He endured
so much suffering, bore so much agony, that God was pleased to accept it
in the place of the eternal torments of all the redeemed. The interests
of justice, the honor and stability of his government, would be as
secure in saving them in this manner as if the suffering were inflicted
on them personally in hell. God, by giving his Son to die for sinners,
has shown his infinite abhorrence of sin; since, according to his view,
and therefore according to truth, nothing else would show its evil
nature but the awful sufferings of his own Son. That he died "in the
stead or place" of sinners is abundantly clear from the following
passages of Scripture: [Joh 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029); [Eph
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002); [Heb
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#027); [Jo1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002); [Jo1
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#010); [Isa
53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010); [Rom
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032); [Co2
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#015).

[Mat 26:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#029)

But I say unto you ... - That is, the observance of the Passover, and of
the rites shadowing forth future things, here end.

I am about to die. The design of all these types and shadows is about to
be accomplished. This is the last time that I shall partake of them with
you. Hereafter, when my Father's kingdom is established in heaven, we
will partake together of the thing represented by these types and
ceremonial observances - the blessings and triumphs of redemption.

Fruit of the vine - "Wine, the fruit or produce" of the vine made of the
grapes of the vine.

Until that day - Probably the time when they should be received to
heaven. It does not mean here on earth, further than that they would
partake with him in the happiness of spreading the gospel and the
triumphs of his kingdom.

When I drink it new with you - Not that he would partake with them of
literal wine there, but in the thing represented by it. Wine was an
important part of the feast of the Passover, and of all feasts. The
kingdom of heaven is often represented under the image of a feast. It
means that he will partake of joy with them in heaven; that they will
share together the honors and happiness of the heavenly world.

New - In a new manner, or perhaps "afresh."

In my Father's kingdom - In heaven. The place where God shall reign in a
kingdom fully established and pure.

[Mat 26:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#030)

And when they had sung a hymn - The Passover was observed by the Jews by
singing or "chanting" Ps. 113-118. These they divided into two parts.
They sung Ps. 113-114 during the observance of the Passover, and the
others at the close. There can be no doubt that our Saviour, and the
apostles also, used the same psalms in their observance of the Passover.
The word rendered "sung a hymn" is a participle, literally meaning
"hymning" - not confined to a single hymn, but admitting many.

Mount of Olives - See the notes at [Mat
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001).

[Matthew 26:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 26:31</span></span>

Jesus foretells the fall of Peter - This is also recorded in [Mar
14:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#027); [Luk
22:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#031); [Joh
13:34-38](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034).

[Mat 26:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#031)

Then saith Jesus unto them - The occasion of his saying this was Peter's
bold affirmation that he was ready to die with him, [Joh
13:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#036)

Jesus had told them that he was going away - that is, was about to die.
Peter asked him whither he was going. Jesus replied that he could not
follow him then, but should afterward. Peter, not satisfied with that,
said that he was ready to lay down his life for him. Then Jesus
distinctly informed them that all of them would forsake him that very
night.

All ye shall be offended because of me - See the notes at [Mat
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029). This language means, here, you
will all stumble at my being taken, abused, and set at naught; you will
be ashamed to own me as a teacher, and to acknowledge yourselves as my
disciples; or, my being betrayed will prove a snare to you all, so that
you will be guilty of the sin of forsaking me, and, by your conduct, of
denying me.

For it is written ... - See [Zac 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007).
This is affirmed here to have reference to the Saviour, and to be
fulfilled in him.

I will smite - This is the language of God the Father. I will smite
means either that I will give him up to be smitten (compare [Exo
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#021) with [Exo
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#015), etc.), or that I will do it
myself. Both of these things were done. God gave him up to the Jews and
Romans, to be smitten for the sins of the world [Rom
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032); and he himself left him to deep
and awful sorrows - to bear "the burden of the world's atonement" alone.
See [Mar 15:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#034).

The Shepherd - The Lord Jesus - the Shepherd of his people, [Joh
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011), [Joh
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#014). Compare the notes at [Isa
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011).

The sheep - This means here particularly "the apostles." It also refers
sometimes to all the followers of Jesus, the friends of God, [Joh
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016); [Psa
100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003).

Shall be scattered abroad - This refers to their fleeing, and it was
fulfilled in that. See [Mat 26:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#056).

[Mat 26:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#032)

But after I am risen ... - This promise was given them to encourage and
support them, and also to give them an indication where he might be
found.

He did not deny that he would first appear to a part of them before he
met them all together (compare Luke 24:13-31, [Luk
24:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#034); [Co1
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#005)), but that he would meet them all
in Galilee. This was done. See [Mar
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#007); [Mat
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#016).

Galilee - See the notes at [Mat 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#022).

[Mat 26:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#033)

Peter answered ... Though all men ... - The word "men" is improperly
inserted here by the translators. Peter meant only to affirm this of
"the disciples." This confidence of Peter was entirely characteristic.
He was ardent, sincere, and really attached to his Master. Yet this
declaration was made evidently:

1\. from true love to Jesus;

2\. from too much reliance upon his own strength;

3\. from ignorance of himself, and of the trials which he was soon to
pass through.

And it most impressively teaches us:

1\. that no strength of attachment to Jesus can justify such confident
promises of fidelity, made without dependence on him.

2\. that all promises to adhere to him should be made relying on him for
aid.

3\. that we little know how feeble we are until we are tried.

4\. that Christians may be left to great and disgraceful sins to show
them their weakness.

Luke adds that Jesus said to Peter that Satan had desired to have him,
that he might sift him as wheat - that is, that he might thoroughly test
him. But Jesus says that he had prayed for him that his faith should not
fail, and charged him when he was "converted" - that is, when he was
"turned" from this sin - to strengthen his brethren; to wit, by teaching
them to take warning by his example. See the notes at [Luk
22:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#031).

[Mat 26:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#034)

This night - This was in the "evening" when this was spoken, after the
observance of the Passover, and, we may suppose, near nine o'clock p.m.

Before the cock crow - Mark and Luke add, before the cock crowed twice.
The cock is accustomed to crow twice once at midnight, and once in the
morning at break of day. The latter was commonly called cock-crowing.
See [Mar 13:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#035). This was the time
familiarly known as "the cock-crowing," and of this Matthew and John
speak, without referring to the other. Mark and Luke speak of the
"second" crowing, and mean the same time, so that there is no
contradiction between them.

Deny me thrice - That is, as Luke adds, deny that "thou knowest" me. See
[Mat 26:74](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#074).

[Mat 26:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#035)

Will I not deny thee - Will not deny my connection with thee, or that I
knew thee.

"All" the disciples said the same thing, and all fled at the approach of
danger, "forsaking" their Master and Friend, and practically denying
that they knew him, [Mat 26:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#056).

[Matthew 26:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 26:36</span></span>

Jesus' agony in Gethsemane - This account is also recorded in [Mar
14:32-42](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#032); [Luk
22:39-46](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#039); [Joh
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#001).

[Mat 26:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#036)

Then cometh ... - After the institution of the Lord's Supper, in the
early part of the night, he went out to the Mount of Olives.

In his journey he passed over the brook Cedron [Joh
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#001), which bounded Jerusalem on the
east.

Unto a place - John calls this "a garden." This garden was on the
western side of the Mount of Olives, and a short distance from
Jerusalem. The word used by John means not properly a garden for the
cultivation of vegetables, but a place planted with the olive and other
trees, perhaps with a fountain of water, and with walks and groves; a
proper place of refreshment in a hot climate, and of retirement from the
noise of the adjacent city. Such places were doubtless common in the
vicinity of Jerusalem. Messrs. Fisk and King, American missionaries were
at the place which is commonly supposed to have been the garden of
Gethsemane in 1823. They tell us that the garden is about a stone's cast
from the brook of Cedron; that it now contains eight large and
venerable-looking olives, whose trunks show their great antiquity. The
spot is sandy and barren, and appears like a forsaken place. A low
broken wall surrounds it.

Mr. King sat down beneath one of the trees and read [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001), and also the gospel history
of our Redeemer's sorrow during that memorable night in which he was
there betrayed; and the interest of the association was heightened by
the passing through the place of a party of Bedouins, armed with spears
and swords. A recent traveler says of this place that it "is a field or
garden about 50 paces square, with a few shrubs growing in it, and eight
olive-trees of great antiquity, the whole enclosed with a stone wall."
The place was probably fixed upon, as Dr. Robinson supposes, during the
visit of Helena to Jerusalem, 326 a.d., when the places of the
crucifixion and resurrection were believed to be identified. There is,
however, no absolute certainty respecting the places. Dr. Thomson (The
Land and the Book, vol. ii. p. 484) supposes it most probable that the
real "Garden of Gethsemane" was several hundred yards to the northwest
of the present Gethsemane, in a place much more secluded than the one
usually regarded as that where the agony of the Saviour occurred, and
therefore more likely to have been the place of his retirement. Nothing,
however, that is of importance depends on ascertaining the exact spot.

Luke says that Jesus "went as he was wont" - that is, accustomed - "to
the Mount of Olives." Probably he had been in the habit of retiring from
Jerusalem to that place for meditation and prayer, thus enforcing by his
example what he had so often done by his precepts the duty of retiring
from the noise and bustle of the world to hold communion with God.

Gethsemane - This word is made up either of two Hebrew words, signifying
"valley of fatness" - that is, a fertile valley; or of two words,
signifying "an olive-press," given to it, probably, because the place
was filled with olives.

Sit ye here - That is, in one part of the garden to which they first
came.

While I go and pray yonder - That is, at the distance of a stone's cast,
[Luk 22:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#041). Luke adds that when he
came to the garden he charged them to pray that they might not enter
into temptation - that is, into deep "trials and afflictions," or, more
probably, into scenes and dangers that would tempt them to deny him.

[Mat 26:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#037)

And he took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee - That is, James
and John, [Mat 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#002). On two other
occasions he had favored these disciples in a particular manner,
suffering them to go with him to witness his power and glory, namely, at
the healing of the ruler's daughter [Luk
8:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#051), and at his transfiguration on
the mount, [Mat 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001).

Sorrowful - Affected with grief.

Very heavy - The word in the original is much stronger than the one
translated "sorrowful." It means, to be pressed down or overwhelmed with
great anguish. This was produced, doubtless, by a foresight of his great
sufferings on the cross in making an atonement for the sins of people.

[Mat 26:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#038)

My soul is exceeding sorrowful - His human nature - his soul - was much
and deeply affected and pressed down.

Even unto death - This denotes extreme sorrow and agony.

The sufferings of death are the greatest of which we have any knowledge;
they are the most feared and dreaded by man; and those sufferings are
therefore put for extreme and indescribable anguish. The meaning may be
thus expressed: My sorrows are so great that under their burden I am
ready to die; such is the anxiety of mind, that I seem to bear the pains
of death!

Tarry ye here and watch with me - The word rendered "watch" means,
literally, to abstain from sleep; then to be vigilant, or to guard
against danger. Here it seems to mean to sympathize with him, to unite
with him in seeking divine support, and to prepare themselves for
approaching dangers.

[Mat 26:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039)

And he went a little further - That is, at the distance that a man could
conveniently cast a stone (Luke).

Fell on his face - Luke says "he kneeled down." He did both.

He first kneeled, and then, in the fervency of his prayer and the depth
of his sorrow, he fell with his face on the ground, denoting the deepest
anguish and the most earnest entreaty. This was the usual posture of
prayer in times of great earnestness. See [Num
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#022); [Ch2
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#018); [Neh
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#006).

If it be possible - That is, if the world can be redeemed - if it be
consistent with justice, and with maintaining the government of the
universe, that people should be saved without this extremity of sorrow,
let it be done. There is no doubt that if it had been possible it would
have been done; and the fact that these sufferings were "not" removed,
and that the Saviour went forward and bore them without mitigation,
shows that it was not consistent with the justice of God and with the
welfare of the universe that people should be saved without the awful
sufferings of "such an atonement."

Let this cup - These bitter sufferings. These approaching trials. The
word cup is often used in this sense, denoting sufferings. See the notes
at [Mat 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#022).

Not as I will, but as thou wilt - As Jesus was man as well as God, there
is nothing inconsistent in supposing that, as man, he was deeply
affected in view of these sorrows. When he speaks of His will, he
expresses what "human nature," in view of such great sufferings, would
desire. It naturally shrunk from them and sought deliverance. Yet he
sought to do the will of God. He chose rather that the high purpose of
God should be done, than that that purpose should be abandoned from
regard to the fears of his human nature. In this he has left a model of
prayer in all times of affliction. It is right, in times of calamity, to
seek deliverance. Like the Saviour, also, in such seasons we should, we
must submit cheerfully to the will of God, confident that in all these
trials he is wise, and merciful, and good.

[Mat 26:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#040)

And findeth them asleep - It may seem remarkable that in such
circumstances, with a suffering, pleading Redeemer near, surrounded by
danger, and having received a special charge to watch - that is, not to
sleep - they should so soon have fallen asleep.

It is frequently supposed that this was proof of wonderful stupidity,
and indifference to their Lord's sufferings. The truth is, however, that
it was just the reverse; "it was proof of their great attachment, and
their deep sympathy in his sorrows." Luke has added that he found "them
sleeping" for sorrow - that is, "on account" of their sorrow; or their
grief was so great that they naturally fell asleep. Multitudes of facts
might be brought to show that this is in accordance with the regular
effects of grief. Dr. Rush says: "There is another symptom of grief,
which is not often noticed, and that is "profound sleep." I have often
witnessed it even in mothers, immediately after the death of a child.
Criminals, we are told by Mr. Akerman, the keeper of Newgate, in London,
often sleep soundly the night before their execution. The son of General
Custine slept nine hours the night before he was led to the guillotine
in Paris." - Diseases of the Mind, p. 319.

Saith unto Peter ... - This earnest appeal was addressed to Peter
particularly on account of his warm professions, his rash zeal, and his
self-confidence. If he could not keep awake and watch with the Saviour
for one hour, how little probability was there that he would adhere to
him in the trials through which he was soon to pass!

[Mat 26:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#041)

Watch - See [Mat 26:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#038). Greater trials
are coming on. It is necessary, therefore, still to be on your guard.

And pray - Seek aid from God by supplication, in view of the thickening
calamities.

That ye enter not into temptation - That ye be not overcome and
oppressed with these trials of your faith so as to deny me. The word
"temptation" here properly means what would test their faith in the
approaching calamities - in his rejection and death. It would "try"
their faith, because, though they believed that he was the Messiah, they
were not very clearly aware of the necessity of his death, and they did
not fully understand that he was to rise again. They had cherished the
belief that he was to establish a kingdom "while he lived." When they
should see him, therefore, rejected, tried, crucified, dead - when they
should see him submit to all this as if he had not power to deliver
himself - "then" would be the trial of their faith; and, in view of
that, he exhorted them to pray that they might not so enter temptation
as to be overcome by it and fall.

The spirit indeed is willing ... - The mind, the heart is ready and
disposed to bear these trials, but the "flesh," the natural feelings,
through the fear of danger, is weak, and will be likely to lead you
astray when the trial comes. Though you may have strong faith, and
believe now that you will not deny me, yet human nature is weak, and
shrinks at trials, and you should therefore seek strength from on high.
This was intended to excite them, notwithstanding he knew that they
loved him, to be on their guard, lest the weakness of human nature
should be insufficient to sustain them in the hour of their temptation.

[Mat 26:42-44](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#042)

It is probable that our Lord spent considerable time in prayer, and that
the evangelists have recorded rather "the substance" of his petitions
than the very "words." He returned repeatedly to his disciples,
doubtless to caution them against danger, to show the deep interest
which he had in their welfare, and to show them the extent of his
sufferings on their behalf

Each time that he returned these sorrows deepened. Again he sought the
place of prayer, and as his approaching sufferings overwhelmed him, this
was the burden of his prayer, and he prayed the same words. Luke adds
that amid his agonies an angel appeared from heaven strengthening him.
His human nature began to sink, as unequal to his sufferings, and a
messenger from heaven appeared, to support him in these heavy trials. It
may seem strange that, since Jesus was divine [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001), the divine nature did not
minister strength to the human, and that he that was God should receive
strength from an "angel." But it should be remembered that Jesus came in
his human nature not only to make an atonement, but to be a perfect
example of a holy man; that, as such, it was necessary to submit to the
common conditions of humanity - that he should live as other people, be
sustained as other people, suffer as other people, and be strengthened
as other people; that he should, so to speak, take no advantage in favor
of his piety, from his divinity, but submit it in all things to the
common lot of pious people. Hence, he supplied his wants, not by his
being divine, but in the ordinary way of human life; he preserved
himself from danger, not as God, but by seeking the usual ways of human
prudence and precaution; he met trials as a man; he received comfort as
a man; and there is no absurdity in supposing that, in accordance with
the condition of his people, his human nature should be strengthened, as
they are, by those who are sent forth to be ministering spirits to the
heirs of salvation, [Heb 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014).

Further, Luke adds [Luk 22:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#044) that,
being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as it
were great drops of blood falling down to the ground. The word "agony"
is taken from the anxiety, effort, and strong emotion of the wrestlers
in the Greek games about to engage in a mighty struggle. Here it denotes
the extreme anguish of mind, the strong conflict produced in sinking
human nature from the prospect of deep and overwhelming calamities.

"Great drops of blood," [Luk 22:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#044).
The word rendered here as "great drops" does not mean drops gently
falling on the ground, but rather thick and clammy masses of gore,
pressed by inward agony through the skin, and, mixing with the sweat,
falling thus to the ground. It has been doubted by some whether the
sacred writer meant to say that there was actually "blood" in this
sweat, or only that the sweat was "in the form" of great drops. The
natural meaning is, doubtless, that the blood was mingled with his
sweat; that it fell profusely - falling masses of gore; that it was
pressed out by his inward anguish; and that this was caused in some way
in view of his approaching death. This effect of extreme sufferings, of
mental anguish. has been known in several other instances. Bloody sweats
have been mentioned by many writers as caused by extreme suffering. Dr.
Doddridge says (Note at [Luk 22:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#044))
that "Aristotle and Diodorus Siculus both mention bloody sweats as
attending some extraordinary agony of mind; and I find Loti, in his
"Life of Pope Sextus V.," and Sir John Chardin, in his "History of
Persia," mentioning a like phenomenon, to which Dr. Jackson adds another
from Thuanus." It has been objected to this account that it is
improbable, and that such an event could not occur. The instances,
however, which are referred to by Doddridge and others show sufficiently
that the objection is unfounded. In addition to these, I may observe
that Voltaire has himself narrated a fact which ought forever to stop
the mouths of infidels. Speaking of Charles IX of France, in his
"Universal History," he says: "He died in his 35th year. His disorder
was of a very remarkable kind; the blood oozed out of all his pores.
This malady, of which there have been other instances, was owing to
either excessive fear, or violent agitation, or to a feverish and
melancholy temperament."

Various opinions have been given of the probable causes of these sorrows
of the Saviour. Some have thought it was strong shrinking from the
manner of dying on the cross, or from an apprehension of being
"forsaken" there by the Father; others, that Satan was permitted in a
special manner to test him, and to fill his mind with horrors, having
departed from him at the beginning of his ministry for a season [Luk
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#013), only to renew his temptations in
a more dreadful manner now; and others that these sufferings were sent
upon him as the wrath of God manifested against sin that God inflicted
them directly upon him by his own hand, to show his abhorrence of the
sins of people for which he was about to die. Where the Scriptures are
silent about the cause, it does not become us confidently to express an
opinion. We may suppose, perhaps, without presumption, that a part or
all these things were combined to produce this awful suffering. There is
no need of supposing that there was a single thing that produced it; but
it is rather probable that this was a rush of feeling from every quarter
- his situation, his approaching death, the temptations of the enemy,
the awful suffering on account of people's sins, and God's hatred of it
about to be manifested in his own death - all coming upon his soul at
once sorrow flowing in from every quarter - the "concentration" of the
sufferings of the atonement pouring together upon him and filling him
with unspeakable anguish.

[Mat 26:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#045)

Sleep on now and take your rest - Most interpreters have supposed that
this should be translated as a question rattler than a command,

"Do you sleep now and take your rest? Is this a time, amid so much
danger and so many enemies. to give yourselves to sleep?" This
construction is strongly countenanced by [Luk
22:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#046), where the expression. Why sleep
ye? evidently refers to the same point of time. There is no doubt that
the Greek will bear this construction, and in this way the apparent
inconsistency will be removed between this command "to sleep," and that
in the next verse, "to rise" and be going. Others suppose that, his
agony being over, and the necessity of watching with him being now past,
he kindly permitted them to seek repose until they should be roused by
the coming of the traitor; that while they slept Jesus continued still
awake; that some considerable time elapsed between what was spoken here
and in the next verse; and that Jesus suffered them to sleep until he
saw Judas coming, and then aroused them. This is the most probable
opinion. Others have supposed that he spoke this in irony: "Sleep on
now, if you can; take rest, if possible, in such dangers and at such a
time." But this supposition is unworthy the Saviour and the occasion.
Mark adds, "It is enough." That is, sufficient time has been given to
sleep. It is time to arise and be going.

The hour is at hand - The "time" when the Son of man is to be betrayed
is near.

Sinners - Judas, the Roman soldiers, and the Jews.

[Matthew 26:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">mat 26:46</span></span>

Rise, let us be going - That is, probably, "with them." Let us go
wheresoever they shall lead us. The time when "I must die" is come. It
is no longer proper to attempt an escape, and no more time can be given
to repose.

[Matthew 26:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">mat 26:47</span></span>

The account of Jesus' being betrayed by Judas is recorded by all the
evangelists. See [Mar 14:43-52](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#043); [Luk
22:47-53](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#047); [Joh
18:2-12](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#002).

[Mat 26:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#047)

Judas, one of the twelve, came - This was done while Jesus was
addressing his disciples.

John informs us that Judas knew the place, because Jesus was in the
habit of going there with his disciples. Judas had passed the time,
after he left Jesus and the other disciples at the Passover, in
arranging matters with the Jews, collecting the band, and preparing to
go. Perhaps, also, on this occasion they gave him the money which they
had promised.

A great multitude with swords and staves - John says that he had
received a band of men and officers from the chief priests and
Pharisees." Josephus says (Antiq. b. 20 chapter iv.) that at the
festival of the Passover, when a great multitude of people came to
observe the feast, lest there should be any disorder, a band of men was
commanded to keep watch at the porches of the temple, to repress a
tumult if any should be excited. This band, or guard, was at the
disposal of the chief priests, [Mat
27:65](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#065). It was composed of Roman
soldiers, and was stationed chiefly at the tower of Antonia, at the
northwest side of the temple. In addition to this, they had constant
guards stationed around the temple, composed of Levites. The Roman
soldiers were armed with "swords." The other persons that went out
carried, probably, whatever was accessible as a weapon. These were the
persons sent by the priests to apprehend Jesus. Perhaps other desperate
men might have joined them.

Staves - In the original, "wood;" used here in the plural number. It
means rather "clubs" or "sticks" than spears. It does not mean "staves."
Probably it means any weapon at hand, such as a mob could conveniently
collect. John says that they had "lanterns and torches." The Passover
was celebrated at the "full moon;" but this night might have been
cloudy. The place to which they were going was also shaded with trees,
and lights, therefore, might be necessary.

[Mat 26:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#048)

Gave them a sign - That is, told them of a way by which they might know
whom to apprehend - to wit, by his kissing him.

It was night. Jesus was, besides, probably personally unknown to the
"Romans" - perhaps to the others also. Judas, therefore, being well
acquainted with him, to prevent the possibility of mistake, agreed to
designate him by one of the tokens of friendship.

John tells us that Jesus, knowing all things that should come upon him,
when they approached him, asked them whom they sought, and that they
replied, Jesus of Nazareth. He then informed them that he was the person
they sought. They, when they heard it, overawed by his presence and
smitten with the consciousness of guilt, went backward and fell to the
ground. He again asked them whom they sought. They made the same
declaration - Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus then, since they professed to
seek only Him, claimed the right that his disciples should be suffered
to escape, "that the saying might be fulfilled which he spake [Joh
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#009); Of them which thou gavest me
have I lost none."

[Mat 26:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#049)

Hail, Master - The word translated "hail," here, means to "rejoice," to
have joy, and also to have "cause" of joy.

It thus expresses the "joy" which one friend has when he meets another,
especially after an absence. It was used by the Jews and Greeks as a
mode of salutation among friends. It would here seem to express the
"joy" of Judas at finding his Master and again being "with him."

Master - In the original, "Rabbi." See the notes at [Mat
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#007).

Kissed him - Gave him the common salutation of friends when meeting
after absence. This mode of salutation was more common among Eastern
nations than with us.

[Mat 26:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#050)

And Jesus said unto him, Friend - It seems strange to us that Jesus
should give the endeared name "friend" to a man that he knew was his
enemy, and that was about to betray him.

It should be remarked, however, that this is the fault of our language,
not of the original. In the Greek there are two words which our
translators have rendered "friend" - one implying "affection and
regard," the other not. One is properly rendered "friend;" the other
expresses more nearly what we mean by "companion." It is this "latter"
word which is given to the disaffected laborer in the vineyard:
"'Friend,' I do thee no wrong" [Mat
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#013); to the guest which had not on
the wedding-garment, in the parable of the marriage feast [Mat
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#012); and to "Judas" in this place.

Wherefore art thou come? - This was said, not because he was ignorant
why he had come, but probably to fill the mind of Judas with the
consciousness of his crime, and by a striking question to compel him to
think of what he was doing.

[Mat 26:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#051)

One of them which were with Jesus - John informs us that this was Peter.

The other evangelists concealed the name, probably because they wrote
while Peter was living, and it might have endangered Peter to have it
known.

And drew his sword - The apostles were not commonly armed. On this
occasion they had provided "two swords," [Luk
22:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#038). In seasons of danger, when
traveling, they were under a necessity of providing means of defending
themselves against the robbers that infested the country. This will
account for their having any swords in their possession. See the notes
at [Luk 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030). Josephus informs us
that the people were accustomed to carry swords under their garments as
they went up to Jerusalem.

A servant of the high-priest - His name, John informs us, was "Malchus."
Luke adds that Jesus touched the ear and healed it, thus showing his
benevolence to his foes when they sought his life, and giving them proof
that they were attacking him that was sent from heaven.

[Mat 26:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#052)

Thy sword into his place - Into the sheath.

For all they that take the sword ... - This passage is capable of
different significations.

1\. They who resist by the sword the civil magistrate shall be punished;
and it is dangerous, therefore, to oppose those who come with the
authority of the civil ruler.

2\. These men, Jews and Romans, who have taken the sword against the
innocent, shall perish by the sword. God will take vengeance on them.

3\. However, the most satisfactory interpretation is that which regards
it as a caution to Peter. Peter was rash. Alone he had attacked the
whole band. Jesus told him that his unseasonable and imprudent defense
might be the occasion of his own destruction. In doing it he would
endanger his life, for they who took the sword perished by it. This was
probably a proverb, denoting that they who engaged in wars commonly
perished there.

[Mat 26:53](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#053)

Thinkest thou ... - Jesus says that not only would Peter endanger
himself, but his resistance implied a distrust of the protection of God,
and was an improper resistance of his will.

If it had been proper that they should be rescued, God could easily have
furnished far more efficient aid than that of Peter - a mighty host of
angels.

Twelve legions - A legion was a division of the Roman army amounting to
more than 6,000 men. See the notes at [Mat
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029). The number "twelve" was
mentioned, perhaps, in reference to the number of his apostles and
himself. Judas being away, but eleven disciples remained. God could
guard him, and each disciple, with a legion of angels: that is, God
could easily protect him, if he should pray to him, and if it was his
will.

[Mat 26:54](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#054)

But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled ... - That is, the
Scriptures which foretold of his dying for the world.

In some way that must be accomplished, and the time had come when,
having finished the work which the Father gave him to do, it was proper
that he should submit to death. This was said, doubtless, to comfort his
disciples; to show them that his death was not a matter of surprise or
disappointment to him; and that they, therefore, should not be offended
and forsake him.

[Mat 26:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#055)

Against a thief - Rather a "robber." This was the manner in which they
would have sought to take a highwayman of desperate character, and armed
to defend his life.

It adds not a little to the depth of his humiliation that he consented
to be "hunted down" thus by wicked people, and to be treated as if he
had been the worst of mankind.

Daily with you teaching in the temple - For many days before the
Passover, as recorded in the previous chapter.

[Mat 26:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#056)

Scriptures of the prophets - The "writings" of the prophets, for that is
the meaning of the word "scriptures." He alludes to those parts of the
prophetic writings which foretold his sufferings and death.

Then all the disciples ... - Overcome with fear when they saw their
Master actually taken; alarmed with the terrific appearance of armed men
and torches in a dark night, and forgetting their promises not to
forsake him, they all left their Saviour to go alone to trial and to
death! Alas, how many, when attachment to Christ would lead them to
danger, leave him and flee! Mark adds that after the disciples had fled,
a young man, having a linen cloth cast about his naked body, attempted
to follow him. It is not known who he was, but not improbably he may
have been the owner of the garden and a friend of Jesus. Aroused by the
noise from his repose, he came to defend, or at least to follow the
Saviour. He cast, in his hurry, such a covering as was at hand around
his body, and came to him. The young men among the Romans and Jews
attempted to seize him also, and he only secured his safety by leaving
in their hands the covering that he had hastily thrown around him. It is
not known why this circumstance was recorded by Mark, but it would seem
to be probable that it was to mention him with honor, as showing his
interest in the Saviour, and his willingness to aid him. See the notes
at [Mar 14:50-51](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#050). This circumstance
may have been recorded for the purpose of honoring him by placing his
conduct in strong contrast with that of the apostles, who had all
forsaken the Saviour and fled.

[Mat 26:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#057)

The trial of our Lord before the council, and the denial of Peter
happening at the same time, might be related one before the other,
according to the evangelists' pleasure.

Accordingly, Matthew and Mark relate the "trial" first, and Peter's
denial afterward; Luke mentions the denial first, and John has probably
observed the natural order. The parallel places are recorded in Mark
14:53-72; Luke 22:54-71; and [Joh
18:13-27](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#013).

To Caiaphas - John says that they led him first to Annas, the
father-in-law of Caiaphas. This was done, probably as a mark of respect,
he having been high priest, and perhaps distinguished for prudence, and
capable of "advising" his son-in-law in a difficult case. The Saviour
was "detained" there. probably, until the chief priests and elders were
assembled.

The high priest - Note, [Mat 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#003).
John says he was high priest for that year. Annas had been high priest
some years before. In the time of our Saviour the office was frequently
changed by the civil ruler. This Caiaphas had prophesied that it was
expedient that one should die for the people. See the notes at [Joh
11:49-50](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#049).

The scribes and elders - The men composing the great council of the
nation, or Sanhedrin, [Mat 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022). It is
not probable that they could be immediately assembled, and some part of
the transaction respecting the denial of Peter probably took place while
they were collecting.

[Matthew 26:58](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#058)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">mat 26:58</span></span>

Peter followed afar off - By this he evinced two things:

1\. Real attachment to his Master; a desire to be near him and to
witness his trial.

2\. Fear respecting his personal safety. He therefore kept so far off as
to be out of danger, and yet so near as that he might witness the
transactions respecting his Master.

Perhaps he expected to be lost and unobserved in the crowd. Many, in
this, imitate Peter. They are afraid to follow the Saviour closely. They
fear danger, ridicule, or persecution. They "follow him," but it is at a
great distance - so far that it is difficult to discern that they are in
the train, and are his friends at all. Religion requires us to be near
to Christ. We may measure our piety by our desire to be with him, to be
like him, and by our willingness to follow him always - through trials,
contempt, persecution, and death. Compare the notes at [Phi
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010). John says that another disciple
went with Peter. By that other disciple it is commonly supposed, as he
did not mention his name, that he meant himself. He was acquainted with
the high priest, and went immediately into the hall.

Unto the high priest's palace - The word rendered "palace" means,
rather, the hall, or middle court, or "area" of his house. It was
situated in the center of the palace, and was commonly uncovered. See
the notes and plan of a house in [Mat
9:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#001).

And went in - John informs us that he did not go immediately in; but the
ether disciple, being known to the high priest, went in first, while
Peter remained at the gate or entrance. The other disciple then went out
and brought in Peter. Matthew, Mark, and Luke have omitted this
circumstance. John recorded it, probably, because they had omitted it,
and because he was the "other disciple" concerned in it.

Sat with the servants to see the end - That is, the end of the trial, or
to see how it would go with his Master. The other evangelists say that
he stood with the servants warming himself. John says, it being cold,
they had made a fire of coals and warmed themselves. It was then,
probably, not far from midnight. The place where they were was
uncovered; and travelers say that, though the "days" are warm in Judea
at that season of the year, yet that the nights are often uncomfortably
cold. This fire was made "in the hall" (Luke). The fire was not in a
"fireplace," as we commonly suppose, but was probably made of "coals"
laid on the pavement. At this place and time was Peter's first "denial"
of his Lord, as is recorded afterward. See [Mat
26:69](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#069).

[Matthew 26:59](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#059)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_059">mat 26:59</span></span>

False witness - That is, they sought for witnesses who would accuse him
of crime of violation of the laws of the land or of God. We are not to
suppose that "they wished" them to be "false" witnesses. They were
indifferent, probably, whether they were true or false, if they could
succeed in condemning him. "The evangelist" calls it false testimony.
Before these witnesses were sought, we learn from John [Joh
18:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#019) that the high priest asked
Jesus of his disciples and his doctrine. Jesus replied that he had
taught openly in the temple, and in secret had said nothing; that is, he
had no "secret doctrines" which he had not been willing openly to teach,
and he referred the high priest to those who had heard him. In a firm,
dignified manner he put himself on trial, and insisted on his rights.
"If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but if well, why
smitest thou me?" [Joh 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#023). This
conversation took place, probably, before the council was assembled, and
during this time the denials by Peter occurred. Luke informs us [Luk
22:66](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#066) that the council came together
as soon as it was day; that is, probably, near the morning, or not far
from the break of day - after Peter had denied him and gone out.

[Matthew 26:60](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">mat 26:60</span></span>

Found none - That is, they found none on whose testimony they could with
any show of reason convict him. The reason was, as Mark says [Mar
14:56](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#056), that "their witnesses agreed
not together." They differed about facts, times, and circumstances, as
all false witnesses do. Two witnesses were required by their law, and
they did not "dare" to condemn him without conforming, "in appearance"
at least, to the requirements of the law.

[Matthew 26:61](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#061)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_061">mat 26:61</span></span>

And said, This fellow said ... - Mark has recorded this testimony
differently. According to him, they said, "We heard him say, I will
destroy this temple that is made with hands, and within three days I
will build another. made without hands." Probably both forms of giving
in the testimony were used on the trial, and Matthew has recorded it as
it was given at one time and Mark at another, so that there is no
contradiction. Mark adds, "But neither so did their witnesses agree
together." That which they "attempted" to accuse him of is what he had
said respecting his body and their destroying it, [Joh
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019); "Destroy this temple, and in
three days I will raise it up." This he spoke of his body; they
perverted it, endeavoring to show that he meant the temple at Jerusalem.
They neither stated it as it was, nor did they state correctly its
meaning, nor did they agree about the words used. It was therefore very
little to their purpose.

[Matthew 26:62](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#062)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_062">mat 26:62</span></span>

Jesus held his peace - Was silent. He knew that the evidence did not
even appear to amount to anything worth a reply. He knew that they were
aware of that, and that feeling that, the high priest attempted to draw
something from him on which they could condemn him.

I adjure thee by the living God - I put thee upon thy oath before God.
This was the usual form of putting an oath among the Jews. It implies
calling God to witness the truth of what was said. The law respecting
witnesses also made it a violation of an oath to conceal any part of the
truth; and though our Saviour might have felt that such a question, put
in such a manner, was very improper or was unlawful, yet he also knew
that to be silent would be construed into a denial of his being the
Christ. The question was probably put in auger. They had utterly failed
in their proof. They had no way left to accomplish their purpose of
condemning him but to draw it from his own lips. This cunning question
was therefore proposed. The difficulty of the question consisted in
this: If he confessed that he was the Son of God, they stood ready to
condemn him for "blasphemy;" if he denied it, they were prepared to
condemn him for being an impostor, and for deluding the people under the
pretence of being the Messiah.

The living God - Yahweh is called the living God in opposition to idols,
which were without life.

The Christ - The Messiah, the Anointed. See the notes at [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001).

The Son of God - The Jews uniformly expected that the Messiah would be
the Son of God. In their view it denoted, also, that he would be
"divine," or equal to the Father, [Joh
10:31-36](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#031). To claim that title was
therefore, in their view, "blasphemy;" and as they had determined
beforehand in their own minds that he was not the Messiah, they were
ready at once to accuse him of blasphemy.

[Matthew 26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_064">mat 26:64</span></span>

Thou hast said - This is a form of assenting or affirming. Thou hast
said the truth; or, as Luke [Luk 22:70](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#070)
has it, "Ye say that I am." This was not, however, said "immediately."
Before Jesus acknowledged himself to be the Messiah, he said to them
[Luk 22:67-68](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#067), "If I tell you ye will
not believe, and if I also ask you" - that is, propose the proofs of my
mission, and require you to give your opinion of them "ye will not
answer me, nor let me go."

Nevertheless - This word should have been translated: "moreover or
furthermore." What follows is designed to explain and give confirmation
to what he had said.

Sitting on the right hand of power - That is, of God, called here the
Power - equivalent to "the Mighty, or the Almighty." It denotes dignity
and majesty; for to sit at the right hand of a prince was the chief
place of honor. See the notes at [Mat
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#021).

Coming in the clouds of heaven - See the notes at Matt. 24; 25. The
meaning of this is, You shall see "the sign from heaven" which you have
so often demanded; even the Messiah returning himself "as the sign,"
with great glory, to destroy your city and to judge the world.

[Matthew 26:65](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#065)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_065">mat 26:65</span></span>

Then the high priest rent his clothes - The Jews were accustomed to rend
their clothes as a token of grief. This was done often as a matter of
form, and consisted in tearing a particular part of the garment reserved
for this purpose. It was not lawful for the high priest to rip his
clothes, [Lev 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#006); [Lev
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#010). By that was probably intended
the robes of his priestly office. The garment which he now tore was
probably his ordinary garment, or the garments which he wore as
president of the Sanhedrin - not those in which he officiated as high
priest in the things of religion. This was done on this occasion to
denote the great grief of the high priest that so great a sin as
blasphemy had been committed in his presence.

He hath spoken blasphemy - That is, he has, under oath, arrogated to
himself what belongs to God. In asserting that he is the Son of God, and
therefore equal in dignity with the Father, and that he would yet sit at
his right hand, he has claimed what belongs to no man, and what is
therefore an invasion of the divine prerogative. If he had not been the
Messiah, the charge would have been true; but the question was whether
he had not given evidence that he was the Messiah, and that therefore
his claims were just. This point - the only proper point of inquiry -
they never examined. They assumed that he was an impostor, and that
point being assumed, everything like a pretension to being the Messiah
was, in their view, proof that he deserved to die.

[Matthew 26:66](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#066)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_066">mat 26:66</span></span>

What think ye? - What is your opinion? What sentence do you pronounce?
As President of the Sanhedrin he demanded their judgment.

He is guilty of death - This was the form which was used when a criminal
was condemned to die. The meaning is, he is guilty of a crime to which
the law annexes death. This sentence was used before the Jews became
subject to the Romans, when they had the power of inflicting death.
After they were subject to the Romans, though the power of inflicting
capital punishment" was taken away, yet they retained the form when they
expressed their opinion of the guilt of an offender. The law under which
they condemned him was that recorded in [Lev
24:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#010), which sentenced him that was
guilty of blasphemy to death by stoning. The chief priests, however,
were unwilling to excite a popular tumult by stoning him, and they
therefore consulted to deliver him to the Romans to be crucified, "under
the authority of the Roman name," and thus to prevent any excitement
among the people.

[Matthew 26:67](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#067)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_067">mat 26:67</span></span>

Then did they spit in his face - This, among the Jews, as among us, was
significant of the highest contempt and insult, [Num
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#014); [Isa
50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006); [Job
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#010).

And buffeted him - That is, they struck him with their hands closed, or
with the fist.

Others smote him with the palms of their hands - The word used in the
original here means literally to strike with rods. It also means to
strike the mouth with the open hand, as if to prevent a person's
speaking, or to evince abhorrence of what he had spoken.

[Matthew 26:68](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#068)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_068">mat 26:68</span></span>

Saying, Prophesy unto us ... - Mark informs us that before they said
this they had blindfolded him. Having prevented his seeing, they
ridiculed his pretensions of being the Messiah. If he Was the Christ,
they supposed he could tell who smote him As he bore it patiently and
did not answer, they doubtless supposed that they had discovered another
reason to think he was an impostor. The word "prophesy" does not mean
only to foretell future events, although that is the proper meaning of
the word, but also to declare anything that is unknown, or anything
which cannot be known by natural knowledge or without revelation. Luke
adds, "And many other things blasphemously spoke they against him."
There is something very remarkable in this expression. They had charged
Him with "blasphemy" in claiming to be the Son of God. This charge they
were not able to prove; but the evangelist fixes the charge of
"blasphemy" on them, because he really was the Son of God, and they
denied it.

[Matthew 26:69](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#069)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_069">mat 26:69</span></span>

Now Peter sat without in the palace - Mark says the first denial took
place while Peter was "beneath in the palace." This "palace" was the
large hall or court belonging to the residence of the high priest. The
part of it where Jesus and the council were was "elevated," probably
above the rest for a tribunal. Peter was "beneath or in the "lower part"
of the hall, with the servants at the fire. Yet, as Matthew says, he sat
without in the palace - that is, out of the palace where they were
trying Jesus - to wit, in the lower part of the hall with the servants:
both narratives are therefore consistent.

And a damsel came unto him - John [Joh
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#017) says that this damsel was one
that kept the door.

Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee - Probably she suspected him from
his being in company with John. This was in the early part of the trial
of Jesus.

[Matthew 26:70](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#070)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_070">mat 26:70</span></span>

But he deeded before them all ... - He denied that he was a disciple; he
denied that he knew Jesus; he denied (Mark) that he understood what was
meant - that is, he did not see any reason why this question was asked.
All this was palpable falsehood, and Peter must have known that it was
such. This is remarkable, because Peter had just before been so
confident. It is more remarkable, because the edge of the charge was
taken off by the insinuation that "John" was known to be a disciple thou
"also" wast with Jesus of Galilee.

[Matthew 26:71](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#071)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_071">mat 26:71</span></span>

When he was gone out into the porch - The "entrance," or the small
apartment between the outer door and the large hall in the center of the
building. See plan of a house, Notes, [Mat
9:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#001). Peter was embarrassed and
confused by the question, and to save his confusion from attracting
notice, he went away from the fire into the porch, where he expected to
be unobserved - yet in vain. By the very movement to avoid detection, he
came into contact with another who knew him and repeated the charge. How
clearly does it prove that our Lord was omniscient, that all these
things were foreseen!

Another maid saw him - Mark simply says that "a maid" saw him. From Luke
it would appear that "a man" spoke to him, [Luk
22:58](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#058). The truth probably is that both
were done. When he first went out, "a maid" charged him with being a
follower of Jesus. He was probably there a considerable time. To this
charge he might have been silent, thinking, perhaps, that he was
concealed, and there was no need of denying Jesus then. Yet it is very
likely that the charge would be repeated. A "man," also, might have
repeated it; and Peter, irritated, provoked, perhaps thinking that he
was in danger, "then" denied his Master the second time. This denial was
in a stronger manner and with an oath. While in the porch, Mark says,
the cock crew - that is, the first crowing, or not far from midnight.

[Matthew 26:73](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#073)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_073">mat 26:73</span></span>

And after a while - That is, about an hour after (Luke). Peter by this
time had returned into the palace or hall, and stood warming himself by
the fire, [Joh 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#025).

Thy speech bewrayeth thee - Your language makes it manifest that you are
of his company. That is, as Mark adds, he was a "Galilean," and in this
way his speech betrayed him. It is probable that the Galileans were
distinguished for some peculiarity of pronunciation, perhaps some unique
rusticity or coarseness in their manner of speaking, that distinguished
them from the refinement of the capital, Jerusalem. This charge, John
says [Joh 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#026), was supported by the
express affirmation of a kinsman of Malchus, the servant of the high
priest, that he had seen him in the garden.

[Matthew 26:74](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#074)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_074">mat 26:74</span></span>

Then began he to curse ... - Peter was now irritated beyond endurance.
He could no longer resist the evidence that he was known. It had been
repeatedly charged on him. His language had betrayed him, and there was
a positive witness who had seen him. He felt it necessary, therefore, to
be still more decided, and he accordingly added to the sin of denying
his Lord the deep aggravation of profane cursing and swearing, affirming
what he must have known was false, that he knew not the man. Immediately
then the cock crew - that is, the second crowing, or not far from three
in the morning.

[Matthew 26:75](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#075)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_075">mat 26:75</span></span>

And Peter remembered the word of Jesus ... - Luke has mentioned a
beautiful and touching circumstance omitted by the other evangelists,
that when the cock crew, "Jesus turned and looked upon Peter," and that
then he remembered his words. They were in the same room - Jesus at the
upper end of the hall, elevated for a tribunal and Peter below with the
servants, so that Jesus could look down upon Peter standing near the
fire. By a tender and compassionate look - a single glance of his eye
the injured Saviour brought to remembrance all Peter's promises, his own
predictions, and the great guilt of the disciple; he overwhelmed him
with the remembrance of his sin, and pierced his heart through with many
sorrows. The consciousness of deep and awful guilt rushed over Peter's
soul; he flew from the palace, he went where he might be alone in the
darkness of the night, and "wept bitterly."

The fall of Peter is one of the most melancholy instances of depravity
ever committed in our world. But a little while before so confident;
seated at the table of the Lord; distinguished throughout the ministry
of Christ with special favors; cautioned against this very thing; yet so
soon denying him, forgetting his promises, and profanely calling on God
to witness what he knew to be false - that he did not know him! Had it
been only once, it would have been awful guilt - guilt deeply piercing
the Redeemer's soul in the day of trial; but it was three times
repeated, and at last with profane cursing and swearing. Yet, while we
weep over Peter's fall, and seek not to palliate his crime, we should
draw from it important practical uses:

1\. The danger of self-confidence. "He that thinketh he standeth should
take heed lest he fall" [Co1 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#012).
True Christian confidence is that which relies on God for strength, and
feels safety only in the belief that he is able and willing to keep from
temptation.

2\. The highest favors, the most exalted privileges, do not secure us
from the danger of falling into sin. Few men were ever so highly favored
as Peter; few ever so dreadfully departed from the Saviour, and brought
so deep a scandal on religion.

3\. When a man begins to sin; his fall from one act to another is easy -
perhaps almost certain. At first, Peter's sin was only simple denial;
then it increased to more violent affirmation, and ended with open
profaneness. So the downward road of crime is easy. When sin is once
indulged, the way is open for a whole deluge of crime, nor is the course
easily stayed until the soul is overwhelmed in awful guilt.

4\. True repentance is deep, thorough, bitter. Peter wept bitterly. It
was sincere sorrow - sorrow proportioned to the nature of the offence he
had committed.

5\. A look from Jesus - a look of mingled affection, pity, and reproof -
produces bitter sorrow for sin. We injure Him by our crimes; and His
tender look, when we err, pierces the soul through with many sorrows,
opens fountains of tears in the bosom, and leads us to weep with
bitterness over our transgressions.

6\. When we sin when we fall into temptation - let us retire from the
world, seek the place of solitude, and pour out our sorrows before God.
He will mark our groans; he will hear our sighs; he will behold our
tears; and he will receive us to his arms again.

7\. Real Christians may be suffered to go far astray. To show them their
weakness, to check self-confidence, and to produce dependence on Jesus
Christ, they may be permitted to show how weak, and feeble, and rash
they are. Peter was a real believer. Jesus had prayed for him "that his
faith should fail not," [Luk 22:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#032).
Jesus was always heard in his prayer, [Joh
11:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#042). He was heard, therefore, then.
Peter's faith did not fail - that is, his belief in Jesus, his real
piety, his true attachment to the Saviour. He knew during the whole
transaction that Jesus was the Messiah, and that he himself was well
acquainted with him; but he was suffered to declare that which he knew
was not true, and in this consisted his sin. Yet,

8\. Though a Christian may be suffered to go astray - may fall into sin
- yet he who should, from this example of Peter, think that he might,
lawfully do it, or who should resolve to do it, thinking that he might,
like Peter, weep and repent, would give evidence that he knew nothing of
the grace of God. He that resolves to sin under the expectation of
repenting hereafter "cannot be a Christian."

It is worthy of further remark, that the fact that the fall of Peter is
recorded by "all" the evangelists is high proof of their "honestly."
They were willing to tell the truth as it was; to conceal no fact, even
if it made much against themselves, and to make mention of their own
faults without attempting to appear to be better than they were. And it
is worthy of special observation that Mark has recorded this with all
the circumstances of aggravation, perhaps even more so than the others.
Yet, by the universal belief of antiquity, the Gospel of Mark was
written under Peter's direction, and every part of it submitted to him
for examination. Higher proof of the honesty and candor of the
evangelists could not be demanded.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 27](mat027)

</div>
