<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Matthew Index](mat.md)  
  [Previous](mat004)  [Next](mat006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001.md)

[Matthew 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 5:1</span></span>

And seeing the multitudes - The great numbers that came to attend on his
ministry. The substance of this discourse is recorded also in Luke 6. It
is commonly called the "Sermon on the Mount." It is not improbable that
it was repeated, in substance, on different occasions, and to different
people. At those times parts of it may have been omitted, and Luke may
have recorded it as it was pronounced on one of those occasions. See the
notes at [Luk 6:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#017.md).

Went up into a mountain - This mountain, or hill, was somewhere in the
vicinity of Capernaum, but where precisely is not mentioned. He ascended
the hill, doubtless, because it was more convenient to address the
multitude from an eminence than if he were on the same level with them.
A hill or mountain is still shown a short distance to the northwest of
the ancient site of Capernaum, which tradition reports to have been the
place where this sermon was delivered, and which is called on the maps
the Mount of Beatitudes. The hill commonly believed to be that on which
the sermon was delivered is on the road from Nazareth to Tiberias, not
far from the latter place. The hill is known by the name of Kuran
Huttin, the Horns of Huttin. Of this hill Professor Hackett
(Illustrations of Scripture, pp. 323, 324) says: "Though a noontide heat
was beating down upon us with scorching power, I could not resist the
temptation to turn aside and examine a place for which such a claim has
been set up, though I cannot say that I have any great confidence in it.
The hill referred to is rocky, and rises steeply to a moderate height
above the plain. It has two summits, with a slight depression between
them, and it is from these projecting points, or horns, that it receives
the name given to it. From the top the observer has a full view of the
Sea of Tiberias. The most pleasing feature of the landscape is that
presented by the diversified appearance of the fields. The different
plots of ground exhibit various colors, according to the state. of
cultivation: some of them are red, where the land has been newly plowed
up, the natural appearance of the soil; others yellow or white, where
the harvest is beginning to ripen, or is already ripe; and others green,
being covered with grass or springing grain. As they are contiguous to
each other, or intermixed, these particolored plots present at some
distance an appearance of joyful chequered work, which is really
beautiful.

"In rhetorical descriptions of the delivery of the Sermon on the Mount,
we often hear the people represented as looking up to the speaker from
the sides of the hill, or listening to him from the plain. This would
not be possible with reference to the present locality; for it is too
precipitous and too elevated to allow of such a position. The Saviour
could have sat there, however, in the midst of his hearers, for it
affords a platform amply large enough for the accommodation of the
hundreds who may have been present on that occasion."

And when he was set - This was the common mode of teaching among the
Jews, [Luk 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#020.md); [Luk
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#003.md); [Joh
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#002.md); [Act
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#014.md); [Act
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#013.md).

His disciples came unto him - The word "disciples" means "learners,"
those who are taught. Here it is put for those who attended on the
ministry of Jesus, and does not imply that they were all Christians. See
[Joh 6:66](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#066.md).

[Matthew 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 5:3</span></span>

Blessed are the poor in spirit - The word "blessed" means "happy,"
referring to that which produces felicity, from whatever quarter it may
come.

Poor in spirit - Luke says simply, Blessed are the poor. It has been
disputed whether Christ meant the poor in reference to the things of
this life, or to the humble. The gospel is said to be preached to the
poor, [Luk 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#018.md); [Mat
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#005.md). It was predicted that the
Messiah would preach to the poor, [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001.md). It is said that they have
special facilities for being saved, [Mat
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#023.md); [Luk
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#024.md). The state of such persons is
therefore comparatively blessed, or happy. Riches produce care, anxiety,
and dangers, and not the least is the danger of losing heaven by them.
To be poor in spirit is to have a humble opinion of ourselves; to be
sensible that we are sinners, and have no righteousness of our own; to
be willing to be saved only by the rich grace and mercy of God; to be
willing to be where God places us, to bear what he lays on us, to go
where he bids us, and to die when he commands; to be willing to be in
his hands, and to feel that we deserve no favor from him. It is opposed
to pride, and vanity, and ambition. Such are happy:

1\. Because there is more real enjoyment in thinking of ourselves as we
are, than in being filled with pride and vanity.

2\. Because such Jesus chooses to bless, and on them he confers his
favors here.

3\. Because theirs will be the kingdom of heaven hereafter.

It is remarkable that Jesus began his ministry in this manner, so unlike
all others. Other teachers had taught that happiness was to be found in
honor, or riches, or splendor, or sensual pleasure. Jesus overlooked all
those things, and fixed his eye on the poor and the humble, and said
that happiness was to be found in the lowly vale of poverty more than in
the pomp and splendors of life.

Theirs is the kingdom of heaven - That is, either they have special
facilities for entering the kingdom of heaven, and of becoming
Christians here, or they shall enter heaven hereafter. Both these ideas
are probably included. A state of poverty a state where we are despised
or unhonored by people is a state where people are most ready to seek
the comforts of religion here, and a home in the heavens hereafter. See
the notes at [Mat 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#002.md).

[Matthew 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 5:4</span></span>

Blessed are they that mourn - This is capable of two meanings: either,
that those are blessed who are afflicted with the loss of friends or
possessions, or that they who mourn over sin are blessed. As Christ came
to preach repentance, to induce people to mourn over their sins and to
forsake them, it is probable that he had the latter particularly in
view. Compare [Co2 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010.md). At the same
time, it is true that the gospel only can give true comfort to those in
affliction, [Isa 61:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001.md); [Luk
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#018.md). Other sources of consolation do
not reach the deep sorrows of the soul. They may blunt the sensibilities
of the mind; they may produce a sullen and reluctant submission to what
we cannot help: but they do not point to the true source of comfort. In
the God of mercy only; in the Saviour; in the peace that flows from the
hope of a better world, and there only, is there consolation, [Co2
3:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017.md); [Co2
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#001.md). Those that mourn thus shall be
comforted. So those that grieve over sin; that sorrow that they have
committed it, and are afflicted and wounded that they have offended God,
shall find comfort in the gospel. Through the merciful Saviour those
sins may be forgiven. In him the weary and heavy-ladened soul shall find
peace [Mat 11:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028.md); and the presence
of the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, shall sustain them here [Joh
14:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026.md), and in heaven all their
tears shall be wiped away, [Rev 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#004.md).

[Matthew 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 5:5</span></span>

The meek - Meekness is patience in the reception of injuries. It is
neither meanness nor a surrender of our rights, nor cowardice; but it is
the opposite of sudden anger, of malice, of long-harbored vengeance.
Christ insisted on his right when he said, "If I have done evil, bear
witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou me?" [Joh
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#023.md). Paul asserted his right when he
said, "They have beaten us openly uncondemned, being Romans, and have
cast us into prison; and now do they thrust us out privily? nay verily;
but let them come themselves, and fetch us out," [Act
16:37](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#037.md). And yet Christ was the very
model of meekness. It was one of his characteristics, "I am meek," [Mat
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029.md). So of Paul. No man endured more
wrong, or endured it more patiently than he. Yet the Saviour and the
apostle were not passionate. They bore all patiently. They did not press
their rights through thick and thin, or trample down the rights of
others to secure their own.

Meekness is the reception of injuries with a belief that God will
vindicate us. "Vengeance is his; he will repay," [Rom
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019.md). It little becomes us to take
his place, and to do what he has promised to do.

Meekness produces peace. It is proof of true greatness of soul. It comes
from a heart too great to be moved by little insults. It looks upon
those who offer them with pity. He that is constantly ruffled; that
suffers every little insult or injury to throw him off his guard and to
raise a storm of passion within, is at the mercy of every mortal that
chooses to disturb him. He is like "the troubled sea that cannot rest,
whose waters cast up mire and dirt."

They shall inherit the earth - This might have been translated the land.
It is probable that here is a reference to the manner in which the Jews
commonly expressed themselves to denote any great blessing. It was
promised to them that they should inherit the land of Canaan. For a long
time the patriarchs looked forward to this, [Gen
15:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#007.md); [Exo
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#013.md). They regarded it as a great
blessing. It was so spoken of in the journey in the wilderness, and
their hopes were crowned when they took possession of the promised land,
[Deu 1:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#038.md); [Deu
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#020.md). In the time of our Saviour they
were in the constant habit of using the Old Testament, where this
promise perpetually occurs, and they used it "as a proverbial expression
to denote any great blessing, perhaps as the sum of all blessings," [Psa
37:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#020.md); [Isa
60:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#021.md). Our Saviour used it in this
sense, and meant to say, not that the meek would own great property or
have many lands, but that they would possess special blessings. The Jews
also considered the land of Canaan as a type of heaven, and of the
blessings under the Messiah. To inherit the land became, therefore, an
expression denoting those blessings. When our Saviour uses this language
here, he means that the meek shall be received into his kingdom, and
partake of its blessings here, and of the glories of the heavenly Canaan
hereafter. The value of meekness, even in regard to worldly property and
success in life, is often exhibited in the Scriptures, [Pro
22:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#024.md); [Pro
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#001.md); [Pro
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#008.md), [Pro
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#015.md). It is also seen in common life
that a meek, patient, mild man is the most prospered. An impatient and
quarrelsome man raises up enemies; often loses property in lawsuits;
spends his time in disputes and broils rather than in sober, honest
industry; and is harassed, vexed, and unsuccessful in all that he does.
"Godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life
that now is, and of that which is to come," [Ti1
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008.md). Compare [Ti1
6:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#003.md).

[Matthew 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 5:6</span></span>

Blessed are they which do hunger ... - Hunger and thirst, here, are
expressive of strong desire. Nothing would better express the strong
desire which we ought to feel to obtain righteousness than hunger and
thirst. No needs are so keen, none so imperiously demand supply, as
these. They occur daily, and when long continued, as in case of those
shipwrecked, and doomed to wander months or years over burning sands,
with scarcely any drink or food, nothing is more distressing. An ardent
desire for anything is often represented in the Scriptures by hunger and
thirst, [Psa 42:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001.md); [Psa
63:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001.md). A desire for the blessings of
pardon and peace; a deep sense of sin, and want, and wretchedness, is
also represented by thirsting, [Isa
55:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001.md).

They shall be filled - They shall be satisfied as a hungry man is when
supplied with food, or a thirsty man when supplied with drink. Those who
are perishing for want of righteousness; those who feel that they are
lost sinners and strongly desire to be holy, shall be thus satisfied.
Never was there a desire to be holy which God was not willing to
gratify, and the gospel of Christ has made provision to satisfy all who
truly desire to be holy. See [Isa
55:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001.md); [Isa
65:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#013.md); [Joh
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014.md); [Joh
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#035.md); [Joh
7:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037.md); [Psa
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#015.md).

[Matthew 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 5:7</span></span>

Blessed are the merciful - That is, those who are so affected by the
sufferings of others as to be disposed to alleviate them. This is given
as an evidence of piety, and it is said that they who show mercy to
others shall obtain it. The same sentiment is found in [Mat
10:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#042.md); "Whosoever shall give to drink
unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water only, in the name of a
disciple, verily I say unto you he shall in no wise lose his reward."
See also [Mat 25:34-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034.md). This should be
done with a wish to glorify God; that is, in obedience to his
commandments, and with a desire that he should be honored, and with a
feeling that we are benefiting one of his creatures. Then he will regard
it as done to him, and will reward us. See the sentiment of this verse,
that the merciful shall obtain mercy, more fully expressed in [Sa2
22:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#026.md); and in [Psa
18:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#025.md).

Nowhere do we imitate God more than in showing mercy. In nothing does
God delight more than in the exercise of mercy, [Exo
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006.md); [Eze
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#011.md); [Ti1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#004.md); [Pe2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#009.md). To us, guilty sinners; to us,
wretched, dying, and exposed to eternal woe, he has shown his mercy by
giving his Son to die for us; by expressing his willingness to pardon
and save us; and by sending his Spirit to renew and sanctify our hearts.
Each day of our life, each hour, and each moment, we partake of his
undeserved mercy. All the blessings we enjoy are proofs of his mercy. If
we, then, show mercy to the poor, the wretched, the guilty, it shows
that we are like God. We have his spirit, and shall not lose our reward.
And we have abundant opportunity to do it. Our world is full of guilt
and woe, which we may help to relieve; and every day of our lives we
have opportunity, by helping the poor and wretched, and by forgiving
those who injure us, to show that we are like God. See the notes at [Mat
6:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014.md).

[Matthew 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 5:8</span></span>

Blessed are the pure in heart - That is, whose minds, motives, and
principles are pure; who seek not only to have the external actions
correct, but who desire to be holy in heart, and who are so. Man looks
on the outward appearance, but God looks on the heart.

They shall see God - There is a sense in which all will see God, [Rev
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#007.md). That is, they will behold him as
a Judge, not as a Friend. In this place it is spoken of as a special
favor. So also in [Rev 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#004.md), "And they
shall see his face." To see the face of one, or to be in the presence of
any one, were terms among the Jews expressive of great favor. It was
regarded as a high honor to be in the presence of kings and princes, and
to be permitted to see them, [Pro
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#029.md), "He shall stand before kings."
See also [Kg2 25:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#019.md), "Those that stood
in the king's presence;" in the Hebrew, those that saw the face of the
king; that is, who were his favorites and friends. So here, to see God,
means to be his friends and favorites, and to dwell with him in his
kingdom.

[Matthew 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 5:9</span></span>

Blessed are the peacemakers - Those who strive to prevent contention,
strife, and war; who use their influence to reconcile opposing parties,
and to prevent lawsuits and hostilities in families and neighborhoods.
Every man may do something of this; and no man is more like God than he
who does it. There ought not to be unlawful and officious interference
in that which is none of our business; but without any danger of
acquiring this character, every man has many opportunities of
reconciling opposing parties. Friends, neighbors, people of influence,
lawyers, physicians, ministers of the gospel, may do much to promote
peace. And it should be taken in hand in the beginning. "The beginning
of strife," says Solomon, "is like the letting out of water." "An ounce
of prevention," says the English proverb, "is worth a pound of cure."
Long and most deadly quarrels might often be prevented by a little kind
interference in the beginning.

Children of God - See the notes at [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001.md). Those who resemble God, or who
manifest a spirit like his. He is the Author of peace [Co1
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033.md); and all those who endeavor to
promote peace are like him, and are worthy to be called his children.

[Matthew 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 5:10</span></span>

Blessed are they which are persecuted - To persecute means literally to
pursue; follow after, as one does a flying enemy. Here it means to vex,
or oppress one, on account of his religion. They persecute others who
injure their names, reputation, property, or who endanger or take their
life, on account of their religious opinions.

For righteousness' sake - Because they are righteous, or are the friends
of God. We are not to seek persecution. We are not to provoke it by
strange sentiments or conduct; by violating the laws of civil society,
or by modes of speech that are unnecessarily offensive to others. But
if, in the honest effort to be Christians, and to live the life of
Christians, others persecute and revile us, we are to consider this as a
blessing. It is an evidence that we are the children of God, and that he
will defend us. "All that live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution," [Ti2 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#012.md).

Theirs is the kingdom of heaven - They have evidence that they are
Christians, and that they will be brought to heaven.

[Matthew 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 5:11</span></span>

Blessed are ye when men shall revile you - Reproach you; call you by
evil and contemptuous names; ridicule you because you are Christians.
Thus, they said of Jesus that he was a Samaritan and had a devil [Joh
8:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048.md); that he was mad [Joh
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#020.md); and thus they reviled and
mocked him on the cross, [Mat
27:39-44](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#039.md). But, being reviled, he
reviled not again [Pe1 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#023.md); and thus
being reviled, we should bless [Co1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#012.md); and thus, though the contempt of
the world is not in itself desirable, yet it is blessed to tread in the
footsteps of Jesus, to imitate his example, and even to suffer for his
sake, [Phi 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#029.md).

All manner of evil against you falsely - An emphasis should be laid on
the word falsely in this passage. It is not blessed to have evil spoken
of us if we deserve it; but if we deserve it not, then we should not
consider it as a calamity. We should take it patiently, and show how
much the Christian, under the consciousness of innocence, can bear, [Pe1
3:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#013.md).

For my sake - Because you are attached to me; because you are
Christians. We are not to seek such things. We are not to do things to
offend others; to treat them harshly or unkindly, and. to court
revilings. We are not to say or do things, though they may be on the
subject of religion, designed to disgust or offend. But if, in the
faithful endeavor to be Christians, we are reviled, as our Master was,
then we are to take it with patience, and to remember that thousands
before us have been treated in like manner. When thus reviled or
persecuted, we are to be meek, patient, humble; not angry; not reviling
again; but endeavoring to do good to our persecutors and slanderers,
[Ti2 2:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024.md). In this way many have
been convinced of the power and excellence of that religion which they
were persecuting and reviling. They have seen that nothing else but
Christianity could impart such patience and meekness to the persecuted;
and have, by this means, been constrained to submit themselves to the
gospel of Jesus. Long since it became a proverb, "that the blood of the
martyrs is the seed of the church."

[Matthew 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 5:12</span></span>

Rejoice, and be exceeding glad - Regard it as a great privilege thus to
be persecuted and to suffer - a thing not to be mourned over, but as
among the chief blessings of life.

For great is your reward in heaven - That is, your reward will be great
in the future world. To those who suffer most, God imparts the highest
rewards. Hence, the crown of martyrdom has been thought to be the
brightest that any of the redeemed shall wear; and hence many of the
early Christians sought to become martyrs, and threw themselves in the
way of their persecutors, that they might be put to death. They
literally rejoiced, and leaped for joy, at the prospect of death for the
sake of Jesus. Though God does not require us to seek persecution, yet
all this shows that there is something in religion to sustain the soul
which the world does not possess. Nothing but the consciousness of
innocence, and the presence of God, could bear up the sufferers in the
midst of these trials; and the flame, therefore, kindled to consume the
martyr, has also been a bright light, showing the truth and power of the
gospel of Jesus.

The prophets ... - The holy men who came to predict future events, and
who were the religious teachers of the Jews. For an account of their
persecution, see Heb. 11.

[Matthew 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 5:13</span></span>

Ye are the salt of the earth - Salt renders food pleasant and palatable,
and preserves from putrefaction. So Christians, by their lives and
instructions, are to keep the world from entire moral corruption. By
bringing down the blessing of God in answer to their prayers, and by
their influence and example, they save the world from universal vice and
crime.

Salt have lost its savour - That is, if it has become tasteless, or has
lost its preserving properties. The salt used in this country is a
chemical compound - chloride of sodium - and if the saltness were lost,
or it were to lose its savor, there would be nothing remaining. It
enters into the very nature of the substance. In eastern countries,
however, the salt used was impure, or mingled with vegetable or earthy
substances, so that it might lose the whole of its saltness, and a
considerable quantity of earthy matter remain. This was good for
nothing, except that it was used to place in paths, or walks, as we use
gravel. This kind of salt is common still in that country. It is found
in the earth in veins or layers, and when exposed to the sun and rain,
loses its saltness entirely. Maundrell says, "I broke a piece of it, of
which that part that was exposed to the rain, sun, and air, though it
had the sparks and particles of salt, yet it had perfectly lost its
savor. The inner part, which was connected to the rock, retained its
savor, as I found by proof. So Dr. Thomson (The Land and the Book, vol.
ii. pp. 43, 44) says, "I have often seen just such salt, and the
identical disposition of it that our Lord has mentioned. A merchant of
Sidon having farmed of the government the revenue from the importation
of salt, brought over an immense quantity from the marshes of Cyprus -
enough, in fact, to supply the whole province for at least 20 years.
This he had transferred to the mountains, to cheat the government out of
some small percentage. Sixty-five houses in June - Lady Stanhope's
village were rented and filled with salt. These houses have merely
earthen floors, and the salt next the ground, in a few years, entirely
spoiled. I saw large quantities of it literally thrown into the street,
to be trodden underfoot by people and beasts. It was 'good for nothing.'

"It should be stated in this connection that the salt used in this
country is not manufactured by boiling clean salt water, nor quarried
from mines, but is obtained from marshes along the seashore, as in
Cyprus, or from salt lakes in the interior, which dry up in summer, as
the one in the desert north of Palmyra, and the great lake of Jebbul,
southeast of Aleppo.

"Maundrell, who visited the lake at Jebbul, tells us that he found salt
there which had entirely 'lost its savor,' and the same abounds among
the debris at Usdum, and in other localities of rocksalt at the south
end of the Dead Sea. Indeed, it is a well-known fact that the salt of
this country, when in contact with the ground, or exposed to rain and
sun, does become insipid and useless. From the manner in which it is
gathered, much earth and other impurities are necessarily collected with
it. Not a little of it is so impure that it cannot be used at all, and
such salt soon effloresces and turns to dust - not to fruitful soil,
however. It is not only good for nothing itself, but it actually
destroys all fertility wherever it is thrown; and this is the reason why
it is cast into the street. There is a sort of verbal verisimilitude in
the manner in which our Lord alludes to the act: 'it is cast out' and
'trodden under foot;' so troublesome is this corrupted salt, that it is
carefully swept up, carried forth, and thrown into the street. There is
no place about the house, yard, or garden where it can be tolerated. No
man will allow it to be thrown on to his field, and the only place for
it is the street, and there it is cast to be trodden underfoot of men."

[Matthew 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 5:14</span></span>

The light of the world - The light of the world often denotes the sun,
[Joh 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#009.md). The sun renders objects
visible, shows their form, their nature, their beauties, their
deformities. The term light is often applied to religious teachers. See
[Mat 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#016.md); [Luk
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#032.md); [Joh
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004.md); [Joh
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012.md); [Isa
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006.md). It is pre-eminently applied to
Jesus in these places, because he is, in the moral world, what the sun
is in the natural world. The apostles, Christian ministers, and all
Christians, are lights of the world, because they, by their instructions
and example, show what God requires, what is the condition of man, what
is the way of duty, peace, and happiness the way that leads to heaven.

A city that is set on a hill ... - Many of the cities of Judea were
placed on the summits or sides of mountains, and could be seen from
afar. Perhaps Jesus pointed to such a city, and told his disciples that
they were like it. Their actions could not be hid. The eyes of the world
were upon them. They must be seen; and as this was the case, they ought
to be holy, harmless, and undefiled.

Maundrell, Jowett, and others suppose that the Sermon on the Mount was
delivered in the vicinity of the present city of Safed, or "the Horns of
Huttin" (see the notes at [Mat 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001).md),
and that this city may have been in his eye, and may have been directly
referred to by the Saviour when he uttered this sentiment. It would give
additional force and beauty to the passage to suppose that he pointed to
the city. Of this Dr. Thomson (The Land and the Book, vol. i. pp. 420,
421) says, "The shape of the hill is a well-described oval, and the wall
corresponds to it. The bottom of the outer ditch is now a very
flourishing vineyard, and the entire circuit is not far from half a
mile. The wall is mostly modern, but built on one more ancient, portions
of which can be seen on the east side. The interior summit rises about a
hundred feet higher than this wall, and was a separate castle, strongly
defended. Here are beveled stones, as heavy, and as aged in appearance,
as those of the most celebrated ruins in the country; and they prove
that this has been a place of importance from a remote age. These
ancient parts of the castle render it all but certain that there was
then a city or citadel on this most conspicuous 'hill' top; and our Lord
might well point to it to illustrate and confirm his precept. The
present Hebrew name is Zephath, and may either refer to its elevation
like a watchtower, or to the beauty and grandeur of the surrounding
prospects. Certainly they are quite sufficient to suggest the name.
There lies Gennesaret, like a mirror set in framework of dark mountains
and many-faced hills. Beyond is the vast plateau of the Hauran, faintly
shading with its rocky ranges the utmost horizon eastward. Thence the
eye sweeps over Gilead and Bashan, Samaria and Carmel, the plains of
Galilee, the coasts of Phoenicia, the hills of Naphtali, the long line
of Lebanon, and the lofty head of Hermen - a vast panorama, embracing a
thousand points of historic and sacred interest."

[Matthew 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 5:15</span></span>

Neither do men light a candle ... - The word rendered "candle" means any
portable light, as a lamp, candle, lantern. Compare [Mar
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#021.md); [Luk
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#016.md); [Luk
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035.md). Jesus proceeded here to show
them that the very reason why they were enlightened was that others
might also see the light, and be benefited by it. When people light a
candle, they do not conceal the light, but place it where it may be of
use. So it is with religion. It is given that we may benefit others. It
is not to be concealed, but suffered to show itself, and to shed light
on a surrounding wicked world.

A bushel - Greek, a measure containing nearly a peck. It denotes
anything, here, that might conceal the light.

[Matthew 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 5:16</span></span>

Let your light so shine ... - Let your holy life, your pure
conversation, and your faithful instructions, be everywhere seen and
known. Always, in all societies, in all business, at home and abroad, in
prosperity and adversity, let it be seen that you are real Christians.

That they may see your good works - The proper motive to influence us is
not simply that we may be seen (compare [Mat
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#001).md), but it should be that our
heavenly Father may be glorified. The Pharisees acted to be seen of men,
true Christians act to glorify God, and care little what people may
think of them, except as by their conduct others may he brought to honor
God, yet they should so live that people may see from their conduct what
is the proper nature of their religion.

Glorify your Father - Praise, or honor God, or be led to worship him.
Seeing in your lives the excellency of religion, and the power and
purity of the gospel, they may be won to be Christians also, and give
praise and glory to God for his mercy to a lost world.

We learn here:

1\. that religion, if it exists, cannot be concealed.

2\. that where it is not manifest in the life, it does not exist.

3\. that "professors" of religion, who live like other people, give
evidence that they have never been truly converted.

4\. that to attempt to conceal or hide our Christian knowledge or
experience is to betray our trust, injure the cause of piety, and to
render our lives useless. And,

5\. that good actions will be seen, and will lead people to honor God.
If we have no other way of doing good - if we are poor, and unlearned,
and unknown yet we may do good by our lives. No sincere and humble
Christian lives in vain. The feeblest light at midnight is of use.

"How far the little candle throws his beams!

So shines a good deed in a naughty world!"

[Matthew 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 5:17</span></span>

Think not that I am come ... - Our Saviour was just entering on his
work. It was important for him to state what he came to do. By his
setting up to be a teacher in opposition to the scribes and Pharisees,
some might charge him with an intention to destroy their law, and to
abolish the customs of the nation. He therefore told them that he did
not come for that end, but really to fulfill or accomplish what was in
the law and the prophets.

To destroy - To abrogate; to deny their divine authority; to set people
free from the obligation to obey them. "The law." The five books of
Moses called the law. See the notes at [Luk
24:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044.md).

The Prophets - The books which the prophets wrote. These two divisions
here seem to comprehend the Old Testament, and Jesus says that he came
not to do away or destroy the authority of the Old Testament.

But to fulfil - To complete the design; to fill up what was predicted;
to accomplish what was intended in them. The word "fulfill" also means
sometimes "to teach" or "to inculcate," [Col
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#025.md). The law of Moses contained many
sacrifices and rites which were designed to shadow forth the Messiah.
See the notes at Heb. 9. These were fulfilled when he came and offered
himself a sacrifice to God,

"A sacrifice of nobler name.

And richer blood than they."

The prophets contained many predictions respecting his coming and death.
These were all to be fulfilled and fully accomplished by his life and
his sufferings.

[Matthew 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 5:18</span></span>

Verily - Truly, certainly. A word of strong affirmation.

Till heaven and earth pass - This expression denotes that the law never
would be destroyed until it should be all fulfilled. It is the same as
saying everything else may change; the very earth and heaven may pass
away, but the law of God shall not be destroyed until its whole design
has been accomplished.

One jot - The word "jot," or yod (י y), is the name of the Hebrew letter
I, the smallest letter in the Hebrew alphabet.

One tittle - The word used here, in the Greek, means literally a little
horn, then a point, an extremity. Several of the Hebrew letters were
written with small points or apices, as in the Hebrew letter, shin (שׁ
sh), or the Hebrew letter, sin (שׂ s), which serve to distinguish one
letter from another. To change a small point of one letter, therefore,
might vary the meaning of a word, and destroy the sense. The name
"little horn" was given to these points probably from the manner in
which they were written, resembling a little horn. Professor Hackett
says of a manuscript which he saw a Jew transcribing: "One peculiarity,
that struck me at once as I cast my eye over the parchment, was the
horn-like appearance attached to some of the letters. I had seen the
same mark, before this, in Hebrew manuscripts, but never where it was so
prominent as here. The sign in question, as connected with the Hebrew
Letter Lamedh (ל L) in particular, had almost the appearance of an
intentional imitation of a ram's head. It was to that appendage of the
Hebrew letters that the Saviour referred when he said, "'Not one jot or
little horn' (as the Greek term signifies, which our version renders
'tittle,') 'shall pass from the law until all be fulfilled.'" -
Illustrations of Scripture, p. 234. Hence, the Jews were exceedingly
cautious in writing these letters, and considered the smallest change or
omission a reason for destroying the whole manuscript when they were
transcribing the Old Testament. The expression, "one jot or tittle,"
became proverbial, and means that the smallest part of the law should
not be destroyed.

The laws of the Jews are commonly divided into moral, ceremonial, and
judicial. The moral laws are such as grow out of the nature of things,
and which cannot, therefore, be changed - such as the duty of loving God
and his creatures. These cannot be abolished, as it can never be made
right to hate God, or to hate our fellow-men. Of this kind are the ten
commandments, and these our Saviour has neither abolished nor
superseded. The ceremonial laws are such as are appointed to meet
certain states of society, or to regulate the religious rites and
ceremonies of a people. These can be changed when circumstances are
changed, and yet the moral law be untouched. A general in an army may
command his soldiers to appear sometimes in a red coat and sometimes in
blue or in yellow. This would be a ceremonial law, and might be changed
as he pleased. The duty of obeying him, and of being faithful to his
country, could not be changed.

This is a moral law. A parent might permit his children to have 50
different dresses at different times, and love them equally in all. The
dress is a mere matter of ceremony, and may be changed. The child, in
all these garments, is bound to love and obey his father. This is a
moral law, and cannot be changed. So the laws of the Jews. Those
designed to regulate mere matters of ceremony and rites of worship might
be changed. Those requiring love and obedience to God and love to people
could not be changed, and Christ did not attempt it, [Mat
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#019.md); [Mat
22:37-39](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037.md); [Luk
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#027.md); [Rom
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#009.md). A third species of law was the
judicial, or those laws regulating courts of justice which are contained
in the Old Testament. These were of the nature of the ceremonial law,
and might also be changed at pleasure. The judicial law of the Hebrews
was adapted to their own civil society. When the form of their polity
was changed this was of course no longer binding. The ceremonial law was
fulfilled by the coming of Christ: the shadow was lost in the substance,
and ceased to be binding. The moral law was confirmed and unchanged.

[Matthew 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 5:19</span></span>

Whosoever therefore shall break - Shall violate or disobey.

One of these least commandments - The Pharisees, it is probable, divided
the precepts of the law into lesser and greater, teaching that they who
violated the former were guilty of a trivial offence only. See [Mat
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023.md). Christ teaches that in his
kingdom they who make this distinction, or who taught that any laws of
God might be violated with impunity, should be called least; while they
should be held in high regard who observed all the laws of God without
distinction.

Shall be called least - That is, shall be least. See [Mat
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009.md). The meaning of this passage seems
to be this: in the kingdom of heaven, that is, in the kingdom of the
Messiah, or in the church which he is about to establish (see the notes
at [Mat 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002).md), he that breaks the least
of these commandments shall be in no esteem, or shall not be regarded as
a proper religious teacher. The Pharisees, by dividing the law into
greater and lesser precepts, made no small part of it void by their
traditions and divisions, [Mat 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023.md);
[Mat 15:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#003.md). Jesus says that in his
kingdom all this vain division and tradition would cease. Such divisions
and distinctions would be a small matter. He that attempted it should be
the least of all. People would be engaged in yielding obedience to all
the law of God without any such vain distinctions.

Shall be called great - He that teaches that all the law of God is
binding, and that the whole of it should be obeyed, without attempting
to specify what is most important, shall be a teacher worthy of his
office, and shall be called great. Hence, we learn:

1\. that all the law of God is binding on Christians. Compare [Jam
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010.md).

2\. that all the commands of God should be preached, in their proper
place, by Christian ministers.

3\. that they who pretend that there are any laws of God so small that
they need not obey them, are unworthy of his kingdom. And,

4\. that true piety has respect to all the commandments of God. Compare
[Psa 119:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#006.md).

[Matthew 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 5:20</span></span>

Your righteousness - Your holiness; your views of the nature of
righteousness, and your conduct and lives. Unless you are more holy than
they are, you cannot be saved.

Shall exceed - Shall excel, or abound more. The righteousness of true
Christians is seated in the heart, and is therefore genuine. Jesus means
that unless they had more real holiness of character than the scribes
and Pharisees, they could not be saved.

The righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees - See the notes at [Mat
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007.md). Their righteousness consisted in
outward observances of the ceremonial and traditional law. They offered
sacrifices, fasted often. prayed much, were punctilious about ablutions,
and tithes, and the ceremonies of religion, but neglected justice,
truth, purity, and holiness of heart. See Mat. 23:13-33. The
righteousness that Jesus required in his kingdom was purity, chastity,
honesty, temperance, the fear of God, and the love of man. It is pure,
eternal, reaching the motives, and making the life holy.

The kingdom of heaven - See the notes at [Mat
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002.md). Shall not be a suitable subject
of his kingdom here, or saved in the world to come.

[Matthew 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 5:21</span></span>

Ye have heard - Or, this is the common interpretation among the Jews.
Jesus proceeds here to comment on some prevailing opinions among the
Jews; to show that the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees was
defective; and that people needed a better righteousness, or they could
not be saved. He illustrates what he meant by that better righteousness
by showing that the common opinions of the scribes were erroneous.

By them of old time - This might be translated to the ancients,
referring to Moses and the prophets. But it is more probable that Jesus
here refers to the interpreters of the law and the prophets. He did not
set himself against the law of Moses, but against the false and
pernicious interpretations of the law prevalent in his time.

Thou shalt not kill - See [Exo 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#013.md).
This properly denotes taking the life of another with malice, or with an
intention to murder him. The Jews understood it as meaning no more. The
comment of our Saviour shows that it was spiritual, and was designed to
extend to the thoughts and feelings as well as the external act.

Shall be in danger of - Shall be held guilty, and be punished by. The
law of Moses declared that the murderer should be put to death, [Lev
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#021.md); [Num
35:16](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#016.md). It did not say, however, by
whom this should be done, and it was left to the Jews to organize courts
to have cognizance of such crimes, [Deu
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#018.md).

The judgment - This was the tribunal that had cognizance of cases of
murder, etc. It was a court that sat in each city or town, and consisted
commonly of seven members. It was the lowest court among the Jews, and
from it an appeal might be taken to the Sanhedrin.

[Matthew 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 5:22</span></span>

But I say unto you - Jesus being God as well as man [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md), [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md), and therefore, being the
original giver of the law, had a right to expound it or change it as he
pleased. Compare [Mat 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#006.md), [Mat
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#008.md). He therefore spoke here and
elsewhere as having authority, and not as the scribes. It may be added
here that no mere man ever spake as Jesus did, when explaining or
enforcing the law. He did it as having a right to do it; and he that has
a right to ordain and change laws in the government of God must be
himself divine.

Is angry with His brother without a cause - Anger, or that feeling which
we have when we are injured, and which prompts us to defend ourselves
when in danger, is a natural feeling, given to us:

1\. As a proper expression of our disapprobation of a course of evil
conduct; and

2\. That we may defend ourselves when suddenly attacked.

When excited against sin, it is lawful. God is angry with the wicked,
[Psa 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#011.md). Jesus looked on the
hypocritical Pharisees with anger, [Mar
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#005.md). So it is said, "Be ye angry, and
sin not, [Eph 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026.md). This anger, or
indignation against sin, is not what our Saviour speaks of here. What he
condemns here is anger without a cause; that is, unjustly, rashly,
hastily, where no offence has been given or intended. In that case it is
evil; and it is a violation of the sixth commandment, because "he that
hateth his brother, is a murderer," [Jo1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#015.md). He has a feeling which would
lead him to commit murder, if it were fully acted out. The word
"brother" here refers not merely to one to whom we are nearly related,
having the same parent or parents, as the word is commonly used, but
includes also a neighbor, or perhaps anyone with whom we may be
associated. As all people are descended from one Father and are all the
creatures of the same God, so they are all brethren: and so every man
should be regarded and treated as a brother, [Heb
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#016.md).

Raca - This is a Syriac word, expressive of great contempt. It comes
from a verb signifying to be empty, vain; and hence, as a word of
contempt, denotes senseless, stupid, shallow-brains. Jesus teaches here
that to use such words is a violation of the spirit of the sixth
commandment, and if indulged, may lead to a more open and dreadful
infraction of that law. Children should learn that to use such words is
highly offensive to God, for we must give an account for every idle word
which we speak in the day of judgment, [Mat
12:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#036.md).

In danger of the council - The word translated "council" is in the
original Sanhedrin, and there can be no doubt that the Saviour refers to
the Jewish tribunal of that name. This was instituted in the time of the
Maccabees, probably about 200 years before Christ. It was composed of 72
judges: the high priest was the president of this tribunal. The 72
members were made up of the chief priests and elders of the people and
the scribes. The chief priests were such as had discharged the office of
the high priest, and those who were the heads of the twenty-four classes
of priests, who were called in an honorary way high or chief priests.
See [Mat 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#004.md). The elders were the
princes of the tribes or heads of the family associations. It is not to
be supposed that all the elders had a right to a seat here, but such
only as were elected to the office. The scribes were learned people of
the nation elected to this tribunal, being neither of the rank of
priests or elders. This tribunal had cognizance of the great affairs of
the nation. Until the time when Judea was subjected to the Romans, it
had the power of life and death. It still retained the power of passing
sentence, though the Roman magistrate held the right of execution. It
usually sat in Jerusalem, in a room near the temple. It was before this
tribunal that our Saviour was tried. It was then assembled in the palace
of the high priest, Mat. 26:3-57; [Joh
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#024.md).

Thou fool - This term expressed more than want of wisdom. It was
expressive of the highest guilt. It had been commonly used to denote
those who were idolaters [Deu 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#021.md),
and also one who is guilty of great crimes, [Jos
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#015.md); [Psa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001.md).

Hell fire - The original of this is "the gehennah of fire." The word
gehenna, γέεννα geenna, commonly translated "hell," is made up of two
Hebrew words, and signifies the valley of Hinnom. This was formerly a
pleasant valley near to Jerusalem, on the south. A small brook or
torrent usually ran through it and partly encompassed the city. This
valley the idolatrous Israelites devoted formerly to the horrid worship
of Moloch, [Kg2 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#003.md); [Ch2
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#003.md). In that worship, the ancient
Jewish writers inform us, the idol of Moloch was of brass, adorned with
a royal crown, having the head of a calf, and his arms extended as if to
embrace anyone. When they offered children to him they heated the statue
within by a great fire, and when it was burning hot they put the
miserable child into his arms, where it was soon consumed by the heat;
and, in order that the cries of the child might not be heard, they made
a great noise with drums and other instruments about the idol. These
drums were called תּף toph, and hence a common name of the place was
Tophet, תּפת Tophet, [Jer 7:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#031.md).

After the return of the Jews from captivity, this place was held in such
abhorrence that, by the example of Josiah [Kg2
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010.md), it was made the place where to
throw all the dead carcasses and filth of the city, and was not
unfrequently the place of public executions. It became, therefore,
extremely offensive; the sight was terrific; the air was polluted and
pestilential; and to preserve it in any manner pure, it was necessary to
keep fires continually burning there. The extreme loathsomeness of the
place; the filth and putrefaction; the corruption of the atmosphere, and
the lurid fires blazing by day and night, made it one of the most
appalling and terrific objects with which a Jew was acquainted. It was
called the gehenna of fire, and was the image which our Saviour often
employed to denote the future punishment of the wicked.

In this verse it denotes a degree of suffering higher than the
punishment inflicted by the "court of seventy," or the Sanhedrin, and
the whole verse may therefore mean, "He that hates his brother without a
cause is guilty of a violation of the sixth commandment, and shall be
punished with a severity similar to that inflicted by the court of
judgment. He that shall suffer his passions to transport him still
further, so that he shall make his brother an object of derision and
contempt, shall be exposed to severer punishment, corresponding to that
which the Sanhedrin (council) inflicts. But he who shall load his
brother with odious appellations and abusive language shall incur the
severest degree of punishment, represented by being burned alive in the
horrid and awful valley of Hinnom."

The amount, then, of this difficult and important verse is this: The
Jews considered but one crime a violation of the sixth commandment,
namely, actual murder, or willful, unlawful taking life. Jesus says that
the commandment is much broader. It relates not only to the external
act, but to the feelings and words. He specifies three forms of such
violation:

1\. Unjust anger.

2\. Anger accompanied with an expression of contempt.

3\. Anger, with an expression not only of contempt, but wickedness.

Among the Jews there were three degrees of condemnation: that by the
"judgment," the "council," and the "fire of Hinnom." Jesus says likewise
there shall be grades of condemnation for the different ways of
violating the sixth commandment. Not only murder shall be punished by
God, but anger and contempt shall be regarded by him as a violation of
the law, and punished according to the offence. As these offences were
not actually cognizable before the Jewish tribunals, he must mean that
they will be punished hereafter, and all these expressions therefore
relate to degrees of punishment proportionate to crime in the future
world - the world of justice and of woe.

[Matthew 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 5:23</span></span>

Therefore, if thou bring thy gift to the altar ... - The Pharisees were
intent only on the external act in worship. They looked not at all to
the internal state of the mind. If a man conformed to the external rites
of religion, however much envy, and malice, and secret hatred he might
have, they thought he was doing well. Our Saviour taught a different
doctrine. It was of more consequence to have the heart right than to
perform the outward act. If, therefore, says he, a man has gone so far
as to bring his gift to the very altar, and should remember that anyone
had anything against him, it was his duty there to leave his offering
and go and be reconciled. While a difference of this nature existed, his
offering could not be acceptable. He was not to wait until the offended
brother should come to him; he was to go and seek him out, and be
reconciled. So now the worship of God will not be acceptable, however
well performed externally, until we are at peace with those that we have
injured. "To obey is better than sacrifice," [Sa1
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022.md). He that comes to worship his
Maker filled with malice, and hatred, and envy, and at war with his
brethren, is a hypocritical worshipper, and must meet with God's
displeasure. God is not deceived, and he will not be mocked.

Thy gift - Thy sacrifice. What thou art about to devote to God as an
offering.

To the altar - The altar was situated in front of the temple, and was
the place on which sacrifices were made. See the notes on plan, [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012.md). To bring a gift to the altar
was expressive of worshipping God, for this was the way in which he was
formerly worshipped.

Thy brother - Any man, especially any fellow-worshipper. Anyone of the
same religious society.

Hath aught - Is offended, or thinks he has been injured by you in any
manner.

First be reconciled - This means to settle the difficulty; to make
proper acknowledgment or satisfaction for the injury. If you have
wronged him, make restitution. If you owe him a debt which ought to be
paid, pay it. If you have injured his character, confess it and seek
pardon. If he is under an erroneous impression, if your conduct has been
such as to lead him to suspect that you have injured him, make an
explanation. Do all in your power; and all you ought to do, to have the
matter settled. From this we learn:

1\. That, in order to worship God acceptably, we must do justice to our
fellow-men.

2\. Our worship will not be acceptable unless we do all we can to live
peaceably with others.

3\. It is our duty to seek reconciliation with others when we have
injured them.

4\. This should be done before we attempt to worship God.

5\. This is often the reason why God does not accept our offerings, and
we go empty away from our devotions. We do not do what we ought to
others; we cherish improper feelings or refuse to make proper
acknowledgments, and God will not accept such attempts to worship him.

[Matthew 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 5:25</span></span>

Agree with thine adversary quickly - This is still an illustration of
the sixth commandment. To be in hostility, to go to law, to be
litigious, is a violation always, on one side or the other, of the law
requiring us to love our neighbor, and our Saviour regards it as a
violation of the sixth commandment. While you are in the way with him,
says he, that is, while you are going to the court, before the trial has
taken place, it is your duty, if possible, to come to an agreement. It
is wrong to carry the contention to a court of law. See [Co1
6:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#006.md). The consequence of not being
reconciled, he expresses in the language of courts. The adversary shall
deliver to the judge, and he to the executioner, and he shall throw you
into prison. He did not mean to say that this would be literally the way
with God, but that His dealings with those that harbored these feelings,
and would not be reconciled with their brethren, were represented by the
punishment inflicted by human tribunals. That is, he would hold all such
as violators of the sixth commandment, and would punish them
accordingly.

There is no propriety in the use sometimes made of this verse, in
representing God as the "adversary" of the sinner, and urging him to be
reconciled to God while in the way to judgment. Nor does the phrase
"thou shalt by no means come out thence until thou hast paid the
uttermost farthing" refer to the eternity of future punishment. It is
language taken from courts of justice, to illustrate the truth that God
will punish people according to justice for not being reconciled to him.
The punishment in the future world will be eternal indeed [Mat
25:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046.md), but this passage does not prove
it.

Thine adversary - A man that is opposed to us in law. It here means a
creditor; a man who has a just claim on us.

In the way with him - While you are going before the court. Before the
trial comes on. It is remarkable that this very direction is found in
the Roman law of the Twelve Tables, which expressly directed the
plaintiff and defendant to make up the matter while they were in the
way, or going to the praetor - in via, rem uti pacunt orato. -
Blackstone's Commentary, iii. p. 299. Whether the Saviour had any
reference to this cannot be determined. As the Roman laws prevailed to
some extent in Palestine, however, it is possible that there was such an
allusion.

The officer - The executioner; or, as we should say, the sheriff.

The uttermost farthing - The last farthing. All that is due. The
farthing was a small coin used in Judea, equal to two mites. It was not
quite equal to half a farthing of British money.

[Matthew 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 5:27</span></span>

Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not
commit adultery - See the notes at [Mat
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#021.md). Our Saviour in these verses
explains the seventh commandment. It is probable that the Pharisees had
explained this commandment, as they had the sixth, as extending only to
the external act; and that they regarded evil thoughts and a wanton
imagination as of little consequence, or as not forbidden by the law.
Our Saviour assures them that the commandment did not regard the
external act merely, but the secrets of the heart, and the movements of
the eye. He declares that they who indulge a wanton desire, that they
who look on a woman to increase their lust, have already, in the sight
of God, violated the commandment, and committed adultery in the heart.
Such was the guilt of David, whose deep and awful crime fully shows the
danger of indulging in evil desires, and in the rovings of a wanton eye.
See 2 Sam. 11; Ps. 51. See also [Pe2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014.md). So exceeding strict and broad is
the law of God! And so heinous in his sight axe thoughts and feelings
which may be forever concealed from the world!

[Matthew 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 5:29</span></span>

Thy right eye - The Hebrews, like others, were accustomed to represent
the affections of the mind by the members or parts of the body, [Rom
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023.md); [Rom
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013.md). Thus, the bowels denoted
compassion; the heart, affection or feeling; the reins, understanding,
secret purpose. An evil eye denotes sometimes envy [Mat
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#015.md), and sometimes an evil passion,
or sin in general. [Mar 7:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#021.md); "out
of the heart proceedeth an evil eye." In this place, as in [Pe2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014.md), the expression is used to denote
strong adulterous passion, unlawful desire, or wicked inclination. The
right eye and hand are mentioned, because they are of most use to us,
and denote that, however strong the passion may be, or difficult to part
with, yet that we should do it.

Offend thee - The noun from which the verb "offend," in the original, is
derived, commonly means a stumbling-block, or a stone placed in the way,
over which one might fall. It also means a net, or a certain part of a
net against which, if a bird strikes, it springs the net, and is taken.
It comes to signify, therefore, anything by which we fall, or are
ensnared; and applied to morals, means anything by which we fall into
sin, or by which we are ensnared. The English word "offend" means now,
commonly, to displease; to make angry; to affront. This is by no means
the sense of the word in Scripture. It means to cause to fall into sin.
The eye does this when it wantonly looks upon a woman to lust after her.

Pluck it out ... - It cannot be supposed that Christ intended this to be
taken literally. His design was to teach that the dearest objects, if
they cause us to sin, are to be abandoned; that by all sacrifices and
self-denials we must overcome the evil propensities of our nature, and
resist our wanton imaginations. Some of the fathers, however, took this
commandment literally. Our Saviour several times repeated this
sentiment. See [Mat 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#009.md); [Mar
9:43-47](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#043.md). Compare also [Col
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005.md).

It is profitable for thee - It is better for thee. You will have gained
by it.

One of thy members perish - It is better to deny yourself the
gratification of an evil passion here, however much it may cost you,
than to go down to hell forever.

Thy whole body should be cast into hell - Thy body, with all its
unsubdued and vicious propensities. This will constitute no small part
of the misery of hell. The sinner will be sent there as he is, with
every evil desire, every unsubdued propensity, every wicked and
troublesome passion, and yet with no possibility of gratification. It
constitutes our highest notions of misery when we think of a man filled
with anger, pride, malice, avarice, envy and lust, and with no
opportunity of gratifying them forever. This is all that is necessary to
make an eternal hell. On the word hell, see the notes at [Mat
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022.md).

[Matthew 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 5:30</span></span>

And if thy right hand offend thee - The right hand is selected for the
same reason as the right eye, because it is one of the most important
members of the human body. The idea is, that the dearest earthly objects
are to be sacrificed rather than that we should commit sin; that the
most rigid self-denial should be practiced, and that the most absolute
self-government should be maintained at any sacrifice, rather than that
we should suffer the mind to be polluted by unholy thoughts and impure
desires.

[Matthew 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 5:31</span></span>

It hath been said ... - That is, by Moses, [Deu
24:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001.md). The husband was directed, if
he put his wife away, to give her a bill of divorce, that is a
certificate of the fact she had been his wife, and that he had dissolved
the marriage. There was considerable difference of opinion among the
Jews for what causes the husband was permitted to do this. One of their
famous schools maintained that it might be done for any cause, however
trivial. The other maintained that adultery only could justify it. The
truth was, however, that the husband exercised this right at pleasure;
that he was judge in the case, and dismissed his wife when and for what
cause he chose. And this seems to be agreeable to the law in
Deuteronomy. Our Saviour in [Mar
10:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#001.md), says that this was permitted
on account of the hardness of their hearts, but that in the beginning it
was not so. God made a single pair, and ordained marriage for life. But
Moses found the people so much hardened; so long accustomed to the
practice, and so rebellious, that, as a matter of civil appointment, he
thought it best not to attempt any change. Our Saviour brought marriage
back to its original intention, and declared that whosoever put away his
wife henceforward, except for one offence, should be guilty of adultery.
This is now the law of God. This was the original institution. This is
the only law that is productive of peace and good morals, and that
secures the respect due to a wife, and the good of children. Nor has any
man or set of men - any legislature or any court, civil or
ecclesiastical - a right to interfere, and declare that divorces may be
granted for any other cause. They, therefore, whoever they may be, who
are divorced for any cause except the single one of adultery, if they
marry again, are, according to the Scriptures, living in adultery. No
earthly laws can trample down the laws of God, or make that right which
he has solemnly pronounced wrong.

[Matthew 5:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 5:33</span></span>

Thou shalt not forswear thyself - Christ here proceeds to correct
another false interpretation of the law. The law respecting oaths is
found in [Lev 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#012.md), and [Deu
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#023.md). By those laws people were
forbid to perjure themselves, or to forswear, that is, swear falsely.

Perform unto the Lord - Perform literally, really, and religiously what
is promised in an oath.

Thine oaths - An oath is a solemn affirmation or declaration, made with
an appeal to God for the truth of what is affirmed, and imprecating his
vengeance, and renouncing his favor if what is affirmed is false. A
false oath is called perjury, or, as in this place, forswearing.

It appears, however, from this passage, as well as from the ancient
writings of the Jewish rabbins, that while the Jews professedly adhered
to the law, they had introduced a number of oaths in common
conversation, and oaths which they by no means considered to be binding.
For example, they would swear by the temple, by the head, by heaven, by
the earth. So long as they kept from swearing by the name Yahweh, and so
long as they observed the oaths publicly taken, they seemed to consider
all others as allowable, and allowedly broken. This is the abuse which
Christ wished to correct. "It was the practice of swearing in common
conversation, and especially swearing by created things." To do this, he
said that they were mistaken in their views of the sacredness of such
oaths. They were very closely connected with God; and to trifle with
them was a species of trifling with God. Heaven is his throne; the earth
his footstool; Jerusalem his special abode; the head was made by him,
and was so much under his control that we could not make one hair white
or black. To swear by these things, therefore, was to treat irreverently
objects created by God, and could not be without guilt. It is remarkable
that the sin here condemned by the Saviour prevails still in Palestine
in the same form and manner referred to here. Dr. Thomson (The Land and
the Book, vol. ii. p. 284) says, "The people now use the very same sort
of oaths that are mentioned and condemned by our Lord. They swear by the
head, by their life, by heaven, and by the temple, or what is in its
place, the church. The forms of cursing and swearing, however, are
almost infinite, and fall on the pained ear all day long."

Our Saviour here evidently had no reference to judicial oaths, or oaths
taken in a court of justice. It was merely the foolish and wicked habit
of swearing in private conversation; of swearing on every occasion and
by everything that he condemned. This he does condemn in a most
unqualified manner. He himself, however, did not refuse to take an oath
in a court of law, [Mat 26:63-64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#063.md). So
Paul often called God to witness his sincerity, which is all that is
meant by an oath. See [Rom 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#009.md); [Rom
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001.md); [Gal
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#020.md); [Heb
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#016.md). Oaths were, moreover, prescribed
in the law of Moses, and Christ did not come to repeal those laws. See
[Exo 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#011.md); [Lev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001.md); [Num
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#019.md); [Deu
29:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#012.md), [Deu
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#014.md).

[Matthew 5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 5:34</span></span>

But I say unto you, Swear not at all - That is, in the manner which he
proceeds to specify. Swear not in any of the common and profane ways
customary at that time.

By heaven; for it is God's throne - To swear by that was, if it meant
anything, to swear by Him that sitteth thereon, [Mat
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#022.md).

Nor by the earth; for it is his footstool - Swearing by that, therefore,
is really swearing by God. Or perhaps it means:

1\. that we have no right to pledge, or swear by, what belongs to God;
and,

2\. that oaths by inanimate objects are unmeaningful and wicked.

If they are real oaths, they are by a living Being, who has power to
take vengeance. A footstool is that on which the feet rest when sitting.
The term is applied to the earth to denote how lowly and humble an
object it is when compared with God.

Jerusalem - See the notes at [Mat 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001.md).

City of the Great King - That is, of God; called the Great King because
he was the King of the Israelites, and Jerusalem was the capital of the
nation, and the place where he was especially honored as king. Compare
[Psa 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004.md); [Psa
48:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001.md); [Psa
87:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#003.md).

[Matthew 5:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 5:36</span></span>

Neither shalt thou swear by thy head - This was a common oath. The
Gentiles also used this oath. To swear by the head was the same as to
swear by the life; or to say, I will forfeit my life if what I say is
not true. God is the Author of the life, and to swear by that,
therefore, is the same as to swear by him.

Because thou canst not make one hair white or black - You have no
control or right over your own life. You cannot even change one single
hair. God has all that control; and it is therefore improper and profane
to pledge what is God's gift and God's property; and it is the same as
swearing by God himself.

[Matthew 5:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 5:37</span></span>

But let your communication - Your word; what you say.

Be, Yea - Yes. This does not mean that we should always use the word
"yea," for it might as well have been translated "yes"; but it means
that we should simply affirm or declare that a thing is so.

More than these - More than these affirmations.

Cometh of evil - Is evil. Proceeds from some evil disposition or
purpose. And from this we may learn:

1\. That profane swearing is always the evidence of a depraved heart. To
trifle with the name of God, or with any of his works, is itself most
decided proof of depravity.

2\. That no man is believed any sooner in common conversation because he
swears to a thing. When we hear a man swear to a thing, it is pretty
good evidence that he knows what he is saying to be false, and we should
be on our guard. He that will break the third commandment will not
hesitate to break the ninth also. And this explains the fact that
profane swearers are seldom believed. The man who is always believed is
he whose character is beyond suspicion in all things, who obeys all the
laws of God, and whose simple declaration, therefore, is enough. A man
that is truly a Christian, and leads a Christian life, does not need
oaths and profaneness to make him believed.

3\. It is no mark of a gentleman to swear. The most worthless and vile.
the refuse of mankind, the drunkard and the prostitute, swear as well as
the best dressed and educated gentleman. No particular endowments are
requisite to give finish to the art of cursing. The basest and meanest
of mankind swear with as much tact and skill as the most refined, and he
that wishes to degrade himself to the very lowest level of pollution and
shame should learn to be a common swearer. Any person has talents enough
to learn to curse God and his fellowmen, and to pray - for every man who
swears prays - that God would sink him and others into hell. No profane
person knows but that God will hear his prayer, and send him to the
regions of woe.

4\. Profaneness does no one any good. Nobody is the richer, or wiser, or
happier for it. It helps no one's morals or manners. It commends no one
to any society. The profane man must be, of course, shut out from female
society, and no refined conversation can consist with it. It is
disgusting to the refined; abominable to the good; insulting to those
with whom we associate; degrading to the mind; unprofitable, needless,
and injurious in society; and awful in the sight of God.

5\. God will not hold the profane swearer guiltless. Wantonly to profane
His name, to call His vengeance down, to curse Him on His throne, to
invoke damnation, is perhaps of all offences the most awful. And there
is not in the universe more cause of amazement at His forbearance, than
that God does not rise in vengeance, and smite the profane swearer at
once to hell. Verily, in a world like this, where His name is profaned
every day, and hour, and moment by thousands, God shows that He is slow
to anger, and that His mercy is without bounds!

[Matthew 5:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 5:38</span></span>

An eye for an eye ... - This command is found in [Exo
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#024.md); [Lev
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#020.md), and [Deu
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#021.md). In these places it was given as
a rule to regulate the decisions of judges. They were to take eye for
eye, and tooth for tooth, and to inflict burning for burning. As a
judicial rule it is not unjust. Christ finds no fault with the rule as
applied to magistrates, and does not take upon himself to repeal it. But
instead of confining it to magistrates, the Jews had extended it to
private conduct, and made it the rule by which to take revenge. They
considered themselves justified by this rule to inflict the same injury
on others that they had received. Our Saviour remonstrates against this.
He declares that the law had no reference to private revenge, that it
was given only to regulate the magistrate, and that their private
conduct was to be governed by different principles.

The general principle which he laid down was, that we are not to resist
evil; that is, as it is in the Greek, nor to set ourselves against an
evil person who is injuring us. But even this general direction is not
to be pressed too strictly. Christ did not intend to teach that we are
to see our families murdered, or be murdered ourselves; rather than to
make resistance. The law of nature, and all laws, human and divine,
justify self-defense when life is in danger. It cannot surely be the
intention to teach that a father should sit by coolly and see his family
butchered by savages, and not be allowed to defend them. Neither natural
nor revealed religion ever did, or ever can, inculcate this doctrine.
Our Saviour immediately explains what he means by it. Had he intended to
refer it to a case where life is in danger, he would most surely have
mentioned it. Such a case was far more worthy of statement than those
which he did mention.

A doctrine so unusual, so unlike all that the world had believed. and
that the best people had acted on, deserved to be formally stated.
Instead of doing this, however, he confines himself to smaller matters,
to things of comparatively trivial interest, and says that in these we
had better take wrong than to enter into strife and lawsuits. The first
case is where we are smitten on the cheek. Rather than contend and
fight, we should take it patiently, and turn the other cheek. This does
not, however, prevent our remonstrating firmly yet mildly on the
injustice of the thing, and insisting that justice should be done us, as
is evident from the example of the Saviour himself. See [Joh
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#023.md). The second evil mentioned is
where a man is litigious and determined to take all the advantage the
law can give him, following us with vexatious and expensive lawsuits.
Our Saviour directs us, rather than to imitate him rather than to
contend with a revengeful spirit in courts of justice to take a trifling
injury, and yield to him. This is merely a question about property, and
not about conscience and life.

Coat - The Jews wore two principal garments, an interior and an
exterior. The interior, here called the "coat," or the tunic, was made
commonly of linen, and encircled the whole body, extending down to the
knees. Sometimes beneath this garment, as in the case of the priests,
there was another garment corresponding to pantaloons. The coat, or
tunic, was extended to the neck. and had long or short sleeves. Over
this was commonly worn an upper garment, here called "cloak," or mantle.
It was made commonly nearly square, of different sizes, 5 or 6 cubits
long and as many broad, and was wrapped around the body, and was thrown
off when labor was performed. If, said Christ, an adversary wished to
obtain, at law, one of these garments, rather than contend with him let
him have the other also. A reference to various articles of apparel
occurs frequently in the New Testament, and it is desirable to have a
correct view of the ancient mode of dress. in order to a proper
understanding of the Bible. The Asiatic modes of dress are nearly the
same from age to age, and hence it is not difficult to illustrate the
passages where such a reference occurs. The ordinary dress consisted of
the inner garment, the outer garment, the girdle (belt), and the
sandals. In regard to the sandals, see the notes at [Mat
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011.md).

In the girdle (belt) was the place of the pouch [Mat
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009.md), and to it the sword and dirk
were commonly attached. Compare [Sa2
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#008.md). In modern times the pistols are
also fastened to the belt. It is the usual place for the handkerchief,
smoking materials, inkhorn, and, in general, the implements of one's
profession. The belt served to confine the loose-flowing robe or outer
garment to the body. It held the garment when it was tucked up, as it
was usually in walking or in labor. Hence, "to gird up the loins" became
a significant figurative expression, denoting readiness for service,
activity, labor, and watchfulness; and "to loosen the loins" denoted the
giving way to repose and indolence, [Kg2
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#029.md); [Job
38:3](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#003.md); [Isa
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#027.md); [Luk
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035.md); [Joh
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#007.md).

Whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile - The word translated "shall
compel" is of Persian origin. Post-offices were then unknown. In order
that the royal commands might be delivered with safety and despatch in
different parts of the empire, Cyrus stationed horsemen at proper
intervals on all the great public highways. One of those delivered the
message to another, and intelligence was thus rapidly and safely
communicated. These heralds were permitted to compel any person, or to
press any horse, boat, ship, or other vehicle that they might need for
the quick transmission of the king's commandments. It was to this custom
that our Saviour refers. Rather, says he, than resist a public authority
requiring your attendance and aid for a certain distance, go peaceably
twice the distance.

A mile - A Roman mile was 1,000 paces.

Twain - Two.

[Matthew 5:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mat 5:42</span></span>

Give to him that asketh thee - This is the general rule. It is better to
give sometimes to an undeserving person than to turn away one who is
really in need. It is good to be in the habit of giving. At the same
time, the rule must be interpreted so as to be consistent with our duty
to our families [Ti1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#008.md) and with
other objects of justice and charity. It is seldom, perhaps never, good
to give to a person who is able to work, [Th2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#010.md). To give to such is to encourage
laziness, and to support the idle at the expense of the industrious. If
such a one is indeed hungry, feed him; if he needs anything further,
give him employment. If a widow, an orphan, a man of misfortune, or an
infirmed man, lame, or sick, is at your door, never send any of them
away empty. See [Heb 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#002.md); [Mat
25:35-45](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#035.md). So this is true of a poor
and needy friend that wishes to borrow. We are not to turn away or deny
him. This deserves, however, some limitation. It must be done in
consistency with other duties. To lend to every worthless man would be
to throw away our property, encourage laziness and crime, and ruin our
own families. It should be done consistently with every other
obligation, and of this everyone is to be the judge. Perhaps our Saviour
meant to teach that where there was a deserving friend or brother in
need, we should lend to him without usury, and without standing much
about the security.

[Matthew 5:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mat 5:43</span></span>

Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and
hate thine enemy - The command to love our neighbor was a law of God,
[Lev 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018.md). That we must therefore
hate our enemy was an inference drawn from it by the Jews. They supposed
that if we loved the one, we must of course hate the other. They were
total strangers to that great, special law of religion which requires us
to love both. A neighbor is literally one that lives near to us; then,
one who is near to us by acts of kindness and friendship. This is its
meaning here. See also [Luk 10:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#036.md).

[Matthew 5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">mat 5:44</span></span>

Love your enemies - There are two kinds of love, involving the same
general feeling, or springing from the same fountain of good-will to all
mankind, but differing so far as to admit of separation in idea. The one
is that feeling by which we approve of the conduct of another, commonly
called the love of complacency; the other, that by which we wish well to
the person of another, though we cannot approve his conduct. This is the
love of benevolence, and this love we are to bear toward our enemies. It
is impossible to love the conduct of a person who curses and reviles us,
who injures our person or property, or who violates all the laws of God;
but, though we may hate his conduct, and suffer keenly when we are
affected by it, yet we may still wish well to the person; we may pity
his madness and folly; we may speak kindly of him and to him; we may
return good for evil; we may aid him in the time of trial; we may seek
to do him good here and to promote his eternal welfare hereafter, [Rom
12:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#017.md). This seems to be what is
meant by loving our enemies; and this is a special law of Christianity,
and the highest possible test of piety, and probably the most difficult
of all duties to be performed.

Bless them that curse you - The word "bless" here means to "speak well
of" or "speak well to:" - not to curse again or to slander, but to speak
of those things which we can commend in an enemy; or, if there is
nothing that we can commend, to say nothing about him. The word "bless,"
spoken of God, means to regard with favor or to confer benefits, as when
God is said to bless his people. When we speak of our "blessing God," it
means to praise Him or give thanks to Him. When we speak of blessing
people, it "unites" the two meanings, and signifies to confer favor, to
thank, or to speak well of.

Despitefully use you - The word thus translated means, first, to injure
by prosecution in law; then, wantonly and unjustly to accuse, and to
injure in any way. This seems to be its meaning here.

Persecute - See the notes at [Mat
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010.md).

[Matthew 5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">mat 5:45</span></span>

That ye may be the children of your Father - In Greek, the sons of your
Father. The word "son" has a variety of significations. See the notes at
[Mat 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001.md). Christians are called the
"sons" or "children" of God in several of these senses: as his
offspring; as adopted; as his disciples; as imitators of Him. In this
passage the word is applied to them because, in doing good to enemies,
they resemble God. He makes His sun to rise upon the evil and good, and
sends rain, without distinction, on the just and unjust. So His people
should show that they imitate or resemble Him, or that they possess His
spirit, by doing good in a similar way.

[Matthew 5:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">mat 5:46</span></span>

What reward have ye? - The word "reward" seems to be used in the sense
of "deserving of praise." If you only love those that love you, you are
selfish; it is not genuine love for the "character," but love for the
"benefit," and you deserve no commendation. The very "publicans" would
do the same.

The publicans - The publicans were tax-gatherers. Judea was a province
of the Roman empire. The Jews bore this foreign yoke with great
impatience, and paid their taxes with great reluctance. It happened,
therefore, that those who were appointed to collect taxes were objects
of great detestation. They were, besides, people who would be supposed
to execute their office at all hazards; men who were willing to engage
in an odious and hated employment; people often of abandoned character,
oppressive in their exactions, and dissolute in their lives. By the Jews
they were associated in character with thieves and adulterers; with the
profane and the dissolute. Christ says that even these wretched people
would love their benefactors.

[Matthew 5:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">mat 5:47</span></span>

And if you salute your brethren ... - The word "salute" here means to
show the customary tokens of civility, or to treat with the common marks
of friendship. See the notes at [Luk
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#004.md). The Saviour says that the worst
men, the very publicans, would do this. Christians should do more; they
should show that they have a different spirit; they should treat their
"enemies" as well as wicked people do their "friends." This should be
done:

1\. Because it is "right;" it is the only really amiable spirit; and,

2\. We should show that religion is not selfish, and is superior to all
other principles of action.

[Matthew 5:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">mat 5:48</span></span>

Be ye therefore perfect ... - The Saviour concludes this part of the
discourse by commanding his disciples to be "perfect." This word
commonly means "finished, complete, pure, holy." Originally, it is
applied to a piece of mechanism, as a machine that is complete in its
parts. Applied to people, it refers to completeness of parts, or
perfection, where no part is defective or wanting. Thus, Job [Job
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md) is said to be "perfect;" that is,
not holy as God, or "sinless" - for fault is afterward found with him
[Job 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#020.md); [Job
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#006.md); but his piety was
"proportionate" - had a completeness of parts was consistent and
regular. He exhibited his religion as a prince, a father, an individual,
a benefactor of the poor. He was not merely a pious man in one place,
but uniformly. He was consistent everywhere. See the notes at that
passage. This is the meaning in Matthew. Be not religious merely in
loving your friends and neighbors, but let your piety be shown in loving
your enemies; imitate God; let your piety be "complete, proportionate,
regular." This every Christian may be; this every Christian must be.

Remarks On Matthew 5

1\. The gospel pronounces blessings on things far different from what
the world has thought to be a source of happiness. People suppose that
happiness is to be found in mirth, in wealth, in honor, in esteem, in
freedom from persecution. Christ says that it is to be sought in the
reverse. Often people are most happy in poverty, in sickness, in
persecution, when supported by the presence and promises of a merciful
God. And if God appoints our station there, we should submit to it, and
learn therewith to be content.

2\. We may see the evil of anger. It is a species of murder. If secretly
cherished, or exhibited by contempt and injury, it must bring down the
displeasure of God. It is a source of misery. True enjoyment is found in
meekness, peace, calmness, and benevolence. In such a firmness, and
steadiness, and dependence on God as to keep the soul unruffled in the
midst of provocation, is happiness. Such was Christ.

3\. We see the evil of indelicacy of feeling and sentiment, and the
strictness and severity of the law respecting the contact of the sexes
[Mat 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028.md). And yet what law is more
frequently violated? By obscene anecdotes and tales; by songs and gibes;
by double meanings and innuendoes; by looks and gestures; by
conversation, and obscene books and pictures, this law of our Saviour is
perpetually violated. If there is any one sentiment of most value for
the comfort, the character, the virtuous sociability of the young - one
that will shed the greatest charm over society, and make it the most
pure, it is that which inculcates "perfect delicacy" and "purity" in the
contact of the sexes. Virtue of any kind never blooms where this is not
cherished. Modesty and purity once gone, every flower that would diffuse
its fragrance over life withers and dies with it. There is no one sin
that so withers and blights every virtue, none that so enfeebles and
prostrates every ennobling feeling of the soul, as the violation of the
seventh commandment in spirit or in form, in thought or in act. How
should purity dwell in the heart, breathe from the lips, kindle in the
eye, live in the imagination, and dwell in the conversation of all the
young! An eternal, avenging God is near to every wanton thought, marks
every eye that kindles with impure desire, rolls the thunder of justice
over every polluted soul, and is preparing woe for every violator of the
laws of purity and chastity, [Pro
7:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#022.md); [Pro
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#005.md); [Pro
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#018.md).

4\. Revenge is equally forbidden. Persecution, slander, a spirit of
litigation, anger, personal abuse, dueling, suicide, murder, are all
violations of the law of God, and all must call down His vengeance.

5\. We are bound to love our enemies. This is a law of Christianity,
original and unique. No system of religion but Christianity has required
it, and no act of Christian piety is more difficult. None shows more the
power of the grace of God; none is more ornamental to the character;
none more like God; and none furnishes better evidence of piety. He that
can meet a man kindly who is seeking his hurt; who can speak well of one
that is perpetually slandering and cursing him; that can pray for a man
that abuses, injures, and wounds him: and that can seek heaven for him
that wishes his damnation, is in the way to life. This is religion,
beautiful as its native skies; pure like its Source; kind like its
Author; fresh like the dews of the morning; clear and diffusive like the
beams of the rising sun; and holy like the feelings and words that come
from the bosom of the Son of God. He that can do this need not doubt
that he is a Christian. He has caught the very spirit of the Saviour,
and he must inherit eternal life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 6](mat006.md)

</div>
