<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat022)  [Next](mat024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#001)

[Matthew 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 23:2</span></span>

Scribes and Pharisees - See the notes at [Mat
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007).

Moses' seat - Moses was the great legislator of the Jews. By him the Law
was given. The office of explaining that Law among the Jews devolved on
the scribes and Pharisees. In the synagogues they sat while expounding
the Law, and rose when they read it. By "sitting in the seat of Moses"
we are to understand authority to teach the Law; or, as he taught the
nation by giving the Law, so they taught it by explaining it.

[Matthew 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 23:3</span></span>

All, therefore, whatsoever ... - That is, all that they teach that is
consistent with the Law of Moses - all the commands of Moses which they
read to you and properly explain. The word "all" could not be taken
without such a restriction, for Christ himself accuses them of teaching
many things contrary to that law, and of making it void by their
traditions, [Mat 15:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#001).

They say, and do not - The interpretation which they give to the law is
in the main correct, but their lives do not correspond with their
teaching. It is not the duty of people to imitate their teachers unless
their lives are pure; they are to obey the law of God, and not to frame
their lives by the example of evil people.

[Matthew 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 23:4</span></span>

They bind heavy burdens ... - This phrase is derived from the custom of
loading animals. The load or burden is bound up and then laid on the
beast. So the Pharisees appointed weighty burdens, or grievous and heavy
precepts, and insisted that the people should obey them, though they
lent no assistance. The "heavy burdens" refer not here to the traditions
and foolish customs of the Pharisees, for Jesus would not command the
people to observe them; but they clearly mean the ceremonies and rights
appointed by Moses, which Peter says neither "they nor their fathers
were able to bear," [Act 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#010). Those
rites were numerous, expensive, requiring much time, much property, and
laborious. The Pharisees were rigid in requiring that all the people
should pay the taxes, give of their property, comply with every part of
the law with the utmost rigor, yet they indulged themselves, and bore as
little of the expense and trouble as possible; so that, where they could
avoid it, they would not lend the least aid to the people in the toils
and expense of their religious rites.

With one of their fingers - In the least degree. They will not render
the least aid.

[Matthew 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 23:5</span></span>

Their phylacteries - The word "phylactery" comes from a word signifying
to keep, preserve, or guard. The name was given because phylacteries
were worn as amulets or charms, and were supposed to defend or preserve
those who wore them from evil. They were small slips of parchment or
vellum, on which were written certain portions of the Old Testament. The
practice of using phylacteries was founded on a literal interpretation
of that passage where God commands the Hebrews to have the law as a sign
on their foreheads, and as frontlets between their eyes, [Exo
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#016); compare [Pro
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#001), [Pro
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#003); [Pro
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#021). One kind of phylactery was
called a "frontlet," and was composed of four pieces of parchment, on
the first of which was written [Exo
12:2-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#002); on the second, [Exo
13:11-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#011); on the third, [Deu
6:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004); and on the fourth, [Deu
11:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#018). These pieces of parchment,
thus inscribed, they enclosed in a piece of tough skin, making a square,
on one side of which is placed the Hebrew letter shin (שׁ sh) and bound
them round their foreheads with a thong or ribbon when they went to the
synagogue. Some wore them evening and morning; others only at the
morning prayer.

As the token upon the hand was required, as well as the frontlets
between the eyes [Exo 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#016), the Jews
made two rolls of parchment, written in square letters, with an ink made
on purpose, and with much care. They were rolled up to a point, and
enclosed in a sort of case of black calf-skin. They were put upon a
square bit of the same leather, whence hung a thong of the same, of
about a finger in breadth, and about 2 feet long. These rolls were
placed at the bending of the left arm, and after one end of the thong
had been made into a little knot in the form of the Hebrew letter yod (י
y), it was wound about the arm in a spiral line, which ended at the top
of the middle finger. The Pharisees enlarged them, or made them wider
than other people, either that they might make the letters larger or
write more on them, to show, as they supposed, that they had special
reverence for the law.

Enlarge the borders of their garments - This refers to the loose threads
which were attached to the borders of the outer garment as a fringe.
This fringe was commanded in order to distinguish them from ether
nations, and that they might remember to keep the commandments of God,
[Num 15:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#038); [Deu
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#012). The Pharisees made them broader
than other people wore them, to show that they had special respect for
the law.

[Matthew 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 23:6</span></span>

The uppermost rooms at feasts - The word "rooms," here, by no means
expresses the meaning of the original. It would be correctly rendered
the uppermost "places or couches" at feasts. To understand this, it is
necessary to remark that the custom among the Jews was not to eat
sitting, as we do, but reclining on couches. The table was made by
"three" tables, raised like ours and placed so as to form a square, with
a clear space in the midst, and one end quite open. Around these tables
were placed cushions capable of containing three or more persons. On
these the guests reclined, leaning on their left side, with their feet
extended from the table, and so lying that the head of one naturally
reclined on the bosom of another. To recline near to one in this manner
denoted intimacy, and was what was meant by lying "in the bosom" of
another, [Joh 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#023); [Luk
16:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#022). As the feet were extended
"from" the table, and as they reclined instead of sitting, it was easy
to approach the feet behind, and even unperceived. Thus, in [Luk
7:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#037), while Jesus reclined in this
manner, a woman that had been a sinner came to his feet "behind him,"
and washed them with her tears, and wiped them with the hair of her
head. She stood on the outside of the couches. So our Saviour washed the
feet of his disciples as they reclined on a couch in this manner, [Joh
13:4-12](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#004). Whenever we read in the New
Testament of "sitting" at meals, it always means reclining in this
manner, and never sitting as we do. The chief seat, or the "uppermost"
one, was the middle couch at the upper end of the table. This the
Pharisees loved, as a post of honor or distinction.

Chief seats in the synagogues - The seats usually occupied by the elders
of the synagogue, near the pulpit. The meaning is, they love a place of
distinction. See the notes at [Mat
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023).

[Matthew 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 23:7</span></span>

Greetings in the markets - Markets were places where multitudes of
people were assembled together. They were pleased with special attention
in public places, and desired that all should show them particular
respect.

Greetings - Salutations. See the notes at [Luk
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#004).

To be called Rabbi, Rabbi - This word literally signifies great. It was
a title given to eminent teachers of the law among the Jews; a title of
honor and dignity, denoting authority and ability to teach. They were
gratified with such titles, and wished it given to themselves as
denoting superiority. Every time it was given to them it implied their
superiority to the persons who used it, and they were fond, therefore,
of hearing it often applied to them. There were three titles in use
among the Jews - Rab, Rabbi, and Rabban - denoting different degrees of
learning and ability, as literary degrees do among us.

[Matthew 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 23:8</span></span>

Be not ye ... - Jesus forbade his disciples to seek such titles of
distinction. The reason which he gave was that he was himself their
Master and Teacher, They were on a level; they were to be equal in
authority; they were brethren; and they should neither covet nor receive
a title which implied either an elevation of one above another, or which
appeared to infringe on the absolute right of the Saviour to be their
only Teacher and Master. The direction here is an express command to his
disciples not to receive such a title of distinction. They were not to
covet it; they were not to seek it; they were not to do anything that
implied a wish or a willingness that it should be appended to their
names. Everything which would tend to make a distinction among them or
destroy their parity - everything which would lead the world to suppose
that there were ranks and grades among them as ministers, they were to
avoid. It is to be observed that the command is that they were not to
receive the title - "Be not ye called Rabbi." The Saviour did not forbid
them giving the title to others when it was customary or not regarded as
improper (compare [Act 26:25](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#025)), but
they were not to receive it. It was to be unknown among them. This title
corresponds with the title "Doctor of Divinity" as applied to ministers
of the gospel; and, so far as I can see, the spirit of the Saviour's
command is violated by the reception of such a title, as really as it
would have been by their being called "Rabbi." It makes a distinction
among ministers. It tends to engender pride and a sense of superiority
in those who obtain it, and envy and a sense of inferiority in those who
do not; and the whole spirit and tendency of it is contrary to the
"simplicity that is in Christ."

[Matthew 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 23:9</span></span>

And call no man your Father ... - This does not, of course, forbid us to
apply the term to our real father. Religion requires all proper honor to
be shown to Him, [Exo 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012); [Mat
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#004); [Eph
6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001). But the word "father" also
denotes "authority, eminence, superiority, a right to command, and a
claim to particular respect." In this sense it is used here. In this
sense it belongs eminently to God, and it is not right to give it to
people. Christian brethren are equal. Only God has supreme authority. He
only has a right to give laws; to declare doctrines that shall bind the
conscience; to punish disobedience. The Jewish teachers affected that
title because they seem to have supposed that a teacher formed the man,
or gave him real life, and sought, therefore, to be called father.
Christ taught them that the source of all life and truth was God, and
they ought not to seek or receive a title which properly belongs to him.

[Matthew 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 23:10</span></span>

Neither be ye called masters - That is, leaders, guides, for this is the
literal meaning of the word. It refers to those who go before others;
who claim, therefore, the right to direct and control others. This was
also a title conferred on Jewish teachers.

Neither of these commands forbids us to give proper titles of civil
office to men, or to render them the honor belonging to their station,
[Mat 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#021); [Rom
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#007); [Pe1
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#017). They prohibit the disciples of
Jesus from seeking or receiving mere empty titles, producing
distinctions among themselves, implying authority to control the
opinions and conduct of others, and claiming that others should
acknowledge them to be superior to them.

[Matthew 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 23:11</span></span>

See the notes at [Mat 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#026).

He that shall humble himself ... - God will exalt or honor him that is
humble, and that seeks a lowly place among people. That is true
religion, and God will reward it.

[Matthew 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 23:13</span></span>

Woe unto you - You are guilty, and punishment will come upon you. Jesus
proceeds to state wherein they were guilty. This most eloquent, most
appalling, and most terrible of all discourses ever delivered to mortals
was pronounced in the temple, in the presence of multitudes. Never was
there more faithful dealing, more terrible reproof, more profound
knowledge of the workings of hypocrisy, or more skill in detecting the
concealments of sin. This was the last of the Saviour's public
discourses; and it is a most impressive summary of all that he had ever
said, or that he had to say, of a wicked and hypocritical generation.

Scribes and Pharisees - See the notes at [Mat
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007).

Hypocrites - Note, [Mat 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#002).

Ye shut up the kingdom of heaven - Note, [Mat
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002). They shut it up by teaching false
doctrines respecting the Messiah; by binding the people to an observance
of their traditions; by opposing Jesus, and attempting to convince the
people that he was an impostor, thus preventing many from becoming his
followers. Many were ready to embrace him as the Messiah, and were about
entering into the kingdom of heaven - that is, the church - but they
prevented it. Luke says [Luk 11:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#052)
they had taken away the key of knowledge, and thus prevented their
entering in - that is, they had taken away the right interpretation of
the ancient prophecies respecting the Messiah, and thus had done all
that they could to prevent the people from receiving Jesus as their
Redeemer.

[Matthew 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 23:14</span></span>

Devour widows' houses - The word "houses" is used here to denote
"property" or possessions of any kind. You take away or get possession
of the property of widows by improper arts and pretences. This was done
in two ways:

1\. They claimed a very exact knowledge of the law and a perfect
observance of it. They pretended to extraordinary justice toward the
poor, friendship for the distressed, and willingness to aid those who
were in embarrassed circumstances. They thus induced "widows" and poor
people to commit the management of their property to them as guardians
and executors, and then took advantage of them and defrauded them.

2\. They put on the appearance of great sanctity, and induced many
conscientious but credulous women to give them much, under pretence of
devoting it to religious purposes.

Long prayer - Their prayers are said to have been often three hours in
length. One rule among them, says Lightfoot, was to meditate an hour,
then pray an hour, and then meditate another hour - all of which was
included in their "long prayers or devotions."

Damnation - Condemnation. The word here probably refers to future
punishment. It does not always, however. It means, frequently, no more
than "condemnation," or the divine disapprobation of a certain course of
conduct, as in [Co1 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029); "He that
eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh "damnation" to
himself;" that is, he that eateth and drinketh in an unworthy manner
disorderly, not with reverence - is guilty, and his conduct will be
disapproved or condemned by God referring solely to the impropriety of
the manner of partaking of the Lord's supper, and not at all to the
worthiness or unworthiness of the person. See the notes at that place.
Compare [Rom 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023).

For a pretence - For appearance or show; in order that they might the
better defraud poor people. They would not be condemned for "making"
long prayers, but because they did it with an evil design. Public
prayers should, however, be short, and always to the point. A man
praying in a Sunday school should pray for the school, and, usually, not
for everything else.

[Matthew 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 23:15</span></span>

Ye compass sea and land - You take every means, spare no pains, to gain
proselytes.

Proselyte - One that comes over from a foreign nation, religion, or sect
to us - a convert. Among the Jews there were two kinds of proselytes:

1\. "Proselytes of righteousness," or those who wholly and fully
embraced the Jewish religion, who were baptized, who were circumcised,
and who conformed to all the rites of the Mosaic institutions.

2\. "Proselytes of the gate," or those who approved of the Jewish
religion, renounced the pagan superstitions, and conformed to some of
the rites of the Jews, but were not circumcised or baptized.

Twofold more the child of hell - That is, twice as bad. To be a child of
hell was a Hebrew phrase, signifying to be deserving of hell, to be
awfully wicked. Compare the notes at [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001). The Jewish writers themselves say
that the proselytes were "scabs of Israel," and "hindered the coming of
the Messiah" by their great wickedness. The Pharisees gained them either
to swell their own numbers, or to make gain by extorting their money
under various pretences; and when they had accomplished that, they took
no pains to instruct them or to restrain them. They had renounced their
superstition which had before somewhat restrained them, but the
Pharisees had given them no religion in its place to restrain them, and
they were consequently left to the full indulgence of their vices.

[Matthew 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 23:16</span></span>

Whosoever shall swear ... - See the notes at [Mat
5:33-37](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#033).

The temple - See the notes at [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012).

It is nothing - It amounts to nothing - it is not binding.

The gold of the temple - Either the golden vessels in the temple - the
candlestick, etc.; or the gold with which the doors and other parts of
the temple were covered; or the gold in the treasury. This, it seems,
they considered far more sacred than any other part of the temple, but
it is not known why.

He is a debtor - He is bound to keep his oath. He is guilty if he
violates it.

[Matthew 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 23:17</span></span>

The temple that sanctifieth the gold - To sanctify is to make holy. The
gold had no holiness but what it derived from the temple. If in any
other place, it would be no more holy than any other gold. It was
foolish, then, to suppose that that was more holy than the temple, from
which it received all the sanctity which it possessed.

[Matthew 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 23:18</span></span>

The altar - The altar of burnt-offerings, in the court of the priests.
See the notes at [Mat 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012). It was
made of brass, about 30 feet in length and breadth, and 15 feet in
height, [Ch2 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#001). On this altar were
offered all the beasts and bloody oblations of the temple.

The gift that is upon it - The gift or offering made to God, so called
because it was devoted or "given" to him. The gift upon this altar was
always beasts and birds.

[Matthew 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 23:19</span></span>

The altar that sanctifieth the gift - The altar, dedicated to God, gave
all the value or holiness to the offering, and must therefore be the
greatest or of the most importance. If, therefore, either bound to the
fulfillment of an oath, it must be the altar.

[Matthew 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 23:21</span></span>

Him that dwelleth therein - That is, God. The temple was his house, his
dwelling. In the first, or Solomon's temple, he dwelt between the
cherubims in the most holy place. He manifested himself there by a
visible symbol, in the form of a cloud resting on the mercy-seat, [Kg1
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#010), [Kg1
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#013); [Psa
80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001).

[Matthew 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 23:22</span></span>

The throne of God - Heaven is his throne, [Mat
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034). It is so called as being the
place where he sits in glory. Jesus says, here, that all who swear at
all do, in fact, swear by God, or the oath is good for nothing. To swear
by an altar, a gift, or a temple is of no force unless it be meant to
appeal to God himself. The essential thing in an oath is calling God to
witness our sincerity. If a real oath is taken, therefore, God is
appealed to. If not it is foolish and wicked to swear by anything else.

[Matthew 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 23:23</span></span>

Ye pay tithe - A tenth part. The law required the Jews to devote a tenth
part of all their property to the support of the Levites, [Num
18:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#020). Another tenth part they paid
for the service of the sanctuary, commonly in cattle or grain, but where
they lived far from the place of worship they changed it to money, [Deu
14:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#022). Besides these, there was to
be every third year a tenth part given to the poor, to be eaten at their
own dwellings [Deu 14:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#028); so that
nearly one-third of the property of the Jews was devoted to religious
services by law. This was besides the voluntary offerings which they
made. How much more mild and gentle are the laws of Christianity under
which we live!

Mint - A garden herb, in the original so called from its agreeable
flavor. It was used to sprinkle the floors of their houses and
synagogues to produce a pleasant fragrance.

Anise - Known commonly among us as "dill." It has a fine aromatic smell,
and is used by confectioners and perfumers.

Cummin - A plant of the same genus, like "fennel," and used for similar
purposes. These were all herbs of little value. The law of Moses said
that they should pay tithes of the "fruits of the earth," [Deu
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#022). It said nothing, however, about
herbs. It was a question whether these should be tithed. The Pharisees
maintained, in their extraordinary strictness, that they ought. Our
Saviour says that they were precise in doing small matters which the law
had not expressly commanded, while they omitted the greater things which
it had enjoined.

Judgment - Justice to others, as magistrates, neighbors, citizens.
Giving to all their just dues.

Mercy - Compassion and kindness to the poor and miserable.

Faith - Piety toward God; confidence in him. Faith in God here means
that we are to give to him what is his due; as mercy and justice mean to
do to people, in all circumstances, what is right toward them.

These ought ye to have done - Attention to even the smallest points of
the law of God is proper, but it should not interfere with the "higher"
and more important parts of that law.

[Matthew 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 23:24</span></span>

Which strain at a gnat ... - This is a proverb. There is, however, a
mistranslation or misprint here, which makes the verse unmeaning. "To
strain" at a "gnat" conveys no sense. It should have been to strain out
a gnat; and so it is printed in some of the earlier versions, and so it
was undoubtedly rendered by the translators. The common reading is a
"misprint," and should be corrected. The Greek means to "strain" out by
a cloth or sieve.

A gnat - The gnat has its origin in the water; not in great rivers, but
in pools and marshes In the stagnant waters they appear in the form of
small "grubs" or "larvae." These larvae retain their form about three
weeks, after which they turn to chrysalids, and after three or four days
they pass to the form of gnats. They are then distinguished by their
well-known sharp sting. It is probable that the Saviour here refers to
the insect as it exists in its "grub" or "larva" form, before it appears
in the form of a gnat. Water is then its element, and those who were
nice in their drink would take pains to strain it out. Hence, the
proverb. See Calmet's Dict., art. "Gnat." It is used here to denote a
very small matter, as a camel is to denote a large object. "You Jews
take great pains to avoid offence in very small matters, superstitiously
observing the smallest points of the law, like a man carefully straining
out the animalculae from what he drinks, while you are at no pains to
avoid great sins - hypocrisy, deceit, oppression, and lust - like a man
who should swallow a camel." The Arabians have a similar proverb: "He
eats an elephant, and is suffocated with a gnat." He is troubled with
little things, but pays no attention to great matters.

[Matthew 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 23:25</span></span>

The cup and the platter - The drinking-cup and the dish containing food.
The Pharisees were diligent in observing all the washings and
obligations required by their traditions. See the notes at [Mar
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#004).

Full of extortion and excess - The outside appeared well; the inside was
filled with the fruit of extortion, oppression, and wickedness. The
meaning is, that though they took much pains to appear well, yet they
obtained a living by extortion and crime. Their cups, neat as they
appeared outward, were filled, not with the fruits of honest industry,
but with that which had been extorted from the poor by wicked arts.
Instead of "excess," many manuscripts and editions of the Greek
Testament read "wickedness."

[Matthew 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 23:26</span></span>

Cleanse first that which is within the cup and the platter - Let them be
filled with the fruits of honest industry, and then the outside and the
inside will be really "clean." By this allusion to the cup and platter
he taught them that it was necessary to cleanse the heart first, that
the external conduct might be really pure and holy.

[Matthew 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 23:27</span></span>

Like unto whited sepulchres - For the construction of sepulchres, see
the notes at [Mat 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#028). Those tombs
were annually whitewashed to prevent the people from accidentally coming
in contact with them as they went up to Jerusalem. This custom is still
continued. Dr. Thomson (The Land and the Book, vol. i. p. 148) says, "I
have been in places where this is repeated very often. The graves are
kept clean and white as snow, a very striking emblem of those painted
hypocrites, the Pharisees, beautiful without, but full of dead men's
bones and of all uncleanness within." The law considered those persons
unclean who had touched anything belonging to the dead, [Num
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#016). Sepulchres were therefore often
whitewashed, that they might be distinctly seen. Thus "whited," they
appeared beautiful; but within they contained the bones and corrupting
bodies of the dead. So the Pharisees. Their outward conduct appeared
well, but their hearts were full of hypocrisy, envy, pride, lust, and
malice - suitably represented by the corruption within a whited tomb.

[Matthew 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 23:29</span></span>

Ye build the tombs of the prophets - That is, you build sepulchres or
tombs ever the prophets that have been slain. This they did professedly
from veneration and respect for their character. This is often done at
the East at the present day, and indeed elsewhere. Among the Muslims it
is a common way of showing respect for any distinguished man to build a
tomb for him. By doing this, they profess respect for his character and
veneration for his memory. So the Pharisees, by building tombs in this
manner, professedly approved of the character and conduct of the
prophets, and disapproved of the conduct of their fathers in killing
them.

And garnish ... - That is, adorn or ornament. This was done by
rebuilding them with more taste, decorating them, and keeping them neat
and clean. The original word means, also, to show any proper honor to
the memory of the dead, as by speaking well of them, praying near them,
or rearing synagogues near them in honor of their memory.

[Matthew 23:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 23:30</span></span>

And say ... - This they professed to say by rebuilding their tombs. They
also, probably, publicly expressed their disapprobation of the conduct
of their fathers. All this, in building and ornamenting tombs, was a
profession of extraordinary piety. Our Lord showed them it was mere
pretence.

[Matthew 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 23:31</span></span>

Ye be witnesses unto yourselves - The emphasis, here, lies in the words
"to yourselves." It is an appeal to their conscience. It was not by
their building the tombs that they were witnesses that they were the
children of those who killed the prophets; but that, in spite of all
this pretence of piety, under all this cloak of profession, they knew in
their consciences, and were witnesses to themselves, that it was mere
hypocrisy, and that they really approved the conduct of those who slew
the prophets.

Children of them ... - Resembling them; approving their conduct;
inheriting their feelings. See the notes at [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001). They not only showed that they
were descended from them, but that they possessed their spirit, and
that, in similar circumstances, they would have done as they did.

[Matthew 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 23:32</span></span>

Fill ye up, then ... - This is a prediction of what they were about to
do. He would have them act out their true spirit, and show what they
were, and evince to all that they had the spirit of their fathers,
Compare the notes at [Joh 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#027). This
was done be putting him to death, and persecuting the apostles.

The measure - The full amount, so as to make it complete. By your
slaying me, fill up what is lacking of the iniquity of your fathers
until the measure is full; until the national iniquity is complete;
until as much has been committed as God can possibly bear, and then
shall come upon you all this blood, and you shall be destroyed, [Mat
23:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#034).

[Matthew 23:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 23:33</span></span>

Ye serpents - This name is given to them on account of their pretending
to be pious, and very much devoted to God, but being secretly evil, At
the heart, with all their pretensions, they were filled with evil
designs, as the serpent was, [Gen
3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001)

Generation of vipers - See the notes at [Mat
12:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#034).

Damnation of hell - This refers, beyond all question, to future
punishment. So great was their wickedness and hypocrisy, that, if they
persevered in this course, it was impossible to escape the damnation
that should come on the guilty. This is the sternest language that Jesus
ever used to wicked people. But it by no means authorizes ministers to
use such language to sinners now. Christ knew that this was true of
them. He had an authority which none now have. It is not the province of
ministers to denounce judgment, or to use severe names, least of all to
do it on pretence of imitating Christ. He knew the hearts of people. We
know them not. He had authority to declare certainly that those whom he
addressed would be lost. We have no such authority. He addressed
persons; we address characters.

[Matthew 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 23:34</span></span>

I send unto you prophets ... - Jesus doubtless refers here to the
apostles, and other teachers of religion. Prophets, wise men, and
scribes were the names by which the teachers of religion were known
among the Jews, and he therefore used the same terms when speaking of
the messengers which he would send. "I send" has the force of the
future, I "will" send.

Some of them ye shall kill - As in the case of Stephen [Act
7:59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#059) and James [Act
12:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#001).

Crucify - Punish with death on the cross. There are no cases of this
mentioned; but few historical records of this age have come down to us.
The Jews had not the power of crucifying, but they had power to deliver
those whom they condemned to death into the hands of the Romans to do
it.

Shall scourge - See the notes at [Mat
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#017). This was done, [Act
22:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#019); [Co2
11:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#024).

Persecute ... - See the notes at [Mat
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010). This was fulfilled in the case
of nearly all the apostles.

[Matthew 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 23:35</span></span>

That upon you may come ... - That is, the nation is guilty. Your fathers
were guilty. You have shown yourselves to be like them. You are about,
by killing the Messiah and his messengers, to fill up the iniquity of
the land. The patience of God is nearly exhausted, and the nation is
about to be visited with signal vengeance. These national crimes deserve
national judgments; and the proper judgment for all these crimes are
about to come upon you in the destruction of your temple and city.

All the righteous blood - That is, all the judgments due for shedding
that blood. God did not hold them guilty for what their fathers had
done; but temporal judgments descend on children in consequence of the
wickedness of parents, as in the case of drunken and profligate parents.
A drunken father wastes the property that his children might have
possessed. A gambler reduces his children to poverty and want. An
imprudent and foolish parent is the occasion of leading his sons into
places of poverty, ignorance, and crime, materially affecting their
character and destiny. See the notes at [Rom
5:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012). So of the Jews. The
appropriate effects of their fathers' crimes were coming on the nation,
and they would suffer.

Upon the earth - Upon the land of "Judea." The word is often used with
this limitation. See [Mat 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#008).

Righteous Abel - Slain by Cain, his brother, [Gen
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#008).

Zacharias, son of Barachias - It is not certainly known who this was.
Some have thought that it was the Zecharias whose death is recorded in
[Ch2 24:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#020). He is there called the
son of Jehoiada; but it is known that it was common among the Jews to
have two names, as Matthew is called Levi; Lebbeus, Thaddeus; and Simon,
Cephas. Others have thought that Jesus referred to Zecharias the
prophet, who might have been massacred by the Jews, though no account of
his death is recorded. It might have been known by tradition.

Whom ye slew - Whom you, Jews, slew. Whom your nation killed.

Between the temple and the altar - Between the temple, properly so
called, and the altar of burnt-offering in the court of the priests. See
the plan of the temple. [Mat 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012).

[Matthew 23:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 23:36</span></span>

Upon this generation - The destruction of Jerusalem took place about
forty years after this was spoken. See the next chapter.

[Matthew 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 23:37</span></span>

O Jerusalem ... - See the notes at [Luk
19:41-42](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041).

Would I have gathered - Would have protected and saved.

Thy children - Thy people.

[Matthew 23:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 23:38</span></span>

Your house - The temple. The house of worship of the Jews. The chief
ornament of Jerusalem.

Desolate - About to be desolate or destroyed. To be forsaken as a place
of worship, and delivered into the hands of the Romans, and destroyed.
See the notes at Matt. 24.

[Matthew 23:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mat 23:39</span></span>

Ye shall not see me ... - The day of your mercy is gone by. I have
offered you protection and salvation, and you have rejected it. You are
about to crucify me, and your temple to be destroyed, and you, as a
nation, to be given up to long and dreadful suffering. You will not see
me as a merciful Saviour, offering you redemption any more, until you
have borne these heavy judgments. They must come upon you, and be borne,
until you would be glad to hail a deliverer, and say, Blessed is he that
cometh in the name of the Lord. Blessed be he that comes as the Messiah,
to bring deliverance. This has not been yet accomplished, but the days
will come when the Jews, long cast out and rejected, will hail Jesus as
the Messiah, and receive him whom their fathers killed as the merciful
Saviour, [Rom 11:25-32](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025).

Remarks On Matthew 23

1\. Proper respect should always be shown to teachers and rulers, [Mat
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003).

2\. We are not to copy the example of wicked people, though they are our
teachers or rulers, [Mat 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003). We are
to frame our conduct by the law of God, and not by the example of
people.

3\. People are often very rigid in exacting of others what they fail
altogether of performing themselves, [Mat
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#004).

4\. We are not to seek human honors [Mat
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#008), nor to give flattering titles to
others, nor to allow others to give them to us [Mat
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#009). Our highest honor is in
humility, and he is most exalted who is most lowly, [Mat
23:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#011).

5\. In the descriptions of the scribes and Pharisees in this chapter, we
have a full-length portrait of a hypocrite.

\(1\) they shut up the kingdom of heaven against others, [Mat
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#013). They made great pretensions to
knowledge, but they neither entered in themselves, nor suffered others.

\(2\) they committed the grossest iniquity under a cloak of religion,
[Mat 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#014). They cheated widows out of
their property, and made long prayers to hide their villainy.

\(3\) they showed great zeal in making proselytes, yet did it only for
gain, and made them more wicked, [Mat
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#015).

\(4\) they taught false doctrine, and they resorted to artful
contrivances to destroy the force of oaths, and to shut out the Creator
from their view, [Mat 23:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#016).

\(5\) they were superstitious, [Mat
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023). Small matters they were exact
in; matters of real importance they cared little about.

\(6\) they took great pains to appear well, while they themselves knew
that it was all deceit and falsehood, [Mat
23:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#025).

\(7\) they professed great veneration for the memory of the pious dead,
while at the same time they were conscious that they really approved the
conduct of those that killed them, [Mat
23:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#029).

Never, perhaps, was there a combination of more wicked feelings and
hypocritical actions than among them; and never was there more profound
knowledge of the human heart, and more faithfulness, than in him who
tore off the mask, and showed them what they were.

6\. It is amazing with what power and authority our blessed Lord
reproves this wicked people. It is wonderful that they ever waited for a
mock trial, and did not kill him at once. But his time was not come, and
they were restrained, and not buffered to act out the fury of their mad
passions.

7\. Jesus pities dying sinners, [Mat
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037). He seeks their salvation. He
pleads with them to be saved. He would gather them to him, if they would
come. The most hardened, even like the sinners of Jerusalem, he would
save if they would come to him. But they will not. They turn from him,
and tread the road to death.

8\. The reason why the wicked are not saved is their own obstinacy. They
choose not to be saved, and they die. If they will not come to Christ,
it is right that they should die. If they do not come, they must die.

9\. The sinner will be destroyed, [Mat
23:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#038). The day will come when the
mercy of God will be clean gone forever, and the forbearance of God
exhausted, and then the sinner must perish. When once God has given him
over, he must die. No man, no parent, no minister, no friend, no angel,
no archangel, can then save. Salvation is lost, forever lost. Oh how
amazing is the folly of the wicked, that they weary out the forbearance
of God, and perish in their sins!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 24](mat024)

</div>
