<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Nahum Index](nah.md)  
  [Previous](nah001)  [Next](nah003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nahum Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001.md)

[Nahum](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">nah 2:0</span></span>

The prophet, having foretold the destruction of Sennacherib, find in him
how the enemy of Judah is wholly cut off, goes on to describe the
destruction of Nineveh, and with it of his whole kingdom, and, under it,
of antichrist and Satan.

[Nahum 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">nah 2:1</span></span>

He that dasheth in pieces - Rather, "the Disperser," the instrument of
God, whereby he should "break her in pieces like a potter's vessel, or
should scatter" her in all lands, is come up against thy face, O
Nineveh, i. e., either, over against thee" , confronting her as it were,
face to face, or directed against thee . From the description of the
peace of Judah, the prophet turns suddenly to her oppressor, to whom,
not to Judah, the rest of the prophecy is directed. Jacob and Israel are
spoken of, not to . The destroyer of Nineveh "went up against the face
of Nineveh," not in the presence of Judah and Jacob, who were far away
and knew nothing of it. "Keep the munition." While all in Judah is now
peace, all in Nineveh is tumult. God whom they had defied, saying that
Hezekiah could not "turn away the face of one captain of the least of
his servants" [Isa 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#009.md), now bids them
prepare to meet him whom He would send against them. "Gird up thy loins
now, like a man" [Job 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#007.md). Thou who
wouldest lay waste others, now, if theft canst, keep thyself. The
strength of the words is the measure of the irony. They had challenged
God; He in turn challenges them to put forth all their might.

Fence thy defenses - we might say. Their strong walls, high though they
were, unassailable by any then known skill of besiegers, would not be
secure.

The prophet uses a kindred and allusive word, that their protection
needed to be itself protected; and this, by one continued watchfulness.
Watch, he adds, the way: spy out (as far as thou canst), the coming of
the enemy; strengthen the loins, the seat of strength. Elsewhere they
are said to be girded up for any exertion. "Fortify thy strength
exceedingly." The expression is rare : commonly it is said of some part
of the human frame, knees, arms, or mind, or of man by God.

The same words are strong mockery to those who resist God, good counsel
to those who trust in God. "Keep the munition, for He who keepeth thee
will not sleep [Psa 121:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#003.md); watch the
way," by which the enemy may approach from afar, for Satan approacheth,
sometimes suddenly, sometimes very stealthily and subtly, "transforming
himself into an angel of light." Jerome: "Watch also the way by which
thou art to go, as it is said, 'Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask
for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein;' [Jer
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#016.md), so that, having stood in many
ways, we may come to that Way which saith, 'I am the Way.'" Then , "make
thy loins strong," as the Saviour commands His disciples, "Let your
loins be girded about" [Luk 12:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035.md), and
the Apostle says, "Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with
truth" [Eph 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014.md); for nothing so
strengthens as the Truth. For Christ being the Truth, whose with his
whole heart hath belived in Christ, is strong against himself, and hath
power over the loins, the seat of the passions. Then, since this warfare
is hard, he adds, be strong, "fortify thy power mightily;" resist not
listlessly, but vehemently; and that, in His strength who hath
strengthened our nature, taking it to Himself and uniting it with the
Godhead. For without Him, strong though thou be, thou wilt avail
nothing.

[Nahum 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">nah 2:2</span></span>

For the Lord hath turned away - (rather restoreth) the excellency of
Jacob Speaking of what should come, as already come. For Nineveh falls,
because God restores His people, whom it had oppressed. The restoration
of God's favor to His Church is the season of His punishment of their
enemies; as, again, His displeasure against her enemies is a token of
His favor to her. When Herod was smitten by God, "the word of God grew
and multiplied" [Act 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#024.md). A long
captivity was still before Judah, yet the destruction of the Assyrian
was the earnest that every "oppressing city should cease" [Isa
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001.md).

The excellency of Jacob - The word, "excellency," is used in a good or
bad sense; bad, if man takes the excellency to himself; good, as given
by God. This is decisive against a modern popular rendering ; "has
returned to the excellency of Jacob;" for Scripture knows of no
"excellency of Jacob," except God Himself or grace from God. Jacob, if
separated from God or left by Him, has no excellency, to which God could
return.

As the excellency of Israel - Both the ten and the two tribes had
suffered by the Assyrian. The ten had been carried captive by
Shalmanezer, the two had been harassed by Sennacherib. After the
captivity of the ten tribes, the name Jacob is used of Judah only. It
may be then, that the restoration of God's favor is promised to each
separately. Or , there may be an emphasis in the names themselves. Their
forefather bore the name of Jacob in his troubled days of exile; that of
Israel was given him on his return [Gen
32:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#028.md). It would then mean, the
afflicted people (Jacob) shall be restored to its utmost glory as
Israel. The sense is the same.

For the emptiers have emptied them out - Their chastisement is the
channel of their restoration. Unlike the world, their emptiness is their
fullness, as the fullness of the world is its emptiness. The world is
cast down, not to arise, for "woe to him that is alone when he falleth:
for he hath not another to help him up" [Ecc
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#010.md). The Church falleth, but "to
arise" [Mic 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#008.md) : the people is
restored, because it had borne chastening [Eze
36:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#003.md), [Eze
36:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#006.md); "for the Lord hath restored
the excellency of Jacob, for the emptiers have emptied them. out and
marred their vinebranches" (see [Psa
80:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#012).md), i. e., its fruit-bearing
branches, that, as far as in them lay, it should not bear fruit unto
God; but to cut the vine is, by God's grace, to make it shoot forth and
bear fruit more abundantly.

[Nahum 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">nah 2:3</span></span>

Army is arrayed against army; the armies, thus far, of God against the
army of His enemy; all without is order; all within, confusion. The
assailing army, from its compactness and unity, is spoken of, both as
many and one. The might is of many; the order and singleness of purpose
is as of one. The shield, collectively, not shields. "His mighty men;"
He, who was last spoken of, was Almighty God, as He says in Isaiah; "I
have commanded My consecrated ones; I have also called My mighty ones,
them that rejoice in My highness" [Isa
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#003.md).

Is reddened - Either with blood of the Assyrians, shed in some previous
battle, before the siege began, or (which is the meaning of the word
elsewhere ), an artificial color, the color of blood being chosen, as
expressive of fiery fierceness. The valiant men are in scarlet, for
beauty and terror, as, again being the color of blood . It was
especially the color of the dress of their nobles one chief color of the
Median dress, from whom the Persians adopted their's . "The chariots
shall be with flaming torches," literally, "with the fire of steels , or
of sharp incisive instruments. Either way the words seem to indicate
that the chariots were in some way armed with steel. For steel was not
an ornament, nor do the chariots appear to have been ornamented with
metal. Iron would have hindered the primary object of lightness and
speed. Steel, as distinct from iron, is made only for incisiveness. In
either way, it is probable, that scythed chariots were already in use.
Against such generals, as the younger Cyrus and Alexander , they were of
no avail; but they must have been terrific instruments against
undisciplined armies.

The rush and noise of the British chariots disturbed for a time even
Caesar's Roman troops . They were probably in use long before . Their
use among the ancient Britons , Gauls and Belgians , as also probably
among the Canaanites , evinces that they existed among very rude people.

The objection that the Assyrian chariots are not represented in the
monuments as armed with scythes is an oversight, since these spoken of
by Nahum may have been Median, certainly were not Assyrian. "In the day
of His preparation" , when He musters the hosts for the battle; "and the
fir-trees shall be terribly shaken;" i. e., fir-spears (the weapon being
often named from the wood of which it is made) shall be made to quiver
through the force wherewith they shall be hurled.

The chariots shall rage - (Or madden , as the driving of Jehu is said to
be "furiously," literally, in madness) "in the streets." The city is not
yet taken; so, since this takes place "in the streets and broad ways,"
they are the confused preparations of the besieged. "They shall justle
one against another," shall run rapidly to and fro, restlessly; "their
show (English margin) is like torches," leaving streaks of fire, as they
pass rapidly along. "They shall run" vehemently, "like the lightnings,"
swift; but vanishing.

[Nahum 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">nah 2:5</span></span>

He shall recount his worthies - The Assyrian king wakes as out of a
sleep, literally, "he remembers his mighty men" (as [Nah
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#018.md); [Jdg
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#013.md); [Neh
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#005).md); "they stumble in their walk,"
literally, paths , not through haste only and eager fear, but from want
of inward might and the aid of God. These whom God leads stumble not
[Isa 63:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#013.md). : "Perplexed every way and
not knowing what they ought to do, their mind wholly darkened and almost
drunken with ills, they reel to and fro, turn from one thing to another,
and in all" labor in vain.

They shall make haste to the walls thereof, and the defense -
(literally, "the covering") shall be prepared The Assyrian monuments
leave no doubt that a Jewish writer is right in the main, in describing
this as a covered shelter, under which an enemy approached the city; "a
covering of planks with skins upon them; under it those who fight
against the city come to the wall and mine the wall underneath, and it
is a shield over them from the stones, which are cast from off the
wall."

The monuments, however, exhibit this shelter, as connected not with
mining but with a battering ram, mostly with a sharp point, by which
they loosened the walls . Another covert was employed to protect single
miners who picked out single stones with a pick-axe . The Assyrians
sculptures show, in the means employed against or in defense of their
engines, how central a part of the siege they formed . Seven of them are
represented in one siege . The "ram" [Eze
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#002.md) is mentioned in Ezekiel as the
well-known and ordinary instrument of a siege.

Thus, [Nah 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#003.md) describes the attack;
and [Nah 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#004.md) describes the defense;
the two first clauses of [Nah 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#005.md)
describes the defense; the two last describe clauses the attack. This
quick interchange only makes the whole account more vivid.

: "But what avails it to build the house, unless the Lord build it? What
helps it to shut the gates, which the Lord unbarreth?" On both sides is
put forth the full strength of man; there seems a stand-still to see,
what will be, and God brings to pass His own work in His own way.

[Nahum 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">nah 2:6</span></span>

The gates of the rivers shall be opened, and the palace shall be
disolved - All gives way in an instant at the will of God; the strife is
hushed; no more is said of war and death; there is no more resistance or
bloodshed; no sound except the wailing of the captives, the flight of
those who can escape, while the conquerors empty it of the spoil, and
then she is left a waste. The swelling of the river and the opening made
by it may have given rise to the traditional account of Ctesias,
although obviously exaggerated as to the destruction of the wall. The
exaggerated character of that tradition is not inconsistent with, it
rather implies, a basis of truth. It is inconceivable that it should
have been thought, that walls, of the thickness which Ctesias had
described, were overthrown by the swelling of any river, unless some
such event as Ctesias relates, that the siege was ended by an entrance
afforded to the enemy through some bursting in of the river, had been
true.

Nahum speaks nothing of the wall, but simply of the opening of "the
gates of the river," obviously the gates, by which the inhabitants could
have access to the rivers , which otherwise would be useless to them
except as a wall. These "rivers" correspond to the "rivers," the
artificial divisions of the Nile, by which No or Thebes was defended, or
"the rivers of Babylon" [Psa 137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001.md)
which yet was washed by the one stream, the Euphrates. But Nineveh was
surrounded and guarded by actual rivers, the Tigris and the Khausser,
and, (assuming those larger dimensions of Nineveh, which are supported
by evidences so various ) the greater Zab, which was "called the frantic
Zab on account of the violence of its current." "The Zab contained (says
Ainsworth ), when we saw it, a larger body of water than the Tigris,
whose tributaries are not supplied by so many snow-mountains as those of
the Zab." Of these, if the Tigris be now on a level lower than the rains
of Nineveh, it may not have been so formerly.

The Khausser, in its natural direction, ran through Nineveh where, now
as of old, it turns a mill, and must, of necessity, have been fenced by
gates; else any invader might enter at will: as, in modern times, Mosul
has its "gate of the bridge." A break in these would obviously let in an
enemy, and might the more paralyze the inhabitants, if they had any
tradition, that the river alone could or would be their enemy, as Nahum
himself prophesied. Subsequently inaccuracy or exaggeration might easily
represent this to be an overthrow of the walls themselves. It was all
one, in which way the breach was made.

The palace shall be dissolved - The prophet unites the beginning and the
end. The river-gates were opened; what had been the fence against the
enemy became an entrance for them: with the river, there poured in also
the tide of the people of the enemy. The palace, then, the imperial
abode, the center of the empire, embellished with the history of its
triumphs, sank, was disolved , and ceased to be. It is not a physical
loosening of the sun-dried bricks by the stream which would usually flow
harmless by; but the dissolution of the empire itself. : "The temple,
that is, his kingdom was destroyed." The palaces both of Khorsabad and
Kouyunjik lay near the Khausser and both bear the marks of fire .

[Nahum 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">nah 2:7</span></span>

The first word should he rendered, "And it is decreed; She shall be laid
bare. It is decreed." All this took place, otherwise than man would have
thought, because it was the will of God. She (the people of the city,
under the figure of a captive woman) "shall be laid bare," in shame, to
her reproach; "she shall be brought up" , to judgment, or from Nineveh
as being now sunk low and depressed; "and her maids," the lesser cities,
as female attendants on the royal city, and their inhabitants
represented as women, both as put to shame and for weakness. The whole
empire of Nineveh was overthrown by Nabopalassar. Yet neither was the
special shame wanting, that the noble matrons and virgins were so led
captives in shame and sorrow. "They shall lead her, as with the voice of
doves," moaning, yet, for fear, with a subdued voice.

[Nahum 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">nah 2:8</span></span>

But Nineveh is of old like a pool of water - that is, of many peoples
[Rev 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001.md), gathered from all quarters
and settled there, her multitudes being like the countless drops, full,
untroubled, with no ebb or flow, fenced in, "from the days that she hath
been," yet even therefore stagnant and corrupted (see [Jer
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#011).md), not "a fountain of living
waters," during 600 years of unbroken empire; even lately it had been
assailed in vain ; now its hour was come, the sluices were broken; the
waters poured out. It was full not of citizens only, but of other
nations poured into it. An old historian says , "The chief and most
powerful of those whom Ninus settled there, were the Assyrians, but
also, of other nations, whoever willed." Thus, the pool was filled; but
at the rebuke of the Lord they flee. "Stand, stand," the prophet speaks
in the name of the widowed city; "shut the gates, go up on the walls,
resist the enemy, gather yourselves together, form a band to withstand,"
"but none shalt look back" to the mother-city which calls them; all is
forgotten, except their fear; parents, wives, children, the wealth which
is plundered, home, worldly repute. So will men leave all things, for
the life of this world. "All that a man hath, will he give for his life"
[Job 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#004.md). Why not for the life to
come?

[Nahum 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">nah 2:9</span></span>

Take ye the spoil of silver, take the spoil of gold - Nineveh had not
hearkened of old to the voice of the prophet, but had turned back to
sin; it cannot hearken now, for fear. He turns to the spoiler to whom
God's judgments assigned her, and who is too ready to hear. The gold and
silver, which the last Assyrian King had gathered into the palace which
he fired, was mostly removed (the story says, treacherously) to Babylon.
Arbaces is said to have borne this and to have removed the residue, to
the amount of many talents, to Agbatana, the Median capital . "For there
is none end of the store." Nineveh had stored up from her foundation
until then, but at last for the spoiler. "When thou shalt cease to
spoil, thou shalt be spoiled" [Isa
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001.md). Many "perish and leave their
wealth to others" [Psa 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#010.md). "The
wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just" [Pro
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#022.md). "And glory out of all the
pleasant furniture," (literally as in the margin, "glory out of all
vessels of desire") i. e., however large the spoil, it would be but a
portion only; yet all their wealth, though more than enough for the
enemy and for them, could not save them. Her "glory," was but a "weight"
to weigh her down, that she should not rise again [Zac
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#008.md); [Exo
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#010.md). Their wealth brought on the day
of calamity, availed not therein, although it could not be drawn dry
even by the spoiler. Jerome: "They could not spoil so much as she
supplied to be spoiled."

[Nahum 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">nah 2:10</span></span>

She is empty and void and waste - The completeness of her judgment is
declared first under that solemn number, Three, and the three words in
Hebrew are nearly the same , with the same meaning, only each word
fuller than the former, as picturing a growing desolation; and then
under four heads (in all seven) also a growing fear. First the heart,
the seat of courage and resolve and high purpose, melteth; then the
knees smite together, tremble, shake, under the frame; then, much pain
is in all loins, literally, "strong pains as of a woman in travail,"
writhing and doubling the whole body, and making it wholly powerless and
unable to stand upright, shall bow the very loins, the seat of strength
[Pro 31:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#017.md), and, lastly, the faces of
them all gather blackness (see the note at [Joe
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#006).md), the fruit of extreme pain, and
the token of approaching dissolution.

[Nahum 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">nah 2:11</span></span>

Where is the dwelling of the lions, and the feeding place of the young
lions? - Great indeed must be the desolation, which should call forth
the wonder of the prophet of God. He asks "where is it?" For so utterly
was Nineveh to be effaced, that its place should scarcely be known, and
now is known by the ruins which have been buried, and are dug up. The
messengers of her king had asked, "Where are the gods of Hamath and of
Arpad? of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivah?" [Kg2
18:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#034.md). And now of her it is asked,
"Where is Nineveh?" It had "destroyed utterly all lands," and now itself
is utterly destroyed. The lion dwelt, fed, walked there, up and down, at
will; all was spacious and secure; he terrified all, and none terrified
him; he tore, strangled, laid up, as he willed, booty in store; but when
he had filled it to the full, he filled up also the measure of his
iniquities, and his sentence came from God. Nineveh had set at nought
all human power, and destroyed it; now, therefore, God appears in His
own Person.

[Nahum 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">nah 2:13</span></span>

Behold I, Myself, am against thee - (Literally, "toward thee"). God, in
His long-suffering, had, as it were, looked away from him; now He looked
toward (as in [Psa 37:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#020).md) him, and in
His sight what wicked one should stand? "Saith the Lord of hosts," whose
power is infinite and He changes not, and all the armies of heaven, the
truly angels and evil spirits and men are in His Hand, whereto He
directs or overrules them. "And I will burn her chariots in the smoke."
The Assyrian sculptures attest how greatly their pride and strength lay
in their chariots. They exhibit the minute embellishment of the chariots
and horses . Almost inconceivably light for speed, they are pictured as
whirled onward by the two or, more often, three powerful steeds with eye
of fire , the bodies of the slain (or, in peace, the lion ) under their
feet, the mailed warriors, with bows stretched to the utmost, shooting
at the more distant foe.

Sennacherib gives a terrific picture of the fierceness of their
onslaught. "The armor, the arms, taken in my attacks, swam in the blood
of my enemies as in a river; the war-chariots, which destroy man and
beast, had, in their course, crushed the bloody bodies and limbs" . All
this their warlike pride should be but fuel for fire, and vanish in
smoke, an emblem of pride, swelling, mounting like a column toward
heaven, disappearing. Not a brand shall then be saved out of the
burning; nothing half-consumed; but the fire shall burn, until there be
nothing left to consume, as, in Sodom and Gomorrah, "the smoke of the
country went up as the smoke of a furnace. And the sword of the
vengeance of God shall devour the young lions" [Gen
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#028.md), his hope for the time to come,
the flower of his youth; "and I will cut off thy prey," what thou hast
robbed, and so that thou shouldest rob no more, but that thy spoil
should utterly cease from "the earth, and the voice of thy messengers
shall be no more heard," such as Rabshakeh, whereby they insulted and
terrified the nations and blasphemed God.

In the spiritual sense, Nineveh being an image of the world, the
prophecy speaks of the inroad made upon it through the Gospel, its
resistance, capture, desolation, destruction. First, He that "ruleth
with a rod of iron," came and denounced "woe to it because of offenses;"
then His mighty ones in His Name. Their shield is red, "the shield of
faith," kindled and glowing with love. Their raiment too is red, because
they wash it in the Blood of the Lamb, and conquer through the Blood of
the Lamb, and many shed their own blood "for a witness to them." "The
day of His preparation" is the whole period, until the end of the world,
in which the Gospel is preached, of which the prophets and apostles
speak, as the day of salvation [Isa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008.md); [Co2
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002.md); to the believing world a day of
salvation; to the unbelieving, of preparation for judgment. All which is
done, judgments, mercy, preaching, miracles, patience of the saints,
martyrdom, all which is spoken, done, suffered, is part of the one
preparation for the final judgment. The chariots, flashing with light as
they pass, are "the chariots of salvation" [Hab
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#008.md), bearing the brightness of the
doctrine of Christ and the glory of His truth throughout the world,
enlightening while they wound; the "spears" are the word of God, slaying
to make alive.

On the other hand, in resisting, the world clashes with itself. It would
oppose the Gospel, yet knows not how; is "maddened with rage, and
gnashes its teeth, that it can prevail nothing" . On the broad ways
which lead to death, where "Wisdom uttereth her voice" and is not heard,
it is hemmed in, and cannot find a straight path; its chariots dash one
against another, and yet they breathe their ancient fury, and run to and
fro like lightning, as the Lord saith, "I beheld Satan, as lightning,
fall from heaven" [Luk 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018.md). Then
shall they "remember their mighty ones," all the might of this world
which they ascribed to their gods, their manifold triumphs, whereby in
pagan times their empire was established; they shall gather strength
against strength, but it shall be powerless and real weakness. While
they prepare for a long siege, without hand their gates give way; the
kingdom falls, the world is taken captive by a blessed captivity,
suddenly, unawares, as one says in the second century ; "Men cry out
that the state is beset, that the Christians are in their fields, in
their forts, in their islands!" These mourn over their past sins, and
beat their breasts, in token of their sorrow; yet sweeter shall be the
plaint of their sorrow, than any past joy.

Sit they shall mourn as doves, and their mourning is as melody and the
voice of praise in the ear of the Most High. One part of the inhabitants
of the world being thus blessedly taken, the rest are fled. So in all
nearness of God's judgments, those who are net brought nearer, flee
further. "They flee, and look not back, and none heareth the Lord
speaking, "Return, ye backsliding children, and I will heal your
backslidings" [Jer 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#022.md). So then,
hearing not His Voice, stand, stand, they flee away from His presence in
mercy, into darkness for ever. Such is the lot of the inhabitants of the
world; and what is the world itself? The prophet answers what it has
been. A pool of water, into which all things, the riches and glory, and
wisdom, and pleasures of this world, have flowed in on all sides, and
which gave back nothing. All ended in itself. The water came from above,
and became stagnant in the lowest part of the earth. "For all the wisdom
of this world, apart from the sealed fountain of the Church, and of
which it cannot be said, the streams thereof make glad the city of God
nor are of those waters which, above the heavens, praise the Name of the
Lord, however large they may seem, yet are little, and are enclosed in a
narrow bound" [Luk 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018.md).

These either are hallowed to God, like the spoils of Egypt, as when the
eloquence of Cyprian was won through the fishermen , or the gold and
silver are offered to Him, or they are left to be wasted and burned up.
"All which is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life, all under the sun," remain here. : "If they
are thine, take them with thee. When be dieth, he shall carry nothing
away, his glory shall not descend after him" [Psa
49:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#017.md). True riches are, not wealth,
but virtues, which the conscience carries with it, that it may be rich
forever." The seven-fold terrors [Nah
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#010.md), singly, may have a good sense ,
that the stony heart shall be melted, and the stiff knees, which before
were not bent to God, be bowed in the Name of Jesus. Yet more fully are
they the deepening horrors of the wicked in the Day of Judgment, when
"men's hearts shall fail them for fear and for looking after those
things which are coming on the earth" [Luk
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#026.md), closing with the everlasting
confusion of face, "the shame and everlasting contempt," to which the
wicked shall rise.

As the vessel over the fire is not cleansed, but blackened, so through
the judgments of God, whereby the righteous are cleansed, the wicked
gather but fresh defilement and hate. Lastly, the prophet asks, "Where
is the dwelling of those who had made the world a den of ravin, where
the lion," even the devil who is "a roaring lion," and all antichrists
[Jo1 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018.md), destroyed at will; where
Satan made his dwelling in the hearts of the worldly, and "tore in
pieces for his whelps," i. e., killed souls of men and gave them over to
inferior evil spirits to be tormented, and "filled his holes with prey,"
the pit of hell with the souls which he deceived? . The question implies
that they shall not be. "They which have seen him shall say, Where is
he?" [Job 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#007.md). God Himself answers,
that He Himself will come against it to judgment, and destroy all might
arrayed against God; and Christ shall "smite the Wicked one with the rod
of His Mouth" [Isa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004.md), and the
"sharp two-edged sword out of His mouth shall smite all nations" [Rev
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016.md); [Rev
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#015.md), [Rev
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#021.md), "and the smoke of their torment
ascendeth up forever and ever" [Rev
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#011.md); and it should no more oppress,
nor "any messenger of Satan" go forth to harass the saints of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nahum Chapter 3](nah003.md)

</div>
