<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](ezr010)  [Next](neh001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Nehemiah

In the earliest form of the Hebrew canon known to us the books of Ezra
and Nehemiah were united in one, under the name of "The Book of Ezra."
After a while, a division was made, and the two books which we now
recognize were distinguished as "the First Book of Ezra" and "the Second
Book of Ezra" Later still - probably not until toward the close of the
fourth century - the Second Book of Ezra came to be known as "the Book
of Nehemiah."

The Book of Nehemiah is composed of four quite distinct sections:

\(1\) Neh. 1-7 containing the record of the 20th year of Artaxerxes (or
445-444 B.C.), but composed by Nehemiah at least twelve years later [Neh
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#014).

\(2\) the second section of the work consists of Neh. 8-10, and contains
a narrative of some events belonging to the autumn of 444 B.C. In this
portion Nehemiah is spoken of in the third person; he is called the
Tirshatha," whereas in the earlier chapters his title is always פחה
pechâh ("governor"); and Ezra holds the first and most prominent
position. The style of this portion of the book is markedly different
from that of the earlier and later chapters; and critics are generally
agreed that it is NOT from the hand of Nehemiah. Some assign it to Ezra;
others conjecture Zadok (or Zidkijah), Nehemiah's scribe or secretary
[Neh 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#013), to have been the author.

\(3\) Neh. 11-12:26, which consists of six important lists.

List 1 Neh. 11:1-24 and List 2 [Neh
11:25-36](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#025) are probably either the work
of Nehemiah himself or documents drawn up by his orders.

Of the other lists Neh. 12:1-26 some may have been drawn up in the time
(or even by the hand) of Nehemiah, and incorporated by him into his work
as documents having an intrinsic value, though not connected very
closely with the subject matter of his history. But the list in [Neh
12:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#010) cannot, in its present shape,
have proceeded from his hand, or from that of a contemporary, since it
mentions Jaddua, who lived about a century LATER THAN Nehemiah. Neither
can [Neh 12:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#022) intruded between the
5th and 6th lists - lists closely interconnected - belong to Nehemiah's
time, since they contain a mention of both Jaddua and Darius Codomannus,
his contemporary. Possibly, the list in question and the intruded verses
may have proceeded from the same hand.

The section may therefore be regarded as the compilation of Nehemiah
himself, with the exception of [Neh
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#011), [Neh
12:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#022), which must have been added a
century later. Or, it was first added at that period. In either case,
the writer must be equally considered to have drawn the lists from
contemporary state archives (see [Neh
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#023)).

\(4\) [Neh 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#027) to the end. This
section contains an account of the dedication of the wall, and of
certain reforms which Nehemiah effected after his return from Babylon in
432-431 B.C.. It is allowed on all hands to be, in the main, the work of
Nehemiah, and written soon after the events - probably in 431 B.C. or
430 B.C.

It is perhaps, on the whole, more probable that the various sections
composing the "Book of Nehemiah" were collected by Nehemiah himself, who
had written, at any rate, two of them Neh. 1-7:5; [Neh
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#027); [Neh
13:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#031). Having composed these two
separate memoirs, and having perhaps drawn up also certain lists, he
adopted from without an account of some religious transactions belonging
to his first period, and, inserting this in its proper place, prefixed
to the whole work the title, "The words of Nehemiah, the son of
Hachaliah," as fitly designating its main contents. His work, thus
formed, was subsequently added to by Jaddua, or a writer of that time,
who inserted into it [Neh 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#011), [Neh
12:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#022). Or, possibly, this late
writer may first have formed the book into a whole. The date of the
compilation would, in the former case, be about 430 B.C.; in the latter,
about one century later.

The authenticity of the history contained in the Book of Nehemiah is
generally admitted: and the condition of the text is generally good.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 1](neh001)

</div>
