<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Obadiah Index](oba.md)  
  [Previous](amo009)  [Next](oba001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Obadiah Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001.md)

[Obadiah](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">oba 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Obadiah

The silence of Holy Scripture as to the prophet Obadiah stands in
remarkable contrast with the anxiety of people to know something of him.
It would even waste labor to examine the combinations, by which, of old,
the human mind tried to justify its longing to know more of him, than
God had willed to be preserved. People go over them with the view of
triumphing in the superior sagacity of later days, and slaying the
slain. It was a good and pious feeling which longed to know more of the
men of God, whose prophecies He has preserved to us, and, with this
view, looked about whether they could not identify their benefactor
(such as each prophet is) with someone of whom more details are
recorded. Hence, they hoped that Obadiah might prove to have been the
faithful protector of the prophets under Ahab, or the son of the
Shunamite, whom Elijah recalled to life, or the Obadiah whom Jehoshaphat
sent to teach in the cities of Judah or the Levite who was selected,
with one other, to be the overseer set over the repair of the temple in
the reign of Josiah . Fruitless guesses at what God has hidden! God has
willed that his name alone and this brief prophecy should be known in
this world. Here, he is known only as Obadiah, "worshiper of God" .

Yet, these guesses of pious minds illustrate this point, that the
arranger of the canon had some other ground upon which he assigned to
Obadiah his place in it, than any identification of the prophet with any
other person mentioned in Holy Scripture. For whereas, of the Obadiahs,
of whom holy Scripture mentions more than the name, two lived in the
reign of Ahab, one after the captivity of the ten tribes, the prophet
is, by the framer of the canon, placed in the time of Uzziah and
Jeroboam II, in which those placed before and after him, flourished.
Moderns, having slighted these pious longings, are still more at fault
in their way. German critics have assigned to the prophet dates, removed
from each other by more than 600 years; just as if men doubted, "from
internal evidence," whether a work were written in the time of William
the Conqueror, or in that of Cromwell; of S. Louis, or Louis XVIII; or
whether Hesiod was a contemporary of Callimachus, and Ennius of
Claudian; or the author of the Nibelungen Lied lived with Schiller. Such
difference, which seems grotesque, as soon as it is applied to any other
case, was the fruit of unbelief.

Two, or rather, three great facts are spoken of in the prophecy, the
capture of Jerusalem, and a two-fold punishment of Edom consequent on
his malicious triumph over his brother's fall; the one through pagan,
the other through the restored Jews. The punishment of Edom the prophet
clearly foretells, as yet to come; the destruction of Jerusalem, which,
according to our version is spoken of as past, is in reality foretold
also. Unbelief denies all prophecy. Strange, that unbelief, denying the
existence of the jewel - God's authentic and authenticated voice to man
- should trouble itself about the age of the casket. Yet, so it was. The
prophets of Israel used a fascinating power over those who denied their
inspiration. They denied prophecy, but employed themselves about the
prophets. Unbelief, denying prophecy, had to find out two events in
history, which should correspond with these events in the prophet, a
capture of Jerusalem, and a subsequent ("it" could not say) consequent -
suffering on the part of Edom. And since Jerusalem was first taken under
Shishak king of Egypt, in the 5th year of Rehoboam, 970 b.c., and
Josephus relates that in 301 b.c., Ptolemy Lagus treacherously got
possession of it under plea of offering sacrifice, treated it harshly,
took many captive from the mountainous part of Judaea and the places
around Jerusalem, from Samaritis, Gerizim, and settled them all in
Egypt; unbelieving criticism had a wide range, in which to vacillate.

And so it reeled to and fro between the first and last of these periods,
agreeing that Obadiah did not prophesy, and disagreeing as to all
besides. Eichhorn , avowedly on his principle of unbelief, that God's
prophets, when they spoke of detailed events, as future, were really
describing the past, assumed that the last five verses were written in
the time of Alexander Janneus, two centuries LATER than the latest,
about 82 b.c. . As though a Hebrew prophet would speak of one,
detestable for Alexander Janneus' wanton cruelty as a Saviour!

The real question as to the age of Obadiah turns upon two points - one
is external, the other internal. The external is, whether in regard to
those verses which he has in common with Jeremiah, Obadiah gathered into
one, verses which he scattered in Jeremiah, or whether Jeremiah, in
renewing the prophecies against Edom, incorporated verses of Obadiah.
The question, the one which is internal to Obadiah, is, whether he
speaks of the capture of Jerusalem in the prophetic or the real past,
and (as determining this), whether he reproves Edom for past malice at
the capture of Jerusalem, or warns him against it in the future.

The English version in the text supposes that Obadiah reproves for past
sin. For it renders; "Thou shouldest not have looked on the day of thy
brother, in the day when he became a stranger; neither shouldest thou
have rejoiced over the children of Judah in the day of their
destruction; neither shouldest thou have spoken proudly in the day of
their distress" . The English margin gives the other, as a probable
rendering, "do not behold, etc." But it is absolutely certain that אל
'al with the future forbids or deprecates a future thing. In all the
passages, in which אל 'al occurs in the Hebrew Bible , it signifies "do
not." We might as well say that "do not steal" means "thou shouldest not
have stolen," as say that תרה ואל ve'al tēreh, and "do not look," means
"thou shouldest not have looked."

It is true that in a vivid form of question, belonging to strong
feeling, the soul going back in thought to the time before a thing which
has happened, can speak of the past as yet future. Thus, David says, .
"The death of fools shall Abner die?" while mourning over his bier; or
Job, having said to God, "Why didst Thou bring me forth from the womb?"
places himself as at that time and says (literally), "I shall expire,
and eye shall not see me; as if I had not been, I shall be; from the
womb to the grave I shall be carried." He contemplates the future, as it
would have been, had he died in the birth. It was a relative future. We
could almost, under strong emotion, use our "is to" in the same way. We
could render, "Is Abner to die the death of fools?" But these cases have
nothing to do with the uniform idiom; "do not." We must not, on any
principle of interpretation, in a single instance, ascribe to a common
idiom, a meaning which it has not, because the meaning which it has,
does not suit us. There "is" an idiom to express this. It is the future
with לא lo', not with אל 'al.

It agrees with this, that just before , where our version renders, "thou
wert as one of them," the Hebrew (as, in our Bibles, is marked by the
italics) has only, "thou as one of them!" not expressing any time. The
whole verse expresses no time as to Edom. "In the day of thy standing on
the other side, in the day of strangers carrying captive his might, and
strangers entered his gates and cast lots on Jerusalem, thou too as one
of them."

This too is a question not of rhetoric, but of morals. We cannot imagine
that Almighty God, who warns that He may not strike, would eight times
repeat the exhortation - a repetition which in itself has so much
earnestness, "do not," "do not," "do not," in regard to sin which had
been already ended. As to past sin, God exhorts to repent, to break it
off; not to renew it. He does not exhort to that which would be a
contradiction even to His own omnipotence, not to do what had been
already done.

According to the only meaning, then, which the words bear, Edom had not
yet committed the sin against which Obadiah warns him, and so Jerusalem
was not yet destroyed, when the prophet wrote. For the sevenfold "the
day of thy brother," (which is explained to be "the day of his
calamity), the day of their destruction, the day of distress," the
mention whereof had just preceded, can be no other than "the day when
strangers carried away his strength, and foreigners entered his gates,
and cast lots on Jerusalem." But no day was the day of utter destruction
to Jerusalem, except that of its capture by Nebuchadnezzar. Its capture
by Shishak , or by the Chaldees under Jehoiakim and Jehoiachin , left it
uninjured; Jehoash, when he had defeated Amaziah, broke down a part of
its walls only .

The relation of Obadiah to Jeremiah agrees with this. This argument in
proof of that relation has been so carefully drawn out by Caspari , that
little is needed except clearly to exhibit it. Few indeed, I should
think (unless under some strong contrary bias), could read the five
first verses of Obadiah in the book of the prophet himself, and, as they
occur, scattered in Jer. 49, and not be convinced that Jeremiah reset
the words of Obadiah in his own prophecy.

This is, in itself, probable, because Jeremiah certainly incorporated
eight verses from Isaiah in his prophecy against Moab , and four from
the same prophet in his prophecy against Babylon , in addition to
several allusions to his prophecies contained in a word or idiom, or
mode of expression. In the same way, Jeremiah closes his prophecy
against Damascus, with a verse from the prophecy from Amos against it ;
and he inserts a verse from Amos against Ammon in his own prophecy
against that people . This is the more remarkable, because the prophecy
of Amos against each people consists of three verses only. This, of
course, was done in a designed way. Probably in renewing the prophecies
against those nations, Jeremiah wished to point out that those former
prophecies were still in force; that they had not yet been exhausted;
that the threatenings of God were not the less certain, because they
were delayed; that His word would none the less come true, because God
was long-suffering. The insertion of these former prophecies, longer or
shorter, are a characteristic of Jeremiah's prophecies against the
nations, occurring, as they do, in those against Babylon, Damascus,
Moab, Ammon, and therefore, probably in that also against Edom.

The eight verses, moreover, common to Obadiah and Jeremiah form one
whole in Obadiah; in Jeremiah they are scattered amid other verses of
his own, in precisely the same way as we know that he introduced verses
of Isaiah against Moab. But beside this analogy of the relation of the
prophecy of Jeremiah to that of Isaiah, it is plainly more natural to
suppose that Jeremiah enlarged an existing prophecy, adding to it words
which God gave him, than that Obadiah put together scattered sayings of
Jeremiah, and yet, that these sayings, thus severed from their context,
should still have formed as they do, one compact, connected whole.

Yet, this is the case as to these verses of Obadiah. Apart, for the
time, from the poetic imagery, the connection of thought in Obadiah's
prophecy is this: [Oba 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001.md) God had
commanded nations to come against Edom, [Oba
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#002.md) determining to lower it; [Oba
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#003.md) it had trusted proudly in its
strong position; [Oba 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#004.md) yet, God
would bring it down; and that, [Oba
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#005.md) through no ordinary spoiler, but
[Oba 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#006.md) by one who should search out
its most hidden treasures; [Oba 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#007.md)
its friends should be its destroyers; [Oba
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#008.md) its wisdom, and [Oba
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#009.md) might should fail it, and [Oba
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010.md) it should perish, for its malice
to its brother Jacob; the crowning act of which would be at the capture
of Jerusalem; [Oba 1:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011.md) but God's
day was at hand, the pagan should be requited; [Oba
1:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#015.md) the remnant of Zion, being
delivered, would dispossess their dispossessors, would spread far and
wide; [Oba 1:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017.md) a Saviour should
arise out of Zion, and the kingdom should be the Lord's. [Oba
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#021).md)

Thus, not only the eight verses from Obadiah, five of which recur in
Jeremiah, and three others, to which he alludes, stand in close
connection in Obadiah, but they form a part of one well-arranged whole.
The connection is sometimes very close indeed; as when, to the proud
question of Esau, ארץ יוּרדני מי mı̂y yôrı̂dēnı̂y 'erets, [Oba
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#003.md), "Who will bring me down to the
ground?" God answers, "though thou place thy nest among the stars,
אוּרידך משׁם mı̂shâm 'ôrı̂ydekâ, [Oba
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#004.md), thence, will I bring thee down."

Jeremiah, on the contrary, the mourner among the prophets, is plaintive,
even in his prophecies against the enemies of God's people. Even in this
prophecy he mingles words of tenderness ; "Leave thy fatherless
children, I will preserve them alive; and let thy widows trust in Me."
Accordingly, Jeremiah has a succession of striking pictures; but the
connection in him is rather one of oratory than of thought. His object
is to impress; he does impress, by an accumulation of images of terror
or desolation. Closeness of thought would not aid his object, and he
neglects it, except when he retains the order of Obadiah. But plainly it
is most probable, that "that" is the original form of the prophecy,
where the order is the sequence of thought. That sequence is a
characteristic, not of these verses only of Obadiah, but of the whole.
The whole 21 verses of the prophet pursue one connected train of
thought, from the beginning to the end. No one verse could be displaced,
without injuring that order. Thoughts flow on, the one out of the other.
But nothing is more improbable than to suppose that this connected train
of thought was produced by putting together thoughts, which originally
stood unconnected.

The slight variations also in these verses, as they stand in the two
prophets, are characteristic. Wherever the two prophets in any degree
vary, Obadiah is the more concise, or abrupt; Jeremiah, as belongs to
his pathetic character, the more flowing. Thus, Obadiah begins: "Thus
saith the Lord God, concerning Edom: A report we have heard from the
Lord, and a messenger among the pagan is sent; Arise and let us arise
against her to battle." The words, "Thus saith the Lord God, of Edom,"
declare that the whole prophecy which follows came from God; then
Obadiah bursts forth with what he had heard from God, "A report we have
heard from the Lord." The words are joined in meaning; the grammatical
connection, if regarded, would be incorrect. Again, in the words, "we
have heard," the prophet joins his people with himself. Jeremiah
substitutes the more precise, "I have heard," transposes the words to a
later part of the prophecy, and so obviates the difficulty of the
connection: then he substitutes the regular form, שׁלח shâlach, for the
irregular, שׁלח shullach; and for the one abrupt sentence, "Arise, and
arise we against her to battle," he substitutes the Hebrew parallelism,
"Gather ye yourselves and come against her; and arise to battle."

Next, Obadiah has: "Behold! small have I made thee among the nations;
despised art thou exceedingly." Jeremiah connects the verse with the
preceding by the addition of the particle "for," and makes the whole
flow on, depending on the word, "I have made. For behold! small have I
made thee among the pagan, despised among men." Obadiah, disregarding
rules of parallelism, says; "The pride of thy heart hath deceived thee,
dweller in rock-clefts, his lofty seat; who says in his heart, who will
bring me down to the earth?" Jeremiah with a softer flow; "Thy
alarmingness hath deceived thee, the pride of thy heart; dweller in the
clefts of the rock, holding the height of a hill." Obadiah has very
boldly; "Though thou exalt as the eagle, and though amid stars set thy
nest, thence will I bring thee down, saith the Lord." Jeremiah contracts
this, omits an idiom, for boldness, almost alone in Hebrew, סים ככבים
בין ואם ve'im bēyn kôkâbı̂ym sı̂ym, "and though amid stars set," and has
only, "when thou exaltest, as an eagle, thy nest, thence will I bring
thee down, saith the Lord," where also, through the omission of the
words "amid stars," the word "thence" has, in Jeremiah, no exact
antecedent.

In a similar way, Jeremiah smooths down the abrupt appeal, "If thieves
had come to thee, if spoilers of the night (how art thou cut off!) will
they not steal their enough? If grape-gatherers had come to thee, will
they not leave gleanings?" Jeremiah changes it into two even
half-verses; If grape-gatherers had come to thee, will they not leave
gleanings? If thieves by night, they had spoiled their enough." Again,
for the 5 bold words of Obadiah, מצפניו נבעוּ עשׂו נחפשׂוּ איך 'êyk
nechâphas'û ‛ês'âv, nı̂b‛û matsepunâyv, literally, "how are Esau
outsearched, sought out his hidden places," Jeremiah substitutes, "For I
have laid bare Esau; I have discovered his hidden places, and he cannot
be hid."

Again, even an English reader of Jeremiah will have noticed that
Jeremiah has many idioms or phrases or images, which he has pleasure in
repeating. They are characteristic of his style. Now, in these verses
which Obadiah and Jeremiah have in common, there is no one idiom which
occurs elsewhere in Jeremiah; whereas, in the other verses of the
prophecy of Jeremiah against Edom, in which they are, as it were,
inlaid, there are several such, so to say, favorite turns of
expressions. As such, there have been noticed, the short abrupt
questions with which Jeremiah opens his prophecy against Edom ; "Is
wisdom no more in Teman?" the hurried imperatives accumulated upon one
another , "Flee, turn, dwell deep;" the accumulation of words expressive
of desolation ; "Bozrah shall become a desolation, a reproach, a waste
and a curse; and all her cities, perpetual wastes;" the combination of
the two strong words, "shall be stupefied, shall hiss," in amazement at
her overthrow ; "Everyone who goeth by her shall be stupefied" (we say
"struck dumb") "and shall hiss at all her plagues."

Such again are the comparisons to the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah ;
the image of "the lion coming up from the pride of Jordan" ; the burden
of these prophecies ; "the day of the destruction of Edom and the time
of his visitation . "Wherefore hear ye the counsel of the Lord against
Edom and His purposes which He has purposed toward Teman." Then also,
whole verses are repeated in these prophecies .

Out of 16 verses of which the prophecy of Jeremiah against Edom
consists, four are identical with those of Obadiah; a fifth embodies a
verse of Obadiah's; of the 11 which remain, 10 have some turns of
expression or idioms, more or fewer, which recur in Jeremiah, either in
these prophecies against foreign nations, or in his prophecies
generally. Now it would be wholly improbable that a prophet, selecting
verses out of the prophecy of Jeremiah, should have selected precisely
those which contain none of Jeremiah's characteristic expressions;
whereas it perfectly fits in with the supposition that Jeremiah
interwove verses of Obadiah with his own prophecy, that in verses so
interwoven there is not one expression which occurs elsewhere in
Jeremiah.

One expression, which has been cited as an exception, if it is more than
an accidental coincidence, the rather confirms this. Obadiah, in one of
the earlier verses which Jeremiah has not here employed, says: "To the
border have sent thee forth the men of thy covenant; the men of thy
peace have deceived thee, have prevailed against thee; thy bread" (i.
e., the men of thy bread, they who ate bread with thee) "have laid a
snare under thee." In the middle of this threefold retribution for their
misdealing to their brother Judah, there occur the words, "the men of
thy peace," which are probably taken from a Psalm of David . But the
word השיאך, "have deceived thee," corresponds to the word השיאוך in [Oba
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#003.md). "deceived thee" hath the pride of
thy heart." The deceit on the part of their allies was the fruit and
consequence of their self-deceit through the pride of their own heart.
The verse in Obadiah then stands in connection with the preceding, and
it is characteristic of Obadiah to make one part of his prophecy bear
upon another, to show the connection of thoughts and events by the
connection of words. The taunting words against Zedekiah, which Jeremiah
puts into the mouth of the women left in the house, when they should be
brought before the king of Babylon's princes, "Thy friends," literally,
"the men of thy peace, have set thee on, המיתוך, [Jer
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#022.md), and have prevailed against
thee," may very probably be a reminiscence of the words of Obadiah
(although only the words, "men of thy peace," are the same): but they
stand in no connection with any other words in Jeremiah, as those of
Obadiah do with the previous words.

The prophecy of Jeremiah in which he incorporated these words of
Obadiah, itself also speaks of the destruction of Jerusalem as still
future. For he says to Edom , "Lo! they whose judgment was not to drink
the cup, shall indeed drink it; and shalt thou be unpunished? Thou shalt
not be unpunished, for thou shalt indeed drink it." It is plainly wrong
(as even our own version has done) to render the self-same expression
ישתו שׁתו as past, in the first place, "have assuredly drunken," and as
future in the second, תשתה שתו כי, for thou shalt surely drink of it."
Since they must be future in the second place, so must they also in the
first. Jeremiah too elsewhere contrasts, as future, God's dealings with
His own people and with the nations, in this self-same form of words .
"Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Ye shall certainly drink, for lo! I begin
to bring evil on the city which is called by My Name, and shall ye be
utterly unpunished? Ye shall not be unpunished, for I will call for a
sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, saith the Lord of hosts."
The form of words, להתע מחל בעיר־אנכי הנה, in itself requires, at least
a proximate future, (for הנה with a participle always denotes a future,
nearer or further) and the words themselves were spoken in the fourth
year of Jehoiakim.

In that same fourth year of Jehoiakim, Jeremiah received from God the
command to write in that scroll which Jehoiakim burned when a little of
it had been read to him , "all the words that I have spoken unto thee
against Israel and against Judah and against all the nations, from the
day I spake unto thee, from the days of Josiah even unto this day."
After Jehoiakim had burned the scroll, that same collection was renewed,
at God's command, "with many like words" . Now immediately upon this,
follows, in the Book of Jeremiah, the collection of prophecies against
the foreign nations, and in this collection three contain some notice
that they were written in that 4th year of Jehoiakim, and only the two
last, those against Elam and Babylon, which may have been added to the
collection, bear any later date. The prophecy against Babylon is at its
close marked as wholly by itself , For Seraiah is bidden, when he had
come to Babylon, and had "made an end of reading the book," to "bind a
stone" upon it, and "cast it into the Euphrates," and say, "Thus shall
Babylon sink, anew shall not rise again from the evil which I bring upon
her."

These chapters then as to Babylon although connected with the preceding
in that they are prophecies against enemies of God's people, are marked
as in one way detached from them, a book by themselves. And in
conformity with this, they are stated, in the beginning, to have been
written in the 4th year of Zedekiah. In like way, the prophecy against
Elam, which was uttered in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah, was
occasioned probably by misdeeds of that then savage people, serving, as
they did, in the army of the Chaldees against Jerusalem, when
Nebuchadnezzar took Jehoiakim captive to Babylon. It is distinguished
from the earlier prophecies, in that Elam was no inveterate enemy of
God's people, and the instrument of his chastisement was not to be
Babylon.

Those earlier prophecies Jer. 46-49:33 against Egypt, Philistia
(including Tyre and Zidon), Moab, Ammon, Edom, Damascus, Kedar and the
kingdoms of Hazor, all have this in common:

\(1\) that they are directed against old and inveterate enemies of God's
people;

\(2\) they all threaten destruction from one source, the north , or
Nebuchadnezzar himself, either naming or describing him .

They are then probably one whole, a book of the visitations of God upon
His enemies through Nebuchadnezzar. But the first of the two prophecies
against Egypt relates to the expedition of Pharaoh Necho against
Assyria, the utter overthrow of whose vast army at the Euphrates he
foretells. That overthrow took place at Carchemish in the fourth year of
Jehoiakim . The next prophecy against Egypt relates to the expedition of
Nebuchadnezzar against it, which followed immediately on the defeat of
Pharaoh . The third prophecy against Philistia was, before Pharoah smote
Gaza ; but this was probably on his march against Assyria in that same
fourth year of Jehoiakim, before his own power was broken forever.

But since the prophecy of Obadiah was anterior to that of Jeremiah, it
was probably long anterior to it. For Jeremiah probably incorporated it,
in order to show that there was yet a fulfillment in store for it. And
with this it agrees, that Obadiah does employ in his prophecy language
of Balaam, of a psalm of David, of Joel and Amos, and of no later
prophet. This could not have been otherwise, if he lived at the time,
when he is placed in the series of the minor prophets. Had he lived
later, it is inconceivable that, using of set purpose, as he does,
language of Joel and Amos, his prophecy should exhibit no trace of any
other later writing. The expressions taken from the Book of Joel are
remarkable, considering the small extent of both books. Such are
undoubtedly the phrases; "it," Jerusalem, "shall be holiness, קדשׁ
qôdesh . In mount Zion there shall be a remnant .

For near is the Day of the Lord . I will return thy recompense upon thy
head" , the phrase גוּרל ידוּ yadû gôrâl, for "cast lots." These are not
chance idioms. They are not language of imagery. They are distinguished
in no poetical or rhetorical manner from idioms which are not used.

They are not employed, because they strike the senses or the
imagination. One prophet does not borrow the imagery of another. They
are part of the religious language of prophecy, in which when religious
truth had once been embodied, the prophets handed it on from one
generation to another. These words were like some notes of a loved and
familiar melody, which brought back to the soul the whole strain, of
which they were a part. "The Day of the Lord" having been described in
such awful majesty by Joel, thenceforth, the saying, "near is the Day of
the Lord," repeated in his own simple words, conveyed to the mind all
those circumstances of awe, with which it was invested. In like way the
two words, "it shall be holiness," suggested all that fullness of the
outpouring of God's Spirit, the sole source of holiness, with which the
words were associated in Joel; they are full of the Gospel promise, that
the church should be not holy only, but the depository of holiness, the
appointed instrument through which God would diffuse it.

Equally characteristic is that other expression; "In Mount Sion shall be
a remnant." It gives prominence to that truth, so contrary to flesh and
blood, which Paul had to develop, that all were not Israel who were of
Israel . It presented at once the positive and negative side of God's
mercies, that there would be "salvation in Mount Zion," but of a
"remnant" only. So, on the other side, the use of the idiom יעקב אחך
מחמס mēchâmâs 'âchı̂kâ ya‛ăqôb, repeated but intensified from that of
Joel, יהודה בן מחמס mēchâmâs bên yehûdâh," continued on the witness
against that abiding sin for which Joel had foretold the desolation of
Edom, "his violence toward his brother Jacob."

The promise in Amos of the expansion of Jacob, "that they may inherit
the residue of Edom, and all nations upon whom My Name is called," is,
in the same way, the basis of the detailed promise of its expansion in
all directions - east, west, north, south - which Obadiah, like Amos,
begins with the promise, that the people of God should inherit Edom:
"And the South shall inherit Mount Esau, and the plain the Philistines."
Amos, taking Edom as a specimen and type of those who hated God and His
people, promises that they and all nations should become the inheritance
of the church. Obadiah, on the same ground, having declared God's
sentence on Edom, describes how each portion of the people of God should
be enlarged and overspread beyond itself.

While thus alluding to the words of Amos, Obadiah further embodies an
expression of Balaam, to which Amos also refers. Balaam says, "Edom
shall be an heritage (ירשׁה yerûshshâh), Seir also shall be an heritage
to his enemies; and Jacob shall do valiantly; and one out of Jacob shall
have dominion, and shall destroy the remnant (שׂריד s'ârı̂yd) out of the
city." The union of these two declarations of Balaam (one only of which
had been employed by Amos) cannot be accidental. They lie in the two
adjacent verses in each. "The house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the
house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau stubble, and they shall
burn them, and devour them; and there shall be no remnant (שׂריד
s'ârı̂yd) to the house of Esau, for the Lord hath spoken it; and the
south shall inherit (ירשׁ yârash) the mount of Esau." In the fourth
verse, also, Obadiah has an idiom from the prophecy of Balaam, which
occurs nowhere besides; "strong is thy dwelling, and place (קנך ושׂים
ves'ı̂ym qı̂nekâ) in the rock thy nest" This infinitive here is a very
vivid but anomalous construction. It cannot be by accident, that this
idiom occurs in these two places alone in the Hebrew Scriptures.

This employment of prophetic language of earlier prophets is the more
remarkable, from the originality and freshness of Obadiah's own diction.
In his 21 verses he has several words which occur nowhere else . They
are mostly simple words and inflections of words in use. Still they were
probably framed by the prophet himself. One, who himself adds to the
store of words in a language, has no occasion to borrow them of another.
Obadiah adopts that other prophetic language, not as needing it to
express his own meaning, but in order to give to it a fresh force and
bearing.

But on the same ground, on which Obadiah employs the language of
prophets who lived before him, he would have used the words of later
prophets, had he lived later.

The framing of single words or forms is the least part of the
originality of Obadiah's style. Vividness, connectedness, power, are
characteristics of it. As it begins, so it continues and ends. It has no
breaks, nor interruptions. Thought follows on thought, as wave rolls
upon wave, but all marshalled to one end, marching on, column after
column to the goal which God hath appointed for them. Each verse grows
out of that which was before it, and carries on its thought. The cadence
of the words in the original is a singular blending of pathos and
strength. The pathos of the cadence consists in a somewhat long
sustained measure, in which the prophet dwells on the one thought which
he wishes to impress; the force, in the few brief words in which he sums
up some sentence. That lengthened flow will have struck even an English
reader; the conciseness can only be seen in Hebrew. Those 5 words, "how
are Esau outsearched! out-sought his secret places!" have been already
alluded to.

Other such instances are, בוא תבונה אין 'ayin tebûnâh bô' with which
[Oba 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#007.md). closes; מהם אחד אתה גם gam
'attâh' echâd mēhem, "thou too as one of them," [Oba
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011.md); עשׂה אשׁר 'ăsher ‛âs'âh, לך
יעשׂה yē‛âs'âh lâk after the long exhortation in [Oba
1:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012.md). or the 3 words היוּ כלו והיוּ
vehâyâh kelô' לו lô hâyû, which close the description in [Oba
1:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016.md). or those three which so
wonderfully sum up the whole prophecy, המלוּכה אדני והיתה vehâyethâh
'ădonāy hammelûkâh, and the kingdom shall be the Lord's." Even the
repetition which occurs in the prophet, adds to the same effect, as in
the two brief words, נכרי ביום beyôm nokrı̂y, אבד ביום beyôm 'âbad, זרה
ביום beyôm zârâh, אידם ביום beyôm 'ēydâm, אידוּ ביום beyôm 'ēydô, [Oba
1:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012.md), with which he closes each
clause of the exhortation against malicious joy in the calamity of their
brother. The characteristic, vivid detail in description, and, in the
midst of it, great conciseness without sameness, occurs throughout
Obadiah.

It would then be the more strange, that a prophecy so brief and so
connected as that of Obadiah should have been severed into two (one part
of which is to belong to some earlier prophet, the other is to have been
written after the destruction of Jerusalem), but that the motive of this
disruption of the prophecy is apparent. "The oracle on Edom preserved
under the name of Obadiah can," says one , "in its present form, be of
no earlier date than the Babylonian captivity. The destruction and
entire desolation of Jerusalem is here described; the prophet himself
wrote among the exiles." It cannot be of any earlier date, according to
this writer, because, in his belief, there cannot be any certain
prediction of details of the future, or any knowledge of that future,
beyond those dim anticipations which man's own conscience and the survey
of God's ordinary providence may suggest; a cannot, which presupposes
another cannot, that God cannot reveal Himself to His creatures.

But then this writer also could not altogether escape the impression,
that great part of this prophecy must belong to a period long before the
captivity. The only way of reconciling these contradictions, this must
of external evidence, and this cannot of antidoctrinal prejudice, was to
divide in two this living whole, and to assign to the earlier period
such portions relating to Edom, as contained no allusion to the
destruction of Jerusalem. This then is done. "Further investigation,"
the writer proceeds, "shows, that the later prophet employed a fragment
of an earlier prophet as to Edom. More than half of what is now extant,
i. e., [Oba 1:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001.md), half of [Oba
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017.md), and [Oba
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018.md), by their contents, language, and
coloring, indicate very clearly such an earlier prophet; and moreover,
about the same time Jeremiah employed the earlier fragment, in that very
much out of [Oba 1:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001.md) recurs in
Jeremiah, but nothing of the words which belong most visibly to the
later prophet, [Oba 1:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011.md), [Oba
1:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#019.md)."

1\. Now, plainly, since Jeremiah is not here to tell us, why he did
incorporate in his prophecy certain verses, and did not refer to certain
other verses of Obabiah, it is, in the last degree, rash to make a
positive inference from the mere fact of his not employing those verses,
that he had them not to employ. He does embody in his prophecy the five
first verses of Obadiah, and there the correspondence between the two
prophets almost ceases. The "thought" of [Oba
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#006.md), but not one word of it recurs in
Jeremiah to [Oba 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#007.md); there is no
allusion whatever; of [Oba 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#008.md), again,
the thought is retained, but only "one word," and that, in a form
altogether different . This eighth verse is the last in Obadiah, to
which Jeremiah refers. Ewald then has to manufacture his "earlier
prophet" out of those five first verses, which Jeremiah does embody; of
other two, of which the thought only recurs in Jeremiah; and five more ,
to which there is, in Jeremiah, no allusion whatever; and having culled
these ad libitum out of the whole chapter, he argues against the
non-existence of the rest on the ground that Jeremiah does not employ
them, whereas Jeremiah equally does not employ five of those, the
existence of which at that same time Ewald acknowledges, and to two
others Jeremiah alludes but very distantly. Since Jeremiah's not
alluding to five of these verses, does not prove, according to Ewald,
that they did not then exist, neither does his not employing the
remainder prove it as to them.

2\. Jeremiah assigns no ground for the punishment of Edom, except his
pride; nor does he, in any of those prophecies as to those lesser
nations, foretell anything as to the future of Judah. This was not
assigned to him, as his subject here. He does in the prophecies against
Egypt and Babylon; for those were the great dynasties, on whom, in human
eyes, the existence of Judah depended. There he fortells, that God would
"make a full end of all the nations whither" He had "driven" them, but
not "of Jacob" His "servant" . The future lot of Judah, as a whole, did
not depend on those little nations. It may be on this ground, that
Jeremiah foretells "their" destruction and the restoration of Moab and
Ammon , and is silent as to Judah. Again, the immediate punishment of
all these petty nations through Nebuchadnezzar was the subject of
Jeremiah's prophecy, not ulterior suffering at the hands of Judah. Now
these subjects, the "violence" of Esau against his "brother Jacob," as
the ground of Edom's punishment . In [Oba
1:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#015.md) Obadiah, having rehearsed the
offence, repeats the sentence), the future enlargement of Jacob , and an
ulterior retribution on Edom through Judah, occupy most of those verses
of Obadiah, to which there is no allusion in Jeremiah. This accounts (if
there were any need to account for it) for the absence of allusion to
almost all of Obadiah to which Jeremiah does not allude, both as to the
part which Ewald accounts for in "his" way, and as to most of that part
which he leaves unaccounted for.

But altogether, it must be said, that God's prophets employ freely, as
God taught them, what they do employ of the former prophets. They do not
copy them in a mechanical way, as if they were simply re-writing a work
which lay before them, so that we should have to account for anything
which they did not think good to repeat. In making the similar use of
Isaiah's prophecy as to Moab, Jeremiah makes no reference to the five
first verses.

3\. So, far from "writing among the exiles," Obadiah implies that the
captivity had not yet commenced. He speaks of Judah and Benjamin, as in
their own land, and foretells that they shall enlarge themselves on all
sides. Hosea and Amos had, at that time, prophesied the final
destruction of the "kingdom" of Israel and the dispersion of the ten
tribes. In conformity with this, Obadiah foretells to the two tribes,
that they should occupy the vacated places of the land of promise. In
contrast with this enlargement of Judah and Benjamin, he speaks of those
already in captivity, and prophesies their restoration. He speaks of two
bodies of present exiles, "the captivity of "this" host of the children
of Israel," "the captivity of Jerusalem which is at Sepharad." Of these
he probably says , "The captivity of this host of the children of Israel
which are among the Canaanites as far as Zarephath, and the captivity of
Jerusalem which is in Sepharad, shall possess the cities of the South."
Both these sets of captives must have been limited in number.

Those of "Jerusalem at Sepharad" or Sardis the capital of the Lydian
empire, could only have been such as were exported by means of the slave
trade.

The only public settlement of Jews there, was in times long subsequent,
about 200 b.c., when Antiochus the Great, in order to check the
seditions in Lydia and Phrygia , "removed thither at much cost 2,000
Jewish families out of Mesopotamia and Babylonia, with their goods," on
account of their tried faithfulness and zealous service to his
forefathers. This removal, accompanied with grants of land, exemption
from tribute for 10 years, personal and religious protection, "was" a
continuation of the commenced "dispersion;" it was not a "captivity."
They were the descendants of those who might have returned to their
country, if they would. They were in the enjoyment of all the temporal
benefits, for which their forefathers had bartered their portion in
their own land. There was nothing special as to why they should be
singled out as the objects of God's promise. Jews were then dispersing
everywhere, to be the future disciples or persecutors of the Gospel in
all lands. Seleucus Nicator, a century before, had found Jews in Asia
and Lower Syria, and had given them like privileges with the Macedonians
and Greeks whom he settled there. Jews had shared his wars. Alexander
had, at Alexandria, bestowed like privileges on the Egyptian Jews In
such times, then, there was no "captivity at Sepharad;" no Lydian
empire; nothing to distinguish the Jews there, from any others who
remained willingly expatriated.

On the other side, the place which the prophet assigns to those captives
on their return is but a portion of Judah, "the cities of the South,"
which he does not represent as unpopulated. In like way, whether the
words as to Israel are rendered, "which are" among "the Canaanites as
far as Zarephath," or, "shall" possess "the Canaanites as far as
Zarephath," in either case the prophet must be speaking of a very
limited number. Had he been speaking in reference to the ten tribes or
their restoration, he would not have assigned their territory, "Ephraim,
Samaria, Gilead," to the two tribes, nor would he have assigned to them
so small a tract. This limited number of captives exactly agrees with
the state of things, supposing Obadiah to have lived, when, according to
his place in the Canon, he did live, near the time of Joel. For Joel
denounces God's judgments on Tyre, Zidon and Philistia for selling unto
the Grecians the children of Judah and Jerusalem. These captives, of
whom Obadiah speaks, were some probably yet unsold, at Sarepta, and some
at Sepharad or Sardis among the Grecians. On the other hand, it is
inconceivable that Obadiah would have contrasted the present captivity,
"this captivity of the children of Israel," "the captivity of Jerusalem
which is in Sepharad," with Judah and Benjamin in their ancient
possessions, had Judah and Benjamin been, when he wrote, themselves in
captivity in Babylon, or that he would have prophesied concerning some
little fragment of Israel, that it should he restored, and would have
passed over the whole body of the ten tribes, if, when he prophesied, it
had been in captivity. Nor is there again any likelihood, that by "this
captivity of Jerusalem in Sepharad," Obadiah means any captives, among
whom he himself was (which is the whole ground-work of this theory of
Ewald), for, in that case, he would probably have addressed the
consolation and the promise of return TO them (as do the other prophets)
and not have spoken OF them only.

A few years hence, and this theory will be among the things which have
been. The connection of thought in Obadiah is too close, the
characteristics of his style occur too uniformly throughout his brief
prophecy, to admit of its being thus dislocated. Nowhere, throughout his
prophecy, can one word or form be alleged, of which it can even be said,
that it was used more frequently in later Hebrew. All is one original,
uniform, united whole.

"Obadiah," says Hugh of S. Victor, "is simple in language, manifold in
meaning; few in words, abundant in thoughts, according to that, 'the
wise man is known by the fewness of his words.' He directeth his
prophecy, according to the letter, against Edom; allegorically, he
inveighs against the world; morally, against the flesh. Bearing an image
of the Saviour, he hinteth at his coming through whom the world is
destroyed, through whom the flesh is subdued, through whom freedom is
restored." "Among all the prophets," says another , "he is the briefest
in number of words; in the grace of mysteries he is their equal."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Obadiah Chapter 1](oba001.md)

</div>
