<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Obadiah Index](oba)  
  [Previous](oba000)  [Next](jon000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Obadiah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001)

[Obadiah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">oba 1:1</span></span>

The vision of Obadiah - , i. e., of "the worshiper of God." The prophet
would be known only by that which his name imports, that he worshiped
God. He tells us in this double title, through whom the prophecy came,
and from whom it came. His name authenticated the prophecy to the Jewish
Church. Thenceforth, he chose to remain wholly hidden. He entitles it "a
vision," as the prophets were called "seers" [Sa1
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#009), although he relates, not the
vision which he saw, but its substance and meaning. Probably the future
was unfolded to him in the form of sights spread out before his mind, of
which he spoke in words given to him by God. His language consists of a
succession of pictures, which he may have seen, and, in his picture
language, described . "As prophecy is called "the word," because God
spoke to the prophets within, so it is called "vision," because the
prophet saw, with the eyes of the mind and by the light wherewith they
are illumined, what God willeth to be known to them." The name expresses
also the certainty of their knowledge . "Among the organs of our senses,
sight has the most evident knowledge of those things which are the
object of our senses. Hence, the contemplation of the things which are
true is called "vision," on account of the evidence and assured
certainty. On that ground the prophet was called "seer."

Thus saith the Lord God concerning Edom - This second title states, that
the whole which follows is from God. What immediately follows is said in
Obadiah's own person; but all, whether so spoken or directly in the
Person of God, was alike the word of God. God spake in or by the
prophets, in both ways, since [Pe2
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#021) "prophecy came not by the will of
man, but holy men of God spake" as they were "moved by the Holy Spirit."
Obadiah, in that he uses, in regard to his whole prophecy, words which
other prophets use in delivering a direct message from God, ascribes the
whole of his prophecy to God, as immediately as other prophets did any
words which God commanded them to speak. The words are a rule for all
prophecy, that all comes directly from God.

We have heard a rumor - , rather, "a report;" literally "a hearing, a
thing heard," as Isaiah says [Isa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001), "Who hath believed our report? A
"report" is certain or uncertain, according to the authority from whom
it comes. This "report" was certainly true, since it was "from the
Lord." By the plural, we, Obadiah may have associated with himself,
either other prophets of his own day as Joel and Amos, who, with those
yet earlier, as Balaam and David, had prophesied against Edom, or the
people, for whose sakes God made it known to him. In either case, the
prophet does not stand alone for himself. He hears with "the goodly
company of the prophets;" and the people of God hear in him, as Isaiah
says again [Isa 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#010), "that which I
have heard from the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, have I declared
unto you."

And an ambassador is sent among the pagan - The "ambassador" is any
agent, visible or invisible, sent by God. Human powers, who wish to stir
up war, send human messengers. All things stand at God's command, and
whatever or whomsoever He employs, is a messenger from Him. He uses our
language to us. He may have employed an angel, as He says [Psa
78:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#049), "He sent evil angels among
them," and as, through the permission given to a lying spirit [Kg1
22:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#021). He executed His judgments
upon Ahab, of his own free will believing the evil spirit, and
disbelieving Himself. So [Jdg 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#023)
"God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of Shechem,"
allowing His rebellious spirit to bring about the punishment of evil
men, by inflaming yet more the evil passions, of which they were slaves.
Evil spirits, in their malice and rebellion, while stirring up the lust
of conquest, are still God's messengers, in that He overrules them; as,
to Paul [Co2 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007), "the thorn in the
flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet him," was still the gift of God.
"It was given me," he says.

Arise ye and let us rise - He who rouseth them, says, "Arise ye," and
they quickly echo the words, "and let us arise." The will of God is
fulfilled at once. While eager to accomplish their own ends, they
fulfill, the more, the purpose of God. Whether, the first agent is man's
own passions, or the evil spirit who stirs them, the impulse spreads
from the one or the few to the many. But all catch the spark, cast in
among them. The summons finds a ready response. "Arise," is the commend
of God, however given; "let us arise," is the eager response of man's
avarice or pride or ambition, fulfilling impetuously the secret will of
God; as a tiger, let loose upon man by man, fulfills the will of its
owner, while sating its own thirst for blood. So Isaiah hears [Isa
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#004) "the noise of a multitude in the
mountains, like as of a great people, a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms
of nations gathered together." The Medes and Persians thought at that
time of nothing less, than that they were instruments of the One God,
whom they knew not. But Isaiah continues; "The Lord of hosts mustereth
the host of the battle;" and, when it was fulfilled, Cyrus saw and owned
it [Ezr 1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001).

[Obadiah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">oba 1:2</span></span>

Behold, I have made thee small - God, having declared His future
judgments upon Edom, assigns the first ground of those judgments. Pride
was the root of Edom's sin, then envy; then followed exultation at his
brother's fall, hard-heartedness and bloodshed. All this was against the
disposition of God's Providence for him. God had made him small, in
numbers, in honor, in territory. Edom was a wild mountain people. It was
strongly guarded in the rock-girt dwelling, which God had assigned it.
Like the Swiss or the Tyrolese of old, or the inhabitants of Mount
Caucasus now, it had strength for resistance through the advantages of
its situation, not for aggression, unless it were that of a
robber-horde. But lowness, as people use it, is the mother either of
lowliness or pride. A low estate, acquiesced in by the grace of God, is
the parent of lowliness; when rebelled against, it generates a greater
intensity of pride than greatness, because that pride is against nature
itself and God's appointment. The pride of human greatness, sinful as it
is, is allied to a natural nobility of character. Copying pervertedly
the greatness of God, the soul, when it receives the Spirit of God,
casts off the slough, and retains its nobility transfigured by grace.
The conceit of littleness has the hideousness of those monstrous
combinations, the more hideous, because unnatural, not a corruption only
but a distortion of nature. Edom never attempted anything of moment by
itself. "Thou art greatly despised." Weakness, in itself, is neither
despicable nor "despised." It is despised only, when it vaunts itself to
be, what it is not. God tells Edom what, amid its pride, it was in
itself, "despicable;" what it would thereafter be, "despised" .

[Obadiah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">oba 1:3</span></span>

The pride of thy heart hath deceived thee - Not the strength of its
mountain-fastnesses, strong though they were, deceived Edom, but "the
pride of his heart." That strength was but the occasion which called
forth the "pride." Yet, it was strong in its abode. God, as it were,
admits it to them. "Dweller in the clefts of the rocks, the loftiness of
his habitation." "The whole southern country of the Edomites," says
Jerome, "from Eleutheropolis to Petra and Selah (which are the
possessions of Esau), hath minute dwellings in caves; and on account of
the oppressive heat of the sun, as being a southern province, hath under
ground cottages." Its inhabitants, whom Edom expelled [Deu
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#012), were hence called Horites, i.
e., dwellers in caves. Its chief city was called Selah or Petra, "rock."
It was a city single of its kind amid the works of man . "The eagles"
placed their nests in the rocky caves at a height of several hundred
feet above the level of the valley .... The power of the conception
which would frame a range of mountain-rocks into a memorial of the human
name, which, once of noble name and high bepraised, sought, through
might of its own, to clothe itself with the imperishablness of the
eternal Word, is here the same as in the contemporary monuments of the
temple-rocks of Elephantine or at least those of the Egyptian Thebes."
The ornamental buildings, so often admired by travelers, belong to a
later date.

Those nests in the rocks, piled over one another, meeting you in every
recess, lining each fresh winding of the valleys, as each opened on the
discoverer , often at heights, where (now that the face of the rock and
its approach, probably hewn in it, have crumbled away) you can scarcely
imagine how human foot ever climbed , must have been the work of the
first hardy mountaineers, whose feet were like the chamois.

Such habitations imply, not an uncivilized, only a hardy, active,
people. In those narrow valleys, so scorched by a southern sun, they
were at once the coolest summer dwellings, and, amid the dearth of
fire-wood, the warmest in winter. The dwellings of the living and the
sepulchres of the dead were, apparently, hewn out in the same soft red
sandstone-rock, and perhaps some of the dwellings of the earlier
rock-dwellers were converted into graves by the Nabataeans and their
successors who lived in the valley. The central space has traces of
other human habitations . "The ground is covered with heaps of hewn
stones, foundations of buildings and vestiges of paved streets, all
clearly indicating that a large city once existed here" . "They occupy
two miles in circumference, affording room in an oriental city for
30,000 or 40,000 inhabitants."

Its theater held "above 3,000." Probably this city belonged altogether
to the later, Nabataean, Roman, or Christian times. Its existence
illustrates the extent of the ancient city of the rock. The whole space,
rocks and valleys, imbedded in the mountains which girt it in, lay
invisible even from the summit of Mount Hor . So nestled was it in its
rocks, that an enemy could only know of its existence, an army could
only approach it, through treachery. Two known approaches only, from the
east and west, enter into it.

The least remarkable is described as lying amid "wild fantastic
mountains," "rocks in towering masses," "over steep and slippery
passes," or "winding in recesses below." Six hours of such passes led to
the western side of Petra. The Greeks spoke of it as two days' journey
from their "world" Approach how you would, the road lay through defiles
.

The Greeks knew but of "one ascent to it, and that," (as they deemed)
"made by hand;" (that from the east) The Muslims now think the Sik or
chasm, the two miles of ravine by which it is approached, to be
supernatural, made by the rod of Moses when he struck the rock .
Demetrius, "the Besieger" , at the head of 8,000 men, (the 4,000
infantry selected for their swiftness of foot from the whole army) made
repeated assaults on the place, but "those within had an easy victory
from its commanding height" . "A few hundred men might defend the
entrance against a large army."

Its width is described as from 10 to 30 feet , "a rent in a
mountain-wall, a magnificent gorge, a mile and a half long, winding like
the most flexible of rivers, between rocks almost precipitous, but that
they overlap and crumble and crack, as if they would crash over you. The
blue sky only just visible above. The valley opens, but contracts again.
Then it is honey-combed with cavities of all shapes and sizes. Closing
once more, it opens in the area of Petra itself, the torrent-bed passing
now through absolute desolation and silence, though strewn with the
fragments which shew that you once entered on a splendid and busy city,
gathered along in the rocky banks, as along the quays of some great
northern river."

Beyond this immediate rampart of rocks, there lay between it and the
Eastern Empires that vast plateau, almost unapproachable by an enemy who
knew not its hidden artificial reservoirs of waters. But even the
entrance gained, what gain beside, unless the people and its wealth were
betrayed to a surprise? Striking as the rock-girt Petra was, a gem in
its mountain-setting, far more marvelous was it, when, as in the
prophet's time, the rock itself was Petra. Inside the defile, an invader
would be outside the city yet. He might himself become the besieged,
rather than the besieger. In which of these eyries along all those
ravines were the eagles to be found? From which of those lairs might not
Edom's lion-sons burst out upon them? Multitudes gave the invaders no
advantage in scaling those mountain-sides, where, observed themselves by
an unseen enemy, they would at last have to fight man to man. What a
bivouac were it, in that narrow spot, themselves encircled by an enemy
everywhere, anywhere, and visibly nowhere, among those thousand caves,
each larger cave, may be, an ambuscade! In man's sight Edom's boast was
well-founded; but what before God?

That saith in his heart - The heart has its own language, as distinct
and as definite as that formed by the lips, mostly deeper, often truer.
It needeth not the language of the lips, to offend God. Since He answers
the heart which seeks Him, so also He replies in displeasure to the
heart which despises Him. "Who shall bring me down to the earth?" Such
is the language of all self-sufficient security. "Can Alexander fly?"
answered the Bactrian chief from another Petra. On the second night he
was prisoner or slain . Edom probably, under his who? included God
Himself, who to him was the God of the Jews only. Yet, men now, too,
include God in their defiance, and scarcely veil it from themselves by
speaking of "fortune" rather than God; or, if of a coarser sort, they do
not even veil it, as in that common terrible saying, "He fears neither
God nor devil." God answers his thought;

[Obadiah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">oba 1:4</span></span>

Though thou exalt thyself as the eagle - (or, thy nest) The eagle builds
its nest in places nearly inaccessible to man. The Edomites were a race
of eagles. It is not the language of poetry or exaggeration; but is
poetic, because so true. "And though thou set thy nest in the stars."
This is men's language, strange as it is. "I shall touch the stars with
my crown;" "I shall strike the stars with my lofty crown;" "since I have
touched heaven with my lance." As Job says [Job
20:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#006), "Though his excellency mount
up to the heavens and his head reacheth unto the clouds," yet," he shall
perish forever, like his own dung." And Isaiah to the king of Babylon,
the type of Anti Christ and of the Evil one [Isa
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013), [Isa
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#011), "Thou hast said in thy heart, I
will exalt my throne above the stars of God; thy pomp is brought down to
the grave, the worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee" .
"The pagan saw this. AEsop, when asked, what doeth God? said, 'He
humbles the proud and exalts the humble.' And another , 'whom morning's
dawn beholdeth proud, The setting sun beholdeth bowed. '"

"They who boast of being Christians, and are on that ground
self-satisfied, promising themselves eternal life, and thinking that
they need not fear Hell, because they are Christians and hold the faith
of the Apostles, while their lives are altogether alien from
Christianity, are such Edomites, priding themselves because they dwell
in clefts of the rocks. For it sufficeth not to believe what Christ and
the apostles taught, unless thou do what they commanded. These spiritual
Edomites, from a certain love or some fear of future torments, are moved
by grief for sin, and give themselves to repentance, fastings,
almsgiving, which is no other than to enter the clefts of the rocks;
because they imitate the works of Christ and the Italy apostles who are
called rocks, like those to whom John said, [Mat
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007). "O ye generation of vipers, who
hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come?"

But, since they have no humility, they become thereby the more inflated
with pride, and the more of such works they do, the more pleasures they
allow themselves, and become daily the prouder and the wickeder. "The
pride" then "of" their "heart deceiveth" them, because they seem in many
things to follow the deeds of the holy, and they fear no enemies, as
though they "dwelt in clefts of the rocks." They exalt their throne, in
that, through the shadow of lofty deeds, they seem to have many below
them, mount as high as they can, and place themselves, where they think
they need fear no peril. But to them the Lord saith, "Though thou exalt
thyself as the eagle - thence will I bring thee down." For, however
exalted they be, and however they seem good and great, they are "brought
down to the ground" and out from the caverns of the rocks, wherein they
deemed that they dwelt securely, in that they lapse into overt shameful
sin; from where all perceive, what they were then too, when they were
thought to be righteous.

And striking is it, that they are compared to "eagles." For although the
eagle fly aloft, yet thence, it looks to the earth and the carcasses and
animals which it would devour, as Job writes of it [Job
39:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#028), "She dwelleth and abideth
upon the rock, upon the crag of the rock, and the strong place. From
thence she seeketh the prey; her eyes behold afar off; her young ones
also suck up blood, and where the slain are, there is she." So these,
while they pretend perfection, never turn their eyes away from earthly
goods, always casting them on honors, or wealth, or pleasure, without
which they count life to be no life. Well, too, is it called their nest.
For, toil how they may, in seeking an assured, restful, security of
life, yet, what they build, is a nest made of hay and stubble,
constructed with great toil, but lightly destroyed. This security of
rest they lose, when they are permitted, by the just judgment of God, to
fall into uncleanness, ambition or foulest sins, and are deprived of the
glory which they unjustly gained, and their folly becomes manifest to
all. Of such, among the apostles, was the traitor Judas. But the rich
too and the mighty of this world, although they think that their
possessions and what, with great toil, they have gained, when they have
raised themselves above others, are most firm, it is but that nest which
they have placed among the stars, soon to be dissipated by wind and
rain."

[Obadiah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">oba 1:5</span></span>

If thieves came to thee - The prophet describes their future punishment,
by contrast with that which, as a marauding people, they well knew.
Thieves and robbers spoil only for their petty end. They take what comes
to hand; what they can, they carry off shortness of time, difficulty of
transport, necessity of providing for a retreat, limit their plunder.
When they have gorged themselves, they depart. "Their" plunder is
limited. The "grape-gatherer" leaves gleanings. God promises to His own
people, under the same image, that they should have a remnant left [Isa
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#006); [Isa
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#013). "Gleaning grapes shall be left
in it." It shall be, "as gleaning grapes, when the vintage is done." The
prophet anticipates the contrast by a burst of sympathy. In the name of
God, he mourns over the destruction which he fore-announces. He laments
over the destruction, even of the deadly enemy of his people. "How art
thou destroyed!" So the men of God are accustomed to express their
amazement at the greatness of the destruction of the ungodly [Psa
73:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#019). "How are they brought into
desolation as in a moment!" [Isa 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#004),
[Isa 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#012). "How hath the oppressor
ceased! How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning!"
[Jer 50:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#023). "How is the hammer of the
whole earth cut asunder and broken! how is Babylon become a desolation
among the nations!" [Jer 51:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#041). "How
is Sheshach taken! How is the praise of the whole earth surprised."

[Obadiah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">oba 1:6</span></span>

How are the things of Esau searched out! - literally, "How are Esau, out
searched!" i. e., Esau, as a whole and in all its parts and in all its
belongings, all its people and all its property, one and all. The name
"Esau" speaks of them as a whole; the plural verb, "are outsearched,"
represents all its parts. The word signifies a diligent search and
tracking out, as in Zephaniah [Zep
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#012), "I will search out Jerusalem
with candles," as a man holdeth a light in every dark corner, in seeking
diligently some small thing which has been lost. "The hidden things," i.
e., his hidden treasures, "are sought up." The enemy who should come
upon him, should make no passing foray, but should abide there, seeking
out of their holes in the rocks, themselves and their treasures. Petra,
through its rocky ramparts, was well suited, as Nineveh in the huge
circuit of its massive walls was well built, to be the receptacle of
rapine.

And now it was gathered, as rapine is, first or last, for the spoiler.
It was safe stored up there, to be had for the seeking. No exit, no way
of escape. Edom, lately so full of malicious energy, so proud, should
lie at the proud foot of its conqueror, passive as the sheep in this
large shamble, or as the inanimate hoards which they had laid up and
which were now "tracked out." Soon after Obadiah's prophecy, Judah,
under Ahaz, lost again to Syria, Elath [Kg2
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#006), which it had now under Uzziah
recovered [Kg2 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#022). The Jews were
replaced, it is uncertain whether by Edomites or by some tribe of
Syrians. If Syrians, they were then friendly; if Edomites, Elath itself
must, on the nearby captivity of Syria, have become the absolute
possession of Edom. Either way, commerce again poured its wealth into
Edom. To what end? To be possessed and to aggrandize Edom, thought her
wealthy and her wise men; to be searched out and plundered, said the
word of God. And it was so.

[Obadiah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">oba 1:7</span></span>

All the men of thy confederacy have brought thee even to the border -
Destruction is more bitter, when friends aid in it. Edom had all along
with unnatural hatred persecuted his brother, Jacob. So, in God's just
judgment, its friends should be among its destroyers. Those confederates
were probably Moab and Ammon, Tyre and Zidon, with whom they united to
resist Nebuchadnezzar [Jer 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#003), and
seduced Zedekiah to rebel, although Moab, Ammon, and Edom turned against
him [Zep 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#008); Ezek. 25. These then, he
says, sent them "to the border." "So will they take the adversary's
part, that, with him, they will drive thee forth from the borders,
thrusting thee into captivity, to gain favor with the enemy." This they
would do, he adds, through mingled treachery and violence. "The men of
thy peace have deceived, have prevailed against thee." As Edom turned
peace with Judah into war, so those at peace with Edom should use deceit
and violence against them, being admitted, perhaps, as allies within
their borders, and then betraying the secret of their fastnesses to the
enemy, as the Thessalians dealt toward the Greeks at Thermopylae. It was
to be no common deceit, no mere failure to help them.

The men of "thy bread have laid a wound" (better, a snare) "under thee."
Perhaps Obadiah thought of David's words [Psa
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009), "mine own familiar friend, in
whom I trusted, who did eat of my bread, hath lifted up his heel against
me." As they had done, so should it be done to them. "They that take the
sword," our Lord says [Mat 26:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#052),
"shall perish by the sword;" so they who show bad faith, are the objects
of bad faith, as Isaiah says . The proverb which says, "there is honor
among thieves," attests how limited such mutual faith is. It lasts,
while it seems useful. Obadiah's description relates to one and the same
class, the allies of Edom; but it heightens as it goes on; not
confederates only, but those confederates, friends; not friends only,
but friends indebted to them, familiar friends; those joined to them
through that tie, so respected in the East, in that they had eaten of
their bread. Those banded with them should, with signs of friendship,
conduct them to their border, in order to expel them; those at peace
should prevail against them in war; those who ate their bread should
requite them with a snare.

There is none understanding in him - The brief words comprise both cause
and effect. Had Edom not been without understanding, he had not been
thus betrayed; and when betrayed in his security, be was as one
stupefied. Pride and self-confidence betray man to his fall; when he is
fallen, self-confidence betrayed passes readily into despair. In the
sudden shock, the mind collapses. People do not use the resources which
they yet have, because what they had overvalued, fails them. Undue
confidence is the parent of undue fear. The Jewish historian relates,
how, in the last dreadful siege, when the outer wall began to give way ,
"fear fell on the tyrants, more vehement than the occasion called for.
For, before the enemy had mounted, they were paralyzed, and ready to
flee. You might see men, aforetime stouthearted and insolent in their
impiety, crouching and trembling, so that, wicked as they were, the
change was pitiable in the extreme. Here, especially, one might learn
the power of God upon the ungodly. For the tyrants bared themselves of
all security, and, of their own accord, came down from the towers, where
no force, but famine alone, could have taken them: For those three
towers were stronger than any engines."

[Obadiah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">oba 1:8</span></span>

Shall I not in that day even destroy the wise out of Edom? - It was then
no common, no recoverable, loss of wisdom, for God, the Author of
wisdom, had destroyed it. The pagan had a proverb, "whom God willeth to
destroy, he first dements." So Isaiah foretells of Judah [Isa
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014), "The wisdom of their wise shall
perish, and the understanding of their prudent shall be hid." Edom was
celebrated of old for its wisdom. Eliphaz, the chief of Job's friends,
the representative of human wisdom, was a Temanite [Job
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#001). A vestige of the name of the
Shuhites, from where came another of his friends, probably still lingers
among the mountains of Edom. Edom is doubtless included among the "sons
of the East" [Kg1 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#030) whose wisdom is
set as a counterpart to that of Egypt, the highest human wisdom of that
period, by which that of Solomon would be measured. "Solomon's wisdom
excelled the wisdom of all the children of the East country and all the
wisdom of Egypt." In Baruch, they are still mentioned among the chief
types of human wisdom (Bar. 3:22, 23). "It (wisdom) hath not been heard
of in Chanaan, neither hath it been seen in Theman. The Agarenes that
seek wisdom upon earth, the merchants of Meran and of Theman, the
authors of fables and searchers-out of understanding, none of these have
known, the way of wisdom, or remember her paths."

Whence, Jeremiah [Jer 49:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007), in using,
these words of Obadiah, says: "Is wisdom no more in Teman? Is counsel
perished from the prudent? Is their wisdom vanished?" He speaks, as
though Edom were a known abode of human wisdom, so that it was strange
that it was found there no more. He speaks of the Edomites "as prudent,"
discriminating , full of judgment, and wonders that counsel should have
"perished" from them. They had it eminently then, before it perished.
They thought themselves wise; they were thought so; but God took it away
at their utmost need. So He says of Egypt [Isa
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#003), [Isa
19:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#011). "I will destroy the counsel
thereof. The counsel of the wise counselors of Pharaoh is become
brutish. How say ye unto Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise, the son of
ancient kings? Where are they? Who are thy wise? And let them tell thee
now, and let them know, what the Lord of hosts hath purposed upon
Egypt." And of Judah [Jer 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#007). "I
will make void the counsel of Judah and Jerusalem in this place."

The people of the world think that they hold their wisdom and all God's
natural gifts, independently of the Giver (God). God, by the events of
His natural Providence, as here by His word, shows, through some sudden
withdrawal of their wisdom, that it is His, not their's! People wonder
at the sudden failure, the flaw in the well-arranged plan, the one
over-confident act which ruins the whole scheme, the over-shrewdness
which betrays itself, or the unaccountable oversight. They are amazed
that one so shrewd should overlook this or that, and think not that He,
in whose hands are our powers of thought, supplied not just that
insight, Whereon the whole depended.

[Obadiah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">oba 1:9</span></span>

And thy mighty, O Teman, shall be dismayed - The pagan, more religiously
than we, ascribed panic to the immediate action of one of their gods, or
to Nature deified, Pan, i. e., the Universe: wrong as to the being whom
they "ignorantly worshiped;" right, in ascribing it to what they thought
a divine agency. Holy Scripture at times discovers the hidden agency,
that we may acknowledge God's Hand in those terrors which we cannot
account for. So it relates, on occasion of Jonathan's slaughter of the
Philistine garrison [Sa1 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#015), "there
was a trembling in the host and in the field, and among all the people:
the garrison and the spoilers, they also trembled, and the earth quaked,
so it became a trembling from God," or (in our common word,) a panic
from God. All then failed Edom. Their allies and friends betrayed them;
God took away their wisdom. Wisdom was turned into witlessness, and
courage into cowardice; "to the end that every one from mount Esau may
be cut off by slaughter." The prophet sums up briefly God's end in all
this. The immediate means were man's treachery, man's violence, the
failure of wisdom in the wise, and of courage in the brave. The end of
all, in God's will, was their destruction [Rom
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028).

By slaughter - , literally "from slaughter," may mean either the
immediate or the distant cause of their being "cut off," either the
means which God employed , "All things work together for good to those
who love God," and for evil to those who hate Him, that Edom was cut off
by one great slaughter by the enemy; or that which moved God to give
them over to destruction, their own "slaughter" of their brethren, the
Jews, as it follows;

[Obadiah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">oba 1:10</span></span>

For thy violence against thy brother Jacob - To Israel God had
commanded: ([Deu 23:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#007) ([Deu
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#008), [Deu
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#009) in the Hebrew text)), "Thou shalt
not abbor an Edomite, for he is thy brother. The children that are
begotten of them shall enter into the congregation of the Lord in their
third generation." Edom did the contrary to all this. "Violence"
includes all sorts of ill treatment, from one with whom "might is
right," "because it is in the power of their hand" [Mic
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#002). to do it. This they had done to
the descendants of their brother, and him, their twin brother, Jacob.
They helped the Chaldaeans in his overthrow, rejoiced in his calamity,
thought that, by this cooperation, they had secured themselves. What,
when from those same Chaldees, those same calamities, which they had
aided to inflict on their brother, came on themselves, when, as they had
betrayed him, they were themselves betrayed; as they had exulted in his
overthrow, so their allies exulted in their's! The "shame" of which the
prophet spoke, is not the healthful distress at the evil of sin, but at
its evils and disappointments. Shame at the evil which sin is, works
repentance and turns aside the anger of God. Shame at the evils which
sin brings, in itself leads to further sins, and endless, fruitless,
shame. Edom had laid his plans, had succeeded; the wheel, in God's
Providence, turned around and he was crushed.

So Hosea said [Hos 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#006), "they shall
be ashamed through their own counsels;" and Jeremiah [Jer
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#025), "we lie down in our shame and
our confusion covereth us;" and David [Psa
109:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#029), "let mine adversaries be
clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves with their own
confusion as with a mantle." As one, covered and involved in a cloak,
can find no way to emerge; as one, whom the waters cover [Exo
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#010), is buried under them
inextricably, so, wherever they went, whatever they did, shame covered
them. So the lost shall "rise to shame and everlasting contempt" [Dan
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002).

Thou shalt be cut off forever - One word expressed the sin, "violence;"
four words, over against it, express the sentence; shame encompassing,
everlasting excision. God's sentences are not completed at once in this
life. The branches are lopped off; the tree decays; the axe is laid to
the root; at last it is cut down. As the sentence on Adam, "in the day
that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die," was fulfilled, although
Adam did not die, until he had completed 930 years [Gen
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#005), so was this on Edom, although
fulfilled in stages and by degrees. Adam bore the sentence of death
about him. The 930 years wore out at last that frame, which, but for
sin, had been immortal. So Edom received this sentence of excision,
which was, on his final impenitence, completed, although centuries
witnessed the first earnest only of its execution. Judah and Edom stood
over against each other, Edom ever bent on the extirpation of Judah. At
that first destruction of Jerusalem, Edom triumphed, "Raze her! Raze
her, even to the ground!" Yet, though it tarried long, the sentence was
fulfilled. Judah, the banished, survived; Edom, the triumphant, was, in
God's time and after repeated trials, "cut off forever." Do we marvel at
the slowness of God's sentence? Rather, marvel we, with wondering
thankfulness, that His sentences, on nations or individuals, are slow,
yet, stand we in awe, because, if unrepealed, they are sure. Centuries,
to Edom, abated not their force or certainty; length of life changes not
the sinner's doom.

[Obadiah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">oba 1:11</span></span>

In the day that thou stoodest on the other side - The time when they so
stood, is not defined in itself, as a past or future. It is literally;
"In the day of thy standing over against," i. e., to gaze on the
calamities of God's people; "in the day of strangers carrying away his
strength," i. e., "the strength of thy brother Jacob," of whom he had
just spoken, "and foreigners entered into his gates, and cast lots on
Jerusalem, thou too as one of them. One of them" they were not. Edom was
no stranger, no alien, no part of the invading army; he whose strength
they carried away, was, he had just said, his "brother Jacob." Edom
burst the bonds of nature, to become what he was not, "as one of them."
He purposely does not say, "thou too wast (הית hayı̂tha) as of them;" as
he would have said, had he wished to express what was past. Obadiah
seeing, in prophetic vision, the destruction of Jerusalem, and the share
which the Edomites took there at, describes it as it is before his eyes,
as past.

We see before us, the enemy carrying off all in which the human strength
of Judah lay, his forces and his substance, and casting lots on
Jerusalem its people and its possessions. He describes it as past, yet,
not more so, than the visitation itself which was to follow, some
centuries afterward. Of both, he speaks alike as past; of both, as
future. He speaks of them as past, as being so beheld in "His" mind in
whose name he speaks. God's certain knowledge does not interfere with
our free agency. "God compelleth no one to sin; yet, foreseeth all who
shall sin of their own will. How then should He not justly avenge what,
foreknowing, He does not compel them to do? For as no one, by his
memory, compelleth to be done things which pass, so God, by His
foreknowledge, doth not compel to be done things which will be. And as
man remembereth some things which he hath done, and yet, hath not done
all which he remembereth; so God foreknoweth all things whereof He is
Himself the Author, and yet, is not Himself the Author of all which He
foreknoweth. Of those things then, of which He is no evil Author, He is
the just Avenger.

[Obadiah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">oba 1:12</span></span>

But thou shouldest not - , rather it means, and can only mean , "And
look not (i. e., gaze not with pleasure) on the day of thy brother in
the day of his becoming a stranger ; and rejoice not over the children
of Judah in the day of their destruction; and enlarge not thy mouth in
the day of distress. Enter not into the gate of My people in the day of
their calamity; look not, thou too, on his affliction in the day of his
calamity; and lay not hands on his substance in the day of his calamity;
And stand not on the crossway, to cut off his fugitives; and shut not up
his remnants in the day of distress."

Throughout these three verses, Obadiah uses the future only. It is the
voice of earnest, emphatic, dehortation and entreaty, not to do what
would displease God, and what, if done, would be punished. He dehorts
them from malicious rejoicing at their brother's fall, first in look,
then in word, then in act, in covetous participation of the spoil, and
lastly in murder. Malicious gazing on human calamity, forgetful of man's
common origin and common liability to ill, is the worst form of human
hate. It was one of the contumelies of the Cross, "they gaze, they look"
with joy "upon Me." [Psa 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#017). The
rejoicing over them was doubtless, as among savages, accompanied with
grimaces (as in [Psa 35:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#019); [Psa
38:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#016)). Then follow words of insult.
The enlarging of the mouth is uttering a tide of large words, here
against the people of God; in Ezekiel, against Himself [Eze
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#013) : "Thus with your mouth ye have
enlarged against Me and have multiplied your words against Me. I have
heard."

Thereon, follows Edom's coming yet closer, "entering the gate of God's
people" to share the conqueror's triumphant gaze on his calamity. Then,
the violent, busy, laying the hands on the spoil, while others of them
stood in cold blood, taking the "fork" where the ways parted, in order
to intercept the fugitives before they were dispersed, or to shut them
up with the enemy, driving them back on their pursuers. The prophet
beholds the whole course of sin and persecution, and warns them against
it, in the order, in which, if committed, they would commit it. Who
would keep clear from the worst, must stop at the beginning. Still God's
warnings accompany him step by step. At each step, some might stop. The
warning, although thrown away on the most part, might arrest the few. At
the worst, when the guilt had been contracted and the punishment had
ensued, it was a warning for their posterity and for all thereafter.

Some of these things Edom certainly did, as the Psalmist prays [Psa
137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007), "Remember, O Lord, to the
children of Edom the day of Jerusalem, who said, Lay bare, lay bare,
even to the foundation in her." And Ezekiel [Eze
35:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#005) alluding to this language of
Obadiah , "because thou hast had a perpetual hatred, and hast shed the
blood of the children of Israel by the force of the sword in the time of
their calamity, in the time that their iniquity had an end, therefore,
as I live, saith the Lord God, I will prepare thee unto blood, and blood
shall pursue thee; sith thou hast not hated blood, even blood shall
pursue thee." Violence, bloodshed, unrelenting, deadly hatred against
the whole people, a longing for their extermination, had been inveterate
characteristics of Esau. Joel and Amos had already denounced God's
judgments against them for two forms of this hatred, the murder of
settlers in their own land or of those who were sold to them [Joe
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#019); [Amo
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#006), [Amo
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#009), [Amo
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#011).

Obadiah warns them against yet a third, intercepting their fugitives in
their escape from the more powerful enemy. "Stand not in the crossway."
Whoso puts himself in the situation to commit an old sin, does, in fact,
will to renew it, and will, unless hindered from without, certainly do
it. Probably he will, through sin's inherent power of growth, do worse.
Having anew tasted blood, Ezekiel says, that they sought to displace
God's people and remove God Himself [Eze
35:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#010). "Because thou hast said,
these two nations and these two countries shall be mine, and we will
possess it, whereas the Lord was there, therefore, as I live, saith the
Lord God, I will even do according to thine anger, and according to
thine envy, which thou hast used out of thy hatred against them."

[Obadiah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">oba 1:15</span></span>

For the day of the Lord is near upon all the pagan - The prophet once
more enforces his warning by preaching judgment to come. "The day of the
Lord" was already known [Joe 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#015);
[Joe 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001), [Joe
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#031), as a day of judgment upon "all
nations," in which God would "judge all the pagan," especially for their
outrages against His people. Edom might hope to escape, were it alone
threatened. The prophet announces one great law of God's retribution,
one rule of His righteous judgment. "As thou hast done, it shall be done
unto thee." Pagan justice owned this to be just, and placed it in the
mouth of their ideal of justice. "Blessed he," says the Psalmist [Psa
137:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#008), "that recompenses unto thee the
deed which thou didst to us." "Blessed," because he was the instrument
of God. Having laid down the rule of God's' judgment, he resumes his
sentence to Edom, and speaks to all in him. In the day of Judahs
calamity Edom made itself as "one of them." It, Jacob's brother, had
ranked itself among the enemies of God's people. It then too should be
swept away in one universal destruction. It takes its place with them,
undistinguished in its doom as in its guilt, or it stands out as their
representa tive, having the greater guilt, because it had the greater
light. Obadiah, in adopting Joel's words [Joe
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#007), "thy reward shall return upon
thine own head," pronounces therewith on Edom all those terrible
judgments contained in the sentence of retribution as they had been
expanded by Joel.

[Obadiah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">oba 1:16</span></span>

For as ye have drunk - Revelry always followed pagan victory; often,
desecration. The Romans bore in triumph the vessels of the second
temple, Nebuchadnezzar carried away the sacred vessels of the first.
Edom, in its hatred of God's people, doubtless regarded the destruction
of Jerusalem, as a victory of polytheism (the gods of the Babylonians,
and their own god Coze), over God, as Hyrcanus, in his turn, required
them, when conquered, to be circumcised. God's "holy mountain is the
hill of Zion," including mount Moriah on which the temple stood. This
they desecrated by idolatrous revelry, as, in contrast, it is said that,
when the pagan enemy had been destroyed, "mount Zion" should "be
holiness" [Oba 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017). Brutal,
unfeeling, excess had been one of the sins on which Joel had declared
God's sentence [Joe 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#003), "they cast
lots on My people; they sold a girl for wine, that they might drink."

Pagan tempers remain the same; under like circumstances, they repeat the
same circle of sins, ambition, jealousy, cruelty, bloodshed, and, when
their work is done, excess, ribaldry, profaneness. The completion of sin
is the commencement of punishment. "As ye," he says, pagan yourselves
and "as one of" the pagan "have drunk" in profane revelry, on the day of
your brother's calamity, "upon My holy mountain," defiling it, "so shall
all the pagan drink" continually. But what draught? a draught which
shall never cease, "continually; yea, they shall drink on, and shall
swallow down," a full, large, maddening draught, whereby they shall reel
and perish, "and they shall be as though they had never been" . "For
whoso cleaveth not to Him Who saith, I AM, is not." The two cups of
excess and of God's wrath are not altogether distinct. They are joined,
as cause and effect, as beginning and end.

Whoso drinketh the draught of sinful pleasure, whether excess or other,
drinketh there with the cup of God's anger, consuming him. It is said of
the Babylon of the world, in words very like to these [Rev
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003), [Rev
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#006); "All nations have drank of the
wine of her fornications - reward her as she has rewarded you; in the
cup which she hath filled, fill to her double." "All nations" are in the
first instance, all who had been leagued against God's people; but the
wide term, "all nations," comprehends all, who, in thee, become like
them. It is a rule of God's justice for all times. At each and at all
times, God requites them to the uttermost. The continuous drinking is
filfilled in each. Each drinketh the cup of God's anger, until death and
in death. God employs each nation in turn to give that cup to the other.
So Edom drank it at the hand of Babylon, and Babylon from the Medes, and
the Medes find Persians from the Macedonians, and the Macedonians from
the Romans, and they from the Barbarians. But each in turn drank
continuously, until it became as though it had never been. To swallow
up, and be swallowed up in turn, is the world's history.

The details of the first stage of the excision of Edom are not given.
Jeremiah distinctly says that Edom should be subjected to Nebuchadnezzar
[Jer 27:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#002), [Jer
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#006). "Thus saith the Lord; make thee
bonds and yokes, and put them upon thy neck, and send them to the king
of Edom, and to the king of Moab, and to the king of the Ammonites, and
to the king of Tyrus, and to the king of Zidon, by the hands of the
messengers which come to Jerusalem unto Zedekiah king of Judah, and
command them to say to their masters - I have given all these lands into
the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, My servant." Holy Scripture
gives us both prophecy and history; but God is at no pains to clear,
either the likelihood of His history, or the fulfillment of His
prophecies. The sending of messengers from these petty kings to Zedekiah
looks as if there had been, at that time, a plan to free themselves
jointly, probably by aid of Egypt, from the tribute to Nebuchadnezzar.
It may be that Nebuchadnezzar knew of this league, and punished it
afterward.

Of these six kings, we know that he subdued Zedekiah, the kings of Tyre,
Moab and Ammon. Zion doubtless submitted to him, as it had aforetime to
Shalmaneser . But since Nebuchadnezzar certainly punished four out of
these six kings, it is probable that they were punished for some common
cause, in which Edom also was implicated. In any case, we know that Edom
was desolated at that time. Malachi, after the captivity, when
upbraiding Israel for his unthankfulness to God, bears witness that Edom
had been made utterly desolate [Mal
1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002). "I have loved Jacob, and Esau I
have hated, and laid his mountains and his heritage waste for the
jackals of the wilderness." The occasion of this desolation was
doubtless the march of Nebuchadnezzar against Egypt, when, Josephus
relates, he subdued Moab and Ammon (Josephus, Ant. x. 9, 7). Edom lay in
his way from Moab to Egypt. It is probable, anyhow, that he then found
occasion (if he had it not) against the petty state, whose submission
was needed to give him free passage between the Dead Sea and the Gulf of
Akaba, the important access which Edom had refused to Israel, as he came
out of Egypt. There Edom was "sent forth to its borders," i. e., misled
to abandon its strong fastnesses, and so, falling into the hands of
Nebuchadnezzar, it met with the usual lot of the conquered, plunder,
death, captivity.

Malachi does not verbally allude to the prophecy of Obadiah, for his
office related to the restored people of God, not to Edom. But whereas
Obadiah had prophesied the slaughter of Edom and the searching out of
his treasures, Malachi appeals to all the Jews, their immediate
neighbors, that, whereas Jacob was in great degree restored through the
love of God, Edom lay under His enduring displeasure; his mountains
were, and were to continue to be [Mal
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#004), a waste; he was "impoverished;"
his places were desolate. Malachi, prophesying toward (See the
introduction to Malachi) 415 b.c., foretold a further desolation. A
century later, we find the Nabathaeans in tranquil and established
possession of Petra, having there deposited the wealth of their
merchandise, attending fairs at a distance, avenging themselves on the
General of Antigonus, who took advantage of their absence to surprise
their retreat, holding their own against the conqueror of Ptolemy who
had recovered Syria and Palestine; in possession of all the mountains
around them, from where, when Antigonus, despairing of violence, tried
by falsehood to lull them into security, they transmitted to Petra by
fiery beacons the tidings of the approach of his army .

How they came to replace Edom, we know not. They were of a race, wholly
distinct; active friends of the Maccabees (See 1 Macc. 5:24-27; 9:35.
Josephus, Ant. xii. 8, 3; xiii. 1. 2. Aretas of Petra aided the Romans
3, b.c. against Jews and Idumaeans. Ant. xvii. 10. 9), while the
Idumaeans were their deadly enemies. Strabo relates , that the Edomites
"were expelled from the country of the Nabathaeans in a sedition, and so
joined themselves to the Jews and shared their customs." Since the
alleged incorporation among the Jews is true, although at a later
period, so may also the expulsion by the Nabathaeans be, although not
the cause of their incorporation.

It would be another instance of requital by God, that "the men" of their
"confederacy brought" them "to" their "border, the men of" their "peace
prevailed against" them." A mass of very varied evidence establishes as
an historical certainty, that the Nabathaeans were of Aramaic contends
that the Nabathaeans of Petra were Arabs, on the following grounds:

\(1\) The statements of Diodorus (xix. 94), Strabo (xvi. 2. 34. Ibid. 4.
2 & 21), Josephus (Ant. i. 12, 4.), S. Jerome and some latter writers.

\(2\) The statement of Suidas (980 a.d.) that Dusares, an Arab idol, was
worshiped there.

\(3\) The Arabic name of Aretes, king of Petra.

are alleged; Arindela (if the same as this Ghurundel) 18 hours from
Petra (Porter, Handb. p. 58); Negla, (site unknown): Auara, a degree
North, (Ptol. in Reland, 463); Elji, close to Petra. But as to:

\(1\) Diodorus, who calls the Nabathaeans Arabs, says that they wrote
"Syriac;" Strabo calls the "Edomites" Nabathaeans, and the inhabitants
of Galilee, Jericho, Philadelphia and Samaria, "a mixed race of
Egyptians, Arabians, and Phoenicians" (Section 34). Also Diodorus speaks
of "Nabathaean Arabia" as a distinct country (xvii. 1. 21) Josephus, and
Jerome (Qu. in Gen. 25. 13) following him, include the whole country
from the Euphrates to Egypt, and so some whose language was Aramaic. As
to

\(2\) Dusares, though at first an Arab idol, was worshiped far and wide,
in Galatia, Bostra, even Italy (See coins in Eckhel, Tanini, in Zoega de
Obelisc. pp. 205-7, and Zoega himself, p. 205). As to:

\(3\) The kings named by Josephus, (see the list in Vincent's Commerce,
ii. 273-6) Arethas, Malchus, Obodas, may be equally Aramaic, and Obodas
has a more Aramaic sound. Anyhow, the Nabathaeans, if placed in Petra by
Nebuchadnezzar, were not conquerors, and may have received an Arab king
in the four centuries between Nebuchadnezzar and the first Aretas known
at Petra. What changes those settled in Samaria underwent! As to

\(4\) the names of places are not altered by a garrison in a capital.
Our English names were not changed even by the Norman conquest; nor
those of Samaria by the Assyrian. How many live on until now! Then of
the four names, norm occurs until after the Christian era. There is
nothing to connect them with the Nabathaeans. They may have been given
before or long after them.) not of Arabic, origin. They were inhabitants
of Southern Mesopotamia, and, according to the oldest evidence short of
Holy Scripture, were the earliest inhabitants, before the invasion of
the Chaldaeans. Their country, Irak, "extended lengthways from Mosul or
Nineveh to Aba dan, and in breadth from Cadesia to Hulvan." Syrian
writers claimed that their's was the primaeval language ; Muslim
writers, who deny this, admit that their language was Syriac. A learned
Syriac writer calls the three Chaldee names in Daniel, Shadrach,
Meshach, Abednego, Nabathaean. The surviving words of their language are
mostly Syriac. Muslim writers suppose them to be descended from Aram son
of Shem. Once they were a powerful nation, with a highly cultivated
language. One of their books, written before the destruction of Nineveh
and Babylon, itself mentions an ancient literature, specifically on
agriculture, medicine, botany, and, that favorite study of the
Chaldaeans, astrology, "the mysteries," star-worship and a very
extensive, elaborate, system of symbolic representation. But the
Chaldees conquered them; they were subjects of Nebuchadnezzar, and it is
in harmony with the later policy of the Eastern Monarchies, to suppose
that Nebuchadnezzar placed them in Petra, to hold in check the revolted
Idumaeans. 60 geographical miles from Petra. Anyhow, 312 b.c., Edom had
long been expelled from his native mountains. He was not there about 420
b.c., the age of Malachi. Probably then, after the expulsion foretold by
Obadiah, he never recovered his former possessions, but continued his
robber-life along the Southern borders of Judah, unchanged by God's
punishment, the same deadly enemy of Judah.

[Obadiah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">oba 1:17</span></span>

But (And) upon (in) Mount Zion, shall be deliverance, or, an escaped
remnant, and there (and it) shall be holiness - The sifting times of the
Church are the triumph of the world; the judgment of the world is the
restoration of the Church. In the triumph of the world, the lot was cast
on Jerusalem, her sons were carried captive and slain, her holy places
were desecrated. On the destruction of the nations, Mount Zion rises in
calm majesty, as before; "a remnant" is replaced there, after its
sifting; it is again "holiness;" not holy only, but a channel of
holiness; "and the house of Jacob shall possess their possessions
(literally inherit their inheritances)"; either their own former
possessions, receiving and "inheriting" from the enemy, what they had
lost; or the "inheritances" of the nations. For the whole world is the
inheritance of the Church, as Jesus said to the apostles, sons of Zion
[Mat 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019), "Go ye and teach all
nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father and of the Son and of
the Holy Spirit." and [Mar 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015), "Go
ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature." Holiness
is its title-deeds to the inheritance of the world, that holiness, which
was in the "upper chamber" in "Mount Zion," the presence of God the Holy
Spirit, issuing in holy teaching, holy Scriptures, holy institutions,
holy sacraments, holy lives.

[Obadiah 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">oba 1:18</span></span>

Having given, in summary, the restoration and expansion of Judah,
Obadiah, in more detail, first mentions a further chastisement of Edom,
quite distinct from the former. In the first, for which God summoned the
pagan, there is no mention of Judah, the desolation of whose holy City,
Jerusalem, for the time, and their own captivity is presupposed. In the
second, which follows on the restoration of its remnant, there is no
mention of pagan. Obadiah, whose mission was to Judah, gives to it the
name of the whole, "the house of Jacob." It alone had the true worship
of God, and His promises. Apart from it, there was no oneness with the
faith of the fathers, no foreshadowing sacrifice for sin. Does the
"house of Joseph" express the same in other words? or does it mean,
that, after that first destruction of Jerusalem, Ephraim should be again
united with Judah? Asaph unites, as one, "the sons of Jacob and Joseph"
[Psa 77:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#015), Israel and Joseph [Psa
80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001); Israel, Jacob, Joseph [Psa
81:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#004).

Zechariah [Zac 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#006) after the
captivity, speaks of "the house of Judah" and "the house of Joseph," as
together forming one whole. Amos, about this same time, twice speaks of
Ephraim [Amo 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#015); [Amo
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006) under the name of Joseph. And
although Asaph uses the name of Joseph, as Obadiah does, to designate
Israel, including Ephraim, it does not seem likely that it should be
used of Israel, excluding those whose special name it was. While then
Hosea and Amos foretold the entire destruction of the "kingdom" of
Israel, Obadiah foretells that some should be there, after the
destruction of Jerusalem also, united with them. And after the
destruction of Samaria, there did remain in Israel, of the poor people,
many who returned to the worship of God. Hezekiah invited Ephraim and
Manasseh to the Passover [Ch2 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#001)
from Beersheba to Dan [Ch2 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#005)
addressing them as "the remnant, that are escaped out of the hands of
the kings of Assyria" [Ch2 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#006).

The more part mocked [Ch2 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#010); yet,
"divers of Asher, Manasseh and Zabulon [Ch2
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#011) came from the first, and
afterward many of "Ephraim and Issachar" as well as "Manasseh and
Zabulon" [Ch2 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#018). Josiah destroyed
all the places of idolatry in Bethel [Kg2
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#015) and "the cities of Samaria" [Kg2
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#019), "of Manasseh and Ephraim and
Simeon even unto Naphtali" [Ch2 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#006),
"Manasseh, Ephraim, and all the remnant of Israel" gave money for the
repair of the temple, and this was "gathered" by "the Levites who kept
the doors" [Ch2 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#009). After the
renewal of the covenant to keep the law, "Josiah removed all the
abominations out of all the countries, that" pertained "to the children
of Israel and made all found in Israel to serve the Lord their God" [Ch2
34:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#033).

The pagan colonists were placed "by the king of Assyria in Samaria and
the cities thereof" [Kg2 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024),
probably to hold the people in the country in check. The remnant of "the
house of Joseph" dwelt in the open country and the villages.

And the house of Esau for stubble - At some time after the first
desolation by Nebuchadnezzar, Esau fulfilled the boast which Malachi
records, "we will return and build up the desolate places" [Mal
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#004). Probably during the oppression of
Judah by Antiochus Epiphanes, they possessed themselves of the South of
Judah, bordering on their own country, and of Hebron (1 Macc. 5:65), 22
miles from Jerusalem , where Judah had dwelt in the time of Nehemiah
[Neh 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#025). Judas Maccabaeus was
reduced to (1 Macc. 4:61) "fortify Bethzur," literally "house of the
rock," (20 miles only from Jerusalem) (Eusebius), "that the people might
have a defense against Idumaea." Maresha and Adoraim, 25 miles southwest
of Jerusalem, near the road to Gaza, were cities of Idumaea. (Josephus,
Ant. xiii. 15. 4.) The whole of Simeon was absorbed in it. (Josephus,
Ant. v. 1. 22.) Edom was still on the aggressive, when Judas Maccabaeus
smote them at Arrabatene. It was (1 Macc. 5:3) "because they beset
Israel round about," that "Judas fought against the children of Esau in
Idumea at Arrabatene and gave them a great overthow."

His second battle against them was in Judaea itself. He (1 Macc. 5:65.)
"fought against the children of Esau in the land toward the South, where
he smote Hebron and her daughters, and pulled down its fortress and
burned the towns thereof round about." About 20 years afterward, Simon
had again to recover Bethzur (1 Macc. 11:65, 66), and again to fortify
it, as still lying on the borders of Judah. (1 Macc. 14:33). Twenty
years later, John Hyrcanus, son of Simon, (1 Macc. 13:53). (Josephus,
Ant. xiii. 9, 1) "subdued all the Edomites, and permitted them to remain
in the country, on condition that they would receive circumcision, and
adopt the laws of the Jews." This they did, continues Josephus; "and
henceforth became Jews." Outwardly they appear to have given up their
idolatry. For although Josephus says , "the Edomites "account" (not,
accounted) Koze a god," he relates that, after this forced adoption of
Jewish customs, Herod made Costobar, of the sacerdotal family, prefect
of Idumaea and Gaza. Their character remained unchanged.

The Jewish historian, who knew them well, describes them as "a
tumultuous disorderly race, ever alive to commotions, delighting in
change, who went to engagements as to a feast" : "by nature most savage
for slaughter." 3, b.c. they took part in the sedition against the
Romans , using, as a pretext probably, the Feast of Pentecost, to which
they went up with those of Galilee, Jericho, the country beyond Jordan,
and "the Jews themselves." Just before the last siege of Jerusalem, the
Zealots sent for them, on pretext that the city was betrayed to the
Romans. "All took arms, as if in defense of their metropolis, and,
20,000 in number, went to Jerusalem" . After massacres, of which, when
told that they had been deceived, they themselves repented, they
returned; and were, in turn, wasted by Simon the Gerasene . Simon took
it. "He not only destroyed cities and villages, but wasted the whole
country. For as you may see wood wholly bared by locusts, so the army of
Simon left the country behind them, a desert. Some things they burnt,
others they razed."

After a short space, "he returned to the remnant of Edom, and, chasing
the people on all sides, constrained the many to flee to Jerusalem" .
There they took part against the Zealots , "were a great part of the
war" against the Romans, and perished , "rivals in phrensy" with the
worst Jews in the thee of that extreme, superhuman, wickedness.
Thenceforth, their name disappears from history. The "greater part" of
the remmant of the nation had perished in that dreadful exterminating
siege; if any still survived, they retained no known national existence.
Arabian tradition preserves the memory of three Jewish Arab tribes, none
of the Edomites.

[Obadiah 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">oba 1:19</span></span>

And they of the South shall possess the mount of Esau - The Church was
now hemmed in within Judah and Benjamin. They too were to go into
captivity. The prophet looks beyond the captivity and the return, and
tells how that original promise to Jacob [Gen
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#014) should be fulfilled; "Thy seed
shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt break North to the
West, and to the East, and to the North, and to the South; and in thee
and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed. Hosea
and Amos had, at this time, prophesied the final destruction of the
kingdom of Israel. Obadiah describes Judah, as expanded to its former
bounds including Edom and Philistia, and occupying the territory of the
ten tribes. "The South" , i. e., they of the "hot" and "dry" country to
the South of Judah bordering on Edom, "shall possess the mountains of
Esau," i. e., his mountain country, on which they bordered. And "the
plain," they on the West, in the great maritime plain, the "shephelah,"
should spread over the country of the Philistines, so that the sea
should be their boundary; and on the North, over the country of the ten
tribes, "the fields of Ephraim and the fields of Samaria." The territory
of "Benjamin" being thus included in Judah, to it is assigned the
country on the other side Jordan; "and Benjamin, Gilead."

[Obadiah 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">oba 1:20</span></span>

And the captivity of this host of the children of Israel - , (it must, I
believe, be rendered,) "which are among the Canaanites, as far as
Zarephath, and the captivity of Jerusalem which is in Sepharad, shall
possess the cities of the South." Obadiah had described how the two
tribes, whose were the promises to the house of David, should spread
abroad on all sides. Here he represents how Judah should, in its turn,
receive into its bosom those now carried away from them; so should all
again be one fold.

Zarephath - (probably "smelting-house," and so a place of slave-labor,
pronounced Sarepta in Luke) [Luk 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#026).
belonged to Sidon [Kg1 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#009), lying on
the sea about halfway between it and Tyre. . These were then, probably,
captives, placed by Tyrians for the time in safe keeping in the narrow
plain between Lebanon and the sea, intercepted by Tyre itself from their
home, and awaiting to be transported to a more distant slavery. These,
with those already sold to the Grecians and in slavery at Sardis, formed
one whole. They stand as representatives of all who, whatever their lot,
had been rent off from the Lord's land, and had been outwardly severed
from His heritage.

[Obadiah 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">oba 1:21</span></span>

And saviors shall ascend on Mount Zion - The body should not be without
its head; saviours there should be, and those, successively. The title
was familiar to them of old [Jdg 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#009),
[Jdg 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#015). "The children of Israel
cried unto the Lord, Who raised them up a savior, and he saved them. And
the Lord gave unto Israel a savior" [Kg2
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#005), in the time of Jehoahaz.
Nehemiah says to God, [Neh 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#027).
"According to Thy manifold mercies, Thou gavest them saviours, who
should save them from the hands of their enemies." So there should be
thereafter. Such were Judas Maccabeus and his brothers, and Hyrcanus,
Alexander, Aristobulus. They are said to "ascend" as to a place of
dignity, to "ascend on Mount Zion;" not to go up thither "ward," but to
dwell and abide "in" it, which aforetime was defiled, which now was to
be holy.

He ends, as he began, with Mount Zion, the "holy hill," where God was
pleased to dwell [Psa 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006); [Psa
68:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#016), to reveal Himself. In both, is
the judgment of Esau. Mount Zion stands over against Mount Esau, God's
holy mount against the mountains of human pride, the Church against the
world. And with this agrees the office assigned, which is almost more
than that of man. He began his prophecy of the deliverance of God's
people, "In Mount Zion shall be an escaped remnant;" he ends, "saviors
shall ascend on Mount Zion:" he began, "it shall be" holiness;" he
closes, "and the kingdom shall be the Lord's. To judge the mount of
Esau." Judges, appointed by God, judge His people; saviours, raised up
by God, deliver them. But once only does Ezekiel speak of man's judging
another nation, as the instrument of God [Eze
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#014). "I, the Lord, have spoken it -
and I will do it; I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will
I repent; according to thy ways and according to thy doings shall they
judge thee, saith the Lord God." But it is the prerogative of God. And
so, while the word "saviours" includes those who, before and afterward,
were the instruments of God in saving His Church and people, yet, all
saviours shadowed forth or back the one Saviour, who alone has the
office of Judge, in whose kingdom, and associated by Him with Him [Co1
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#002), "the saints shall judge the
world," as He said to His Apostles [Mat
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028), "ye which have followed Me, in
the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of His
glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes
of Israel." And the last words must at all times have recalled that
great prophecy of the Passion, and of its fruits in the conversion of
the Pagan, from which it is taken - Ps. 22.

The outward incorporation of Edom in Judah through Hyrcanus was but a
shadow of that inward union, when the kingdom of God was established
upon earth, and Edom was enfolded in the one kingdom of Christ, and its
cities, from where had issued the wasters and deadly foes of Judah,
became the sees of Christian Bishops. And in this way too Edom was but
the representative of others, aliens from and enemies to God, to whom
His kingdom came, in whom He reigns and will reign, glorified forever in
His saints, whom He has redeemed with His most precious Blood.

And the kingdom shall be the Lord's - Majestic, comprehensive simplicity
of prophecy! All time and eternity, the struggles of time and the rest
of eternity, are summed up in those three words ; Zion and Edom retire
from sight; both are comprehended in that one kingdom, and God is "all
in all" [Co1 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028). The strife is
ended; not that ancient strife only between the evil and the good, the
oppressor and the oppressed, the subduer and the subdued; but the whole
strife and disobedience of the creature toward the Creator, man against
his God. Outward prosperity had passed away, since David had said the
great words [Psa 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#028), "the kingdom
is the Lord's." Dark days had come. Obadiah saw on and beyond to darker
yet, but knits up all his prophecy in this; "the kingdom shall be the
Lord's." Daniel saw what Obadiah foresaw, the kingdom of Judah also
broken; yet, as a captive, he repeated the same to the then monarch of
the world [Jer 50:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#028), "the hammer of
the whole earth," which had broken in pieces the petty kingdom of Judah,
and carried captive its people ([Dan
2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044), add [Dan
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014), [Dan
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027)); "the God of heaven shall set up
a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed."

Zechariah saw the poor fragments which returned from the captivity and
their poor estate, yet said the same;" [Zac
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#009), "The Lord shall be king over all
the earth." All at once that kingdom came; the fishermen, the tax
gatherer and the tentmaker were its captains; the scourge, the claw,
thongs, rack, hooks, sword, fire, torture, the red-hot iron seat, the
cross, the wild-beast, not employed, but endured, were its arms; the
dungeon and the mine, its palaces; fiery words of truth, its [Psa
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#005), "sharp arrows in the hearts of
the King's enemies;" for One spake by them, whose word "is with power."
The strong sense of the Roman, the acuteness of the Greek, and the
simplicity of the Barbarian, cast away their unbelief or their
misbelief, and joined in the one song [Rev
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#006), "The Lord God Omnipotent
reigneth." The imposture of Mohammed, however awfully it rent off
countless numbers from the faith of Christ, still was forced to spread
the worship of the One God, who, when the prophets spake, seemed to be
the God of the Jews only.

Who could foretell such a kingdom, but He who alone could found it, who
alone has for these 18 centuries preserved, and now is anew enlarging
it, God Omnipotent and Omniscient, who waked the hearts which He had
made, to believe in Him and to love Him? Blessed peaceful kingdom even
here, in this valley of tears and of strife, where God rules the soul,
freeing it from the tyranny of the world and Satan and its own passions,
inspiring it to know Himself, the Highest Truth, and to love Him who is
love, and to adore Him who is infinite majesty! Blessed kingdom, in
which God reigns in us by grace, that He may bring us to His heavenly
kingdom, where is the manifest vision of Himself, and perfect love of
Him, blissful society, eternal fruition of Himself ; "where is supreme
and certain security, secure tranquility, tranquil security, joyous
happiness, happy eternity, eternal blessedness, blessed vision of God
forever, where is perfect love, fear none, eternal day and One Spirit in
all!"

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah Introduction](jon000)

</div>
