<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Peter Index](pe1)  
  [Previous](pe1001)  [Next](pe1003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Peter Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#001)

[1 Peter](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pe1 2:0</span></span>

This chapter may be divided into three parts:

I. An exhortation to those whom the apostle addressed, to lay aside all
malice, and all guile, and to receive the simple and plain instructions
of the word of God with the earnestness with which babies desire their
appropriate food, [Pe1 2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#001). Religion
reproduces the traits of character of children in those whom it
influences, and they ought to regard themselves as new-born babes, and
seek that kind of spiritual nutriment which is adapted to their
condition as such.

II\. The privileges which they had obtained by becoming Christians,
while so many others had stumbled at the very truths by which they had
been saved, [Pe1 2:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#004);

\(a\) They had come to the Saviour, as the living stone on which the
whole spiritual temple was founded, though others had rejected him; they
had become a holy priesthood; they had been admitted to the privilege of
offering true sacrifices, acceptable to God, [Pe1
2:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#004).

\(b\) To them Christ was precious as the chief cornerstone, on which all
their hopes rested, and on which the edifice that was to be reared was
safe, though that foundation of the Christian hope had been rejected and
disallowed by others, [Pe1 2:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#006).

\(c\) They were now a chosen people, an holy nation, appointed to show
forth on earth the praises of God, though formerly they were not
regarded as the people of God, and were not within the range of the
methods by which he was accustomed to show mercy, [Pe1
2:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009),

III\. Various duties growing out of these privileges, and out of the
various relations which they sustained in life, [Pe1
2:11-25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#011);

\(a\) The duty of living as strangers and pilgrims; of abstaining from
all those fleshly lusts which war against the soul; and of leading lives
of entire honesty in relation to the Gentiles, by whom they were
surrounded, [Pe1 2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#011).

\(b\) The duty of submitting to civil rulers, [Pe1
2:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013).

\(c\) The duty of servants to submit to their masters, though their
condition was a hard one in life, and they were often called to suffer
wrongfully, [Pe1 2:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#018).

\(d\) This duty was enforced on servants, and on all, from the example
of Christ, who was more wronged than any others can be, and who yet bore
all his sufferings with entire patience, leaving us an example that we
should follow in his steps, [Pe1
2:21-25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021).

[1 Peter 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe1 2:1</span></span>

Wherefore laying aside - On the word rendered laying aside, see [Rom
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#012); [Eph
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022), [Eph
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025); [Col
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#008). The allusion is to putting off
clothes; and the meaning is, that we are to cast off these things
entirely; that is, we are no longer to practice them. The word
"wherefore" (οὖν oun) refers to the reasonings in the first chapter. In
view of the considerations stated there, we should renounce all evil.

All malice - All "evil," (κακίαν kakian.) The word "malice" we commonly
apply now to a particular kind of evil, denoting extreme enmity of
heart, ill-will, a disposition to injure others without cause, from mere
personal gratification, or from a spirit of revenge - Webster. The Greek
word, however, includes evil of all kinds. See the notes at [Rom
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#029). Compare [Act
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#022), where it is rendered wickedness,
and [Co1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008); [Co1
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020); [Eph
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#031); [Col
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#008); [Tit
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#003).

And all guile - Deceit of all kinds. See the [Rom
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#029) note; [Co2
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#016) note; [Th1
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#003) note.

And hypocrisies - See the [Ti1 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#002),
note; [Mat 23:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#028); [Gal
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#013), on the word rendered
dissimulation. The word means, feigning to be what we are not; assuming
a false appearance of religion; cloaking a wicked purpose under the
appearance of piety.

And envies - Hatred of others on account of some excellency which they
have, or something which they possess which we do not. See the notes at
[Rom 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#029).

And all evil speaking - Greek: "speaking against others." This word
(καταλαλιὰ katalalia) occurs only here and in [Co2
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#020), where it is rendered
"backbitings." It would include all unkind or slanderous speaking
against others. This is by no means an uncommon fault in the world, and
it is one of the designs of religion to guard against it. Religion
teaches us to lay aside whatever guile, insincerity, and false
appearances we may have acquired, and to put on the simple honesty and
openness of children. We all acquire more or less of guile and
insincerity in the course of life. We learn to conceal our sentiments
and feelings, and almost unconsciously come to appear different from
what we really are. It is not so with children. In the child, every
emotion of the bosom appears as it is. "Nature there works well and
beautifully." Every emotion is expressed; every feeling of the heart is
developed; and in the cheeks, the open eye, the joyous or sad
countenance, we know all that there is in the bosom, as certainly as we
know all that there is in the rose by its color and its fragrance. Now,
it is one of the purposes of religion to bring us back to this state,
and to strip off all the subterfuges which we may have acquired in life;
and he in whom this effect is not accomplished has never been converted.
A man that is characteristically deceitful, cunning, and crafty, cannot
be a Christian. "Except ye be converted, and become as little children,
ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven," [Mat
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003).

[1 Peter 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pe1 2:2</span></span>

As new-born babes - The phrase used here would properly denote those
which were just born, and hence Christians who had just begun the
spiritual life. See the word explained in the notes at [Ti2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015). It is not uncommon, in the
Scriptures, to compare Christians with little children. See the notes at
[Mat 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003), for the reasons of this
comparison. Compare the [Co1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002) note;
[Heb 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012), [Heb
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#014) notes.

Desire the sincere milk of the word - The pure milk of the word. On the
meaning of the word "sincere," see the notes at [Eph
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#024). The Greek word here (ἄδολον
adolon) means, properly, that which is without guile or falsehood; then
unadulterated, pure, genuine. The Greek adjective rendered "of the
word," (λογικὸν logikon,) means properly rational, pertaining to reason,
or mind; and, in the connection here with milk, means that which is
adapted to sustain the soul. Compare the notes at [Rom
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001). There is no doubt that there is
allusion to the gospel in its purest and most simple form, as adapted to
be the nutriment of the new-born soul. Probably there are two ideas
here; one, that the proper aliment of piety is simple truth; the other,
that the truths which they were to desire were the more elementary
truths of the gospel, such as would be adapted to those who were babes
in knowledge.

That ye may grow thereby - As babes grow on their proper nutriment.
Piety in the heart is susceptible of growth, and is made to grow by its
proper aliment, as a plant or a child is, and will grow in proportion as
it has the proper kind of nutriment. From this verse we may see:

\(1\) the reason of the injunction of the Saviour to Peter, to "feed his
lambs," [Joh 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015); [Pe1
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#001). Young Christians strongly
resemble children, babies; and they need watchful care, and kind
attention, and appropriate aliment, as much as new-born infants do.
Piety receives its form much from its commencement and the character of
the whole Christian life will be determined in a great degree by the
views entertained at first, and the kind of instruction which is given
to those who are just entering on their Christian course. We may also
see,

\(2\) that it furnishes evidence of conversion, if we have a love for
the simple and pure truths of the gospel. It is evidence that we have
spiritual life, as really as the desire of appropriate nourishment is
evidence that an infant has natural life. The new-born soul loves the
truth. It is nourished by it. It perishes without it. The gospel is just
what it wants; and without that it could not live. We may also learn
from this verse,

\(3\) that the truths of the gospel which are best adapted to that
state, are those which are simple and plain. Compare [Heb
5:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012). It is not philosophy that is
needed then; it is not the profound and difficult doctrines of the
gospel; it is those elementary truths which lie at the foundation of all
religion, and which can be comprehended by children. Religion makes
everyone docile and humble as a child; and whatever may be the age at
which one is converted, or whatever attainments he may have made in
science, he relishes the same truths which are loved by the youngest and
most unlettered child that is brought into the kingdom of God.

[1 Peter 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pe1 2:3</span></span>

If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious - Or rather, as
Doddridge renders it, "Since you have tasted that the Lord is gracious."
The apostle did not mean to express any doubt on the subject, but to
state that, since they had had an experimental acquaintance with the
grace of God, they should desire to increase more and more in the
knowledge and love of him. On the use of the word "taste," see the notes
at [Heb 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004).

[1 Peter 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pe1 2:4</span></span>

To whom coming - To the Lord Jesus, for so the word "Lord" is to be
understood in [Pe1 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#003). Compare the
notes at [Act 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#024). The idea here is,
that they had come to him for salvation, while the great mass of people
rejected him. Others "disallowed" him, and turned away from him, but
they had seen that he was the one chosen or appointed of God, and had
come to him in order to be saved. Salvation is often represented as
corning to Christ. See [Mat 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028).

As unto a living stone - The allusion in this passage is to [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016), "Behold, I lay in Zion for a
foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious cornerstone, a sure
foundation: he that believeth shall not make haste." See the notes at
that passage. There may be also possibly an allusion to [Psa
118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022), "The stone which the builders
disallowed is become the headstone of the corner." The reference is to
Christ as the foundation on which the church is reared. He occupied the
same place in regard to the church which a foundation-stone does to the
edifice that is reared upon it. Compare [Mat
7:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024). See the [Rom
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033) note, and [Eph
2:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020) notes. The phrase "living
stone" is however unusual, and is not found, I think, except in this
place. There seems to be an incongruity in it, in attributing life to a
stone, yet the meaning is not difficult to be understood. The purpose
was not to speak of a temple, like that at Jerusalem, made up of gold
and costly stones; but of a temple made up of living materials - of
redeemed people - in which God now resides. In speaking of that, it was
natural to refer to the foundation on which the whole rested, and to
speak of that as corresponding to the whole edifice. It was all a living
temple - a temple composed of living materials - from the foundation to
the top. Compare the expression in [Joh
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#010), "He would have given thee living
water;" that is, water which would have imparted life to the soul. So
Christ imparts life to the whole spiritual temple that is reared on him
as a foundation.

Disallowed indeed of men - Rejected by them, first by the Jews, in
causing him to be put to death; and then by all people when he is
offered to them as their Saviour. See the notes at [Isa
53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003). [Psa
118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022); "Which the builders refused."
Compare the [Mat 21:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042) note; [Act
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#011) note.

But chosen of God - Selected by him as the suitable foundation on which
to rear his church.

And precious - Valuable. The universe had nothing more valuable on which
to rear the spiritual temple.

[1 Peter 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe1 2:5</span></span>

Ye also, as lively stones - Greek, "living stones." The word should have
been so rendered. The word lively with us now has a different meaning
from living, and denotes "active, quick, sprightly." The Greek word is
the same as that used in the previous verse, and rendered living. The
meaning is, that the materials of which the temple here referred to was
composed, were living materials throughout. The foundation is a living
foundation, and all the superstructure is compassed of living materials.
The purpose of the apostle here is to compare the church to a beautiful
temple - such as the temple in Jerusalem, and to show that it is
complete in all its parts, as that was. It has within itself what
corresponds with everything that was valuable in that. It is a beautiful
structure like that; and as in that there was a priesthood, and there
were real and acceptable sacrifices offered, so it is in the Christian
church.

The Jews prided themselves much on their temple. It was a most costly
and splendid edifice. It was the place where God was worshipped, and
where he was supposed to dwell. It had an imposing service, and there
was acceptable worship rendered there. As a new dispensation was
introduced; as the tendency of the Christian system was to draw off the
worshippers from that temple, and to teach them that God could be
worshipped as acceptably elsewhere as at Jerusalem, [Joh
4:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#021) as Christianity did not
inculcate the necessity of rearing splendid temples for the worship of
God; and as in fact the temple at Jerusalem was about to be destroyed
forever, it was important to show that in the Christian church there
might be found all that was truly beautiful and valuable in the temple
at Jerusalem; that it had what corresponded to what was in fact most
precious there, and that there was still a most magnificent and
beautiful temple on the earth.

Hence, the sacred writers labor to show that all was found in the church
that had made the temple at Jerusalem so glorious, and that the great
design contemplated by the erection of that splendid edifice - the
maintenance of the worship of God - was now accomplished in a more
glorious manner than even in the services of that house. For there was a
temple, made up of living materials, which was still the special
dwelling-place of God on the earth. In that I temple there was a holy
priesthood - for every Christian was a priest. In that temple there were
sacrifices offered, as acceptable to God as in the former - for they
were spiritual sacrifices, offered continually. These thoughts were
often dwelt upon by the apostle Paul, and are here illustrated by Peter,
evidently with the same design, to impart consolation to those who had
never been permitted to worship at the temple in Jerusalem, and to
comfort those Jews, now converted to Christianity, who saw that that
splendid and glorious edifice was about to be destroyed. The special
abode of God on the earth was now removed from that temple to the
Christian church. The first aspect in which this is illustrated here is,
that the temple of God was made up of "living stones;" that is, that the
materials were not inanimate stones but endued with life, and so much
more valuable than those employed in the temple at Jerusalem, as the
soul is more precious than any materials of stone. There were living
beings which composed that temple, constituting a more beautiful
structure, and a more appropriate dwelling-place for God, than any
edifice could be made of stone, however costly or valuable.

A spiritual house - A spiritual temple, not made of perishable
materials, like that at Jerusalem net composed of matter, as that was,
but made up of redeemed souls - a temple more appropriate to be the
residence of one who is a pure spirit. Compare the [Eph
2:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019) notes, and [Co1
6:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019) notes.

An holy priesthood - In the temple at Jerusalem, the priesthood
appointed to minister there, and to offer sacrifices, constituted an
essential part of the arrangement. It was important, therefore, to show
that this was not overlooked in the spiritual temple that God was
raising. Accordingly, the apostle says that this is amply provided for,
by constituting "the whole body of Christians" to be in fact a
priesthood. Everyone is engaged in offering acceptable sacrifice to God.
The business is not entrusted to a particular class to be known as
priests; there is not a particular portion to whom the name is to be
especially given; but every Christian is in fact a priest, and is
engaged in offering an acceptable sacrifice to God. See [Rom
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#006); "And hath made us: kings and
priests unto God." The Great High Priest in this service is the Lord
Jesus Christ, (see the Epistle to the Hebrews, passim) but besides him
there is no one who sustains this office, except as it is borne by all
the Christian members.

There are ministers, elders, pastors, evangelists in the church; but
there is no one who is a priest, except in the general sense that all
are priests - because the great sacrifice has been offered, and there is
no expiation now to be made. The name priest, therefore should never be
conferred on a minister of the gospel. It is never so given in the New
Testament, and there was a reason why it should not be. The proper idea
of a priest is one who offers sacrifice; but the ministers of the New
Testament have no sacrifices to offer - the one great and perfect
oblation for the sins of the world having been made by the Redeemer on
the cross. To him, and him alone, under the New Testament dispensation,
should the name priest be given, as it is uniformly in the New
Testament, except in the general sense in which it is given to all
Christians. In the Roman Catholic communion it is consistent to give the
name "priest" to a minister of the gospel, but it is wrong to do it.

It is consistent, because they claim that a true sacrifice of the body
and blood of Christ is offered in the mass. It is wrong, because that
doctrine is wholly contrary to the New Testament, and is derogatory to
the one perfect Oblation which has been once made for the sins of the
world, and in conferring upon just one class of people a degree of
importance and of power to which they have no claim, and which is so
liable to abuse. But in a Protestant church it is neither consistent nor
right to give the name "priest" to a minister of religion. The only
sense in which the term can now be used in the Christian church is a
sense in which it is applicable to all Christians alike - that they
"offer the sacrifice of prayer and praise."

To offer up spiritual sacrifices - Not bloody offerings, the blood of
lambs and bullocks, but those which are the offerings of the heart - the
sacrifices of prayer and praise. Since there is a priest, there is also
involved the notion of a sacrifice; but that which is offered is such as
all Christians offer to God, proceeding from the heart, and breathed
forth from the lips, and in a holy life. It is called sacrifice, not
because it makes an explation for sin, but because it is of the nature
of worship. Compare the notes at [Heb
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015); [Heb
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#014).

Acceptable to God by Jesus Christ - Compare the notes at [Rom
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001). Through the merits of the great
sacrifice made by the Redeemer on the cross. Our prayers and praises are
in themselves so imperfect, and proceed from such polluted lips and
hearts, that they can be acceptable only through him as our intercessor
before the throne of God. Compare the notes at [Heb
9:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024); [Heb
10:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#019).

[1 Peter 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pe1 2:6</span></span>

Wherefore also it is contained in the scripture - [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016). The quotation is substantially
as it is found in the Septuagint.

Behold, I lay in Sion - See the [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016) note, and [Rom
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033) note.

A chief cornerstone - The principal stone on which the corner of the
edifice rests. A stone is selected for this which is large and solid,
and, usually, one which is squared, and worked with care; and as such a
stone is commonly laid with solemn ceremonies, so, perhaps, in allusion
to this, it is here said by God that he would lay this stone at the
foundation. The solemnities attending this were those which accompanied
the great work of the Redeemer. See the word explained in the notes at
[Eph 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020).

Elect - Chosen of God, or selected for this purpose, [Pe1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#004).

And he that believeth on him shall not be confounded - Shall not be
ashamed. The Hebrew is, "shall not make haste." See it explained in the
notes at [Rom 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033).

[1 Peter 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pe1 2:7</span></span>

Unto you therefore which believe - Christians are often called simply
"believers," because faith in the Saviour is one of the prominent
characteristics by which they are distinguished from their fellow-men.
It sufficiently describes any man, to say that he is a believer in the
Lord Jesus.

He is precious - Margin, "an honor." That is, according to the margin,
it is an honor to believe on him, and should be so regarded. This is
true, but it is very doubtful whether this is the idea of Peter. The
Greek is ἡ τιμὴ hē timē; literally, "esteem, honor, respect, reverence;"
then "value or price." The noun is probably used in the place of the
adjective, in the sense of honorable, valued, precious; and it is not
incorrectly rendered in the text, "he is precious." The connection
demands this interpretation. The apostle was not showing that it was an
honor to believe on Christ, but was stating the estimate which was put
on him by those who believe, as contrasted with the view taken of him by
the world. The truth which is taught is, that while the Lord Jesus is
rejected by the great mass of people, he is regarded by all Christians
as of inestimable value:

I. Of the fact there can be no doubt. Somehow, Christians perceive a
value in him which is seen in nothing else. This is evinced:

\(a\) in their avowed estimate of him as their best friend;

\(b\) in their being willing so far to honor him as to commit to him the
keeping of their souls, resting the whole question of their salvation
upon him alone;

\(c\) in their readiness to keep his commands, and to serve him, while
the mass of people disobey him; and,

\(d\) in their being willing to die for him.

II\. The reasons why he is so precious to them are such as these:

\(1\) They are brought into a condition where they can appreciate his
worth. To see the value of food, we must be hungry; of clothing, we must
be exposed to the winter's blast; of home, we must be wanderers without
a dwelling-place; of medicine, we must be sick; of competence, we must
be poor. So, to see the value of the Saviour, we must see that we are
poor, helpless, dying sinners; that the soul is of inestimable worth;
that we have no merit of our own; and that unless someone interpose, we
must perish. Everyone who becomes a true Christian is brought to this
condition; and in this state he can appreciate the worth of the Saviour.
In this respect the condition of Christians is unlike that of the rest
of mankind - for they are in no better state to appreciate the worth of
the Saviour, than the man in health is to appreciate the value of the
healing art, or than he who has never had a want unsupplied, the
kindness of one who comes to us with an abundant supply of food.

\(2\) the Lord Jesus is in fact of more value to them than any other
benefactor. We have had benefactors who have done us good, but none who
have done us such good as he has. We have had parents, teachers, kind
friends, who have provided for us, taught us, relieved us; but all that
they have done for us is slight, compared with what he has done. The
fruit of their kindness, for the most part, pertains to the present
world; and they have not laid down their lives for us. What he has done
pertains to our welfare to all eternity; it is the fruit of the
sacrifice of his own life. How precious should the name and memory of
one be who has laid down his own life to save us!

\(3\) we owe all our hopes of heaven to him; and in proportion to the
value of such a hope, he is precious to us. We have no hope of salvation
but in him. Take that away - blot out the name and the work of the
Redeemer - and we see no way in which we could be saved; we have no
prospect of being saved. As our hope of heaven, therefore, is valuable
to us; as it supports us in trial; as it comforts us in the hour of
death, so is the Saviour precious: and the estimate which we form of him
is in proportion to the value of such a hope.

\(4\) there is an intrinsic value and excellency in the character of
Christ, apart from his relation to us, which makes him precious to those
who can appreciate his worth. In his character, abstractedly considered,
there was more to attract, to interest, to love, than in that of any
other one who ever lived in our world. There was more purity, more
benevolence, more that was great in trying circumstances, more that was
generous and self-denying, more that resembled God, than in any other
one who ever appeared on earth. In the moral firmament, the character of
Christ sustains a pre-eminence above all others who have lived, as great
as the glory of the sun is superior to the feeble lights, though so
numerous, which glimmer at midnight. With such views of him, it is not
to be wondered at that, however he may be estimated by the world, "to
them who believe, he is precious."

But unto them which be disobedient - Literally, "unwilling to be
persuaded," (ἀπειθὴς apeithēs) that is, those who refused to believe;
who were obstinate or contumacious, [Luk
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017); [Rom
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#030). The meaning is, that to them he
is made a stone against which they impinge, and ruin themselves. See the
notes at [Pe1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#008).

The stone which the builders disallowed - Which they rejected, or
refused to make a cornerstone. The allusion here, by the word
"builders," is primarily to the Jews, represented as raising a temple of
salvation, or building with reference to eternal life. They refused to
lay this stone, which God had appointed, as the foundation of their
hopes, but preferred some other foundation. See this passage explained
in the [Mat 21:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042) note; [Act
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#011) note; and [Rom
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033) note.

The same is made the head of the corner - That is, though it is rejected
by the mass of people, yet God has in fact made it the cornerstone on
which the whole spiritual temple rests, [Act
4:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#011). However people may regard it,
there is, in fact, no other hope of heaven than that which is founded on
the Lord Jesus. If people are not saved by him, he becomes to them a
stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence.

[1 Peter 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pe1 2:8</span></span>

And a stone of stumbling - A stone over which they, stumble, or against
which they impinge. The idea seems to be that of a cornerstone which
projects from the building, against which they dash themselves, and by
which they are made to fall. See the notes at [Mat
21:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#044). The rejection of the Saviour
becomes the means of their ruin. They refuse to build on him, and it is
as if one should run against a solid projecting cornerstone of a house,
that would certainly be the means of their destruction. Compare the
notes at [Luk 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034). An idea similar to
this occurs in [Mat 21:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#044); "Whosoever
shall fall on this stone shall be broken." The meaning is, that if this
foundation-stone is not the means of their salvation, it will be of
their ruin. It is not a matter of indifference whether they believe on
him or not - whether they accept or reject him. They cannot reject him
without the most fearful consequences to their souls.

And a rock of offence - This expresses substantially the same idea as
the phrase "stone of stumbling." The word rendered "offence," (σκάνδαλον
skandalon) means properly "a trap-stick - a crooked stick on which the
bait is fastened which the animal strikes against, and so springs the
trap," (Robinson, Lexicon) then "a trap, gin, snare"; and then "anything
which one strikes or stumbles against; a stumbling-block." It then
denotes "that which is the cause or occasion of ruin." This language
would be strictly applicable to the Jews, who rejected the Saviour on
account of his humble birth, and whose rejection of him was made the
occasion of the destruction of their temple, city, and nation. But it is
also applicable to all who reject him, from whatever cause; for their
rejection of him will be followed with ruin to their souls. It is a
crime for which God will judge them as certainly as he did the Jews who
disowned him and crucified him, for the offence is substantially the
same. What might have been, therefore, the means of their salvation, is
made the cause of their deeper condemnation.

Even to them which stumble at the word - To all who do this. That is,
they take the same kind of offence at the gospel which the Jews did at
the Saviour himself. It is substantially the same thing, and the
consequences must be the same. How does the conduct of the man who
rejects the Saviour now, differ from that of him who rejected him when
he was on the earth?

Being disobedient - [Pe1 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#007). The
reason why they reject him is, that they are not disposed to obey. They
are solemnly commanded to believe the gospel; and a refusal to do it,
therefore, is as really an act of disobedience as to break any other
command of God.

Whereunto they were appointed - (εἰς ὅ καὶ ἐτέθησαν eis ho kai
etethēsan.) The word "whereunto "means unto which. But unto what? It
cannot be supposed that it means that they were "appointed" to believe
on him and be saved by him; for:

\(1\) this would involve all the difficulty which is ever felt in the
doctrine of decrees or election; for it would then mean that he had
eternally designated them to be saved, which is the doctrine of
predestination; and,

\(2\) if this were the true interpretation, the consequence would follow
that God had been foiled in his plan - for the reference here is to
those who would not be saved, that is, to those who "stumble at that
stumblingstone," and are destroyed.

Calvin supposes that it means, "unto which rejection and destruction
they were designated in the purpose of God." So Bloomfield renders it,
"Unto which (disbelief) they were destined," (Critical Digest) meaning,
as he supposes, that "into this stumbling and disobedience they were
permitted by God to fall." Doddridge interprets it, "To which also they
were appointed by the righteous sentence of God, long before, even as
early as in his first purpose and decree he ordained his Son to be the
great foundation of his church." Rosenmuller gives substantially the
same interpretation. Clemens Romanus says it means that "they were
appointed, not that they should sin, but that, sinning, they should be
punished." See Wetstein. So Macknight. "To which punishment they were
appointed." Whitby gives the same interpretation of it, that because
they were disobedient, (referring, as he supposes, to the Jews who
rejected the Messiah) "they were appointed, for the punishment of that
disobedience, to fall and perish."

Dr. Clark supposes that it means that they were prophesied of that they
should thus fall; or that, long before, it was predicted that they
should thus stumble and fall. In reference to the meaning of this
difficult passage, it is proper to observe that there is in the Greek
verb necessarily the idea of designation, appointment, purpose. There
was some agency or intention by which they were put in that condition;
some act of placing or appointing, (the word τίθημι tithēmi meaning to
set, put, lay, lay down, appoint, constitute) by which this result was
brought about. The fair sense, therefore, and one from which we cannot
escape, is, that this did not happen by chance or accident, but that
there was a divine arrangement, appointment, or plan on the part of God
in reference to this result, and that the result was in conformity with
that. So it is said in [Jde 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#004), of a
similar class of people, "For there are certain men crept in unawares,
who were before of old ordained to this condemnation." The facts were
these:

\(1\) That God appointed his Son to be the cornerstone of his church.

\(2\) that there was a portion of the world which, from some cause,
would embrace him and be saved.

\(3\) that there was another portion who, it was certain, would not
embrace him.

\(4\) that it was known that the appointment of the Lord Jesus as a
Saviour would be the occasion of their rejecting him, and of their
deeper and more aggravated condemnation.

\(5\) that the arrangement was nevertheless made, with the understanding
that all this would be so, and because it was best on the whole that it
should be so, even though this consequence would follow. That is, it was
better that the arrangement should be made for the salvation of people
even with this result, that a part would sink into deeper condemnation,
than that no arrangement should be made to save any. The primary and
originating arrangement, therefore, did not contemplate them or their
destruction, but was made with reference to others, and notwithstanding
they would reject him, and would fall. The expression "whereunto" (εἰς ὅ
eis ho) refers to this plan, as involving, under the circumstances, the
result which actually followed. Their stumbling and falling was not a
matter of chance, or a result which was not contemplated, but entered
into the original arrangement; and the whole, therefore, might be said
to be in accordance with a wise plan and purpose. And,

\(6\) it might he said in this sense, and in this connection, that those
who would reject him were appointed to this stumbling and falling. It
was what was foreseen; what entered into the general arrangement; what
was involved in the purpose to save any. It was not a matter that was
unforeseen, that the consequence of giving a Saviour would result in the
condemnation of those who should crucify and reject him; but the whole
thing, as it actually occurred, entered into the divine arrangement. It
may be added, that as, in the facts in the case, nothing wrong has been
done by God, and no one has been deprived of any rights, or punished
more than he deserves, it was not wrong in him to make the arrangement.
It was better that the arrangement should be made as it is, even with
this consequence, than that none at all should be made for human
salvation. Compare the [Rom 9:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#015)
notes; [Joh 12:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#039) notes. This is
just a statement, in accordance with what everywhere occurs in the
Bible, that all things enter into the eternal plans of God; that nothing
happens by chance; that there is nothing that was not foreseen; and that
the plan is such as, on the whole, God saw to be best and wise, and
therefore adopted it. If there is nothing unjust and wrong in the actual
development of the plan, there was nothing in forming it. At the same
time, no man who disbelieves and rejects the gospel should take refuge
in this as an excuse. He was "appointed" to it no otherwise than as it
actually occurs; and as they know that they are voluntary in rejecting
him, they cannot lay the blame of this on the purposes of God. They are
not forced or compelled to do it; but it was seen that this consequence
would follow, and the plan was laid to send the Saviour notwithstanding.

[1 Peter 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pe1 2:9</span></span>

But ye are a chosen generation - In contradistinction from those who, by
their disobedience, had rejected the Saviour as the foundation of hope.
The people of God are often represented as his chosen or elected people.
See the notes at [Pe1 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002).

A royal priesthood - See the notes at [Pe1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005). The meaning of this is, probably,
that they "at once bore the dignity of kings, and the sanctity of
priests" - Doddridge. Compare [Rev
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006); "And hath made us kings and
priests unto God." See also [Isa 61:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#006);
"But ye shall be named priests of the Lord; men shall call ye ministers
of our God." It may be, however, that the word royal is used only to
denote the dignity of the priestly office which they sustained, or that
they constituted, as it were, an entire nation or kingdom of priests.
They were a kingdom over which he presided, and they were all priests;
so that it might be said they were a kingdom of priests - a kingdom in
which all the subjects were engaged in offering sacrifice to God. The
expression appears to be taken from [Exo
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006) - "And ye shall be unto me a
kingdom of priests" - and is such language as one who had been educated
as a Jew would be likely to employ to set forth the dignity of those
whom he regarded as the people of God.

An holy nation - This is also taken from [Exo
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006). The Hebrews were regarded as a
nation consecrated to God; and now that they were cast off or rejected
for their disobedience, the same language was properly applied to the
people whom God had chosen in their place - the Christian church.

A peculiar people - Compare the notes at [Tit
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#014). The margin here is purchased.
The word "peculiar," in its common acceptation now, would mean that they
were distinguished from others, or were singular. The reading in the
margin would mean that they had been bought or redeemed. Both these
things are so, but neither of them expresses the exact sense of the
original. The Greek λαὸς εἰς περιποίησιν laos eis peripoiēsin) means, "a
people for a possession;" that is, as pertaining to God. They are a
people which he has secured as a possession, or as his own; a people,
therefore, which belong to him, and to no other. In this sense they are
special as being His; and, being such, it may be inferred that they
should be special in the sense of being unlike others (unique) in their
manner of life. But that idea is not necessarily in the text. There
seems to be here also an allusion to [Exo
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005); "Ye shall be a peculiar treasure
with me (Septuagint λαὸς περιούσιος laos periousios) above all people."

That ye should show forth the praises of him - Margin, "virtues." The
Greek word (ἀρετὴ aretē) means properly "good quality, excellence" of
any kind. It means here the excellences of God - His goodness, His
wondrous deeds, or those things which make it proper to praise Him. This
shows one great object for which they were redeemed. It was that they
might proclaim the glory of God, and keep up the remembrance of His
wondrous deeds in the earth. This is to be done:

\(a\) by proper ascriptions of praise to him in public, family, and
social worship;

\(b\) by being always the avowed friends of God, ready ever to vindicate
His government and ways;

\(c\) by endeavoring to make known His excellences to all those who are
ignorant of Him; and,

\(d\) by such a life as shall constantly proclaim His praise - as the
sun, the moon, the stars, the hills, the streams, the flowers do,
showing what God does. The consistent life of a devoted Christian is a
constant setting forth of the praise of God, showing to all that the God
who has made him such is worthy to be loved.

Who hath called you out of darkness into his marvelous light - On the
word called, see the notes at [Eph
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001). Darkness is the emblem of
ignorance, sin, and misery, and refers here to their condition before
their conversion; light is the emblem of the opposite, and is a
beautiful representation of the state of those who are brought to the
knowledge of the gospel. See the notes at [Act
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#018). The word marvelous means
wonderful; and the idea is, that the light of the gospel was such as was
unusual, or not to be found elsewhere, as that excites wonder or
surprise which we are not accustomed to see. The primary reference here
is, undoubtedly, to those who had been pagans, and to the great change
which had been produced by their having been brought to the knowledge of
the truth as revealed in the gospel; and, in regard to this, no one can
doubt that the one state deserved to be characterized as darkness, and
the other as light. The contrast was as great as that between midnight
and noonday. But what is here said is substantially correct of all who
are converted, and is often as strikingly true of those who have been
brought up in Christian lands, as of those who have lived among the
pagans. The change in conversion is often so great and so rapid, the
views and feelings are so different before and after conversion, that it
seems like a sudden transition from midnight to noon. In all cases,
also, of true conversion, though the change may not be so striking, or
apparently so sudden, there is a change of which this may be regarded as
substantially an accurate description. In many cases the convert can
adopt this language in all its fulness, as descriptive of his own
conversion; in all cases of genuine conversion it is true that each one
can say that he has been called from a state in which his mind was dark
to one in which it is comparatively clear.

[1 Peter 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe1 2:10</span></span>

Which in time past were not a people - That is, who formerly were not
regarded as the people of God. There is an allusion here to the passage
in [Hos 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023), "And I will have mercy
upon her that had not obtained mercy; and I will say to them which were
not my people, Thou art my people; and they shall say, Thou art my God."
It is, however, a mere allusion, such as one makes who uses the language
of another to express his ideas, without meaning to say that both refer
to the same subject. In Hosea, the passage refers evidently to the
reception of one portion of the Israelites into favor after their
rejection; in Peter, it refers mainly to those who had been Gentiles,
and who had never been recognized as the people of God. The language of
the prophet would exactly express his idea, and he therefore uses it
without intending to say that this was its original application. See it
explained in the notes at [Rom 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025).
Compare the notes at [Eph 2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#011).

Which had not obtained mercy - That is, who had been living unpardoned,
having no knowledge of the way by which sinners might be forgiven, and
no evidence that your sins were forgiven. They were then in the
condition of the whole pagan world, and they had not then been
acquainted with the glorious method by which God forgives iniquity.

[1 Peter 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pe1 2:11</span></span>

Dearly beloved, I beseech you strangers and pilgrims - On the word
rendered "strangers," (παροίκους paroikous,) see the notes at [Eph
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019), where it is rendered
"foreigners." It means, properly, one dwelling near, neighboring; then a
by-dweller, a sojourner, one without the rights of citizenship, as
distinguished from a citizen; and it means here that Christians are not
properly citizens of this world, but that their citizenship is in
heaven, and that they are here mere sojourners. Compare the notes at
[Phi 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020), "For our conversation
(citizenship) is in heaven." On the word rendered "pilgrims,"
(παρεπιδήμους parepidēmous,) see the [Pe1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001) note; [Heb
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013) note. A pilgrim, properly, is
one who travels to a distance from his own country to visit a holy
place, or to pay his devotion to some holy object; then a traveler, a
wanderer. The meaning here is, that Christians have no permanent home on
earth; their citizenship is not here; they are mere sojourners, and they
are passing on to their eternal home in the heavens. They should,
therefore, act as become such persons; as sojourners and travelers do.
They should not:

\(a\) regard the earth as their home.

\(b\) They should not seek to acquire permanent possessions here, as if
they were to remain here, but should act as travelers do, who merely
seek a temporary lodging, without expecting permanently to reside in a
place.

\(c\) They should not allow any such attachments to be formed, or
arrangements to be made, as to impede their journey to their final home,
as pilgrims seek only a temporary lodging, and steadily pursue their
journey.

\(d\) Even while engaged here in the necessary callings of life - their
studies, their farming, their merchandise - their thoughts and
affections should be on other things. One in a strange land thinks much
of his country and home; a pilgrim, much of the land to which he goes;
and even while his time and attention may be necessarily occupied by the
arrangements needful for the journey, his thoughts and affections will
be far away.

\(e\) We should not encumber ourselves with much of this world's goods.
Many professed Christians get so many worldly things around them, that
it is impossible for them to make a journey to heaven. They burden
themselves as no traveler would, and they make no progress. A traveler
takes along as few things as possible; and a staff is often all that a
pilgrim has. We make the most rapid progress in our journey to our final
home when we are least encumbered with the things of this world.

Abstain from fleshly lusts - Such desires and passions as the carnal
appetites prompt to. See the notes at [Gal
5:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019). A sojourner in a land, or a
pilgrim, does not give himself up to the indulgence of sensual
appetites, or to the soft pleasures of the soul. All these would hinder
his progress, and turn him off from his great design. Compare [Rom
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004); [Gal
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#024); [Ti2
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#022); [Tit
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#012); [Pe1
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#014).

Which war against the soul - Compare the notes at [Rom
8:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#012). The meaning is, that
indulgence in these things makes war against the nobler faculties of the
soul; against the conscience, the understanding, the memory, the
judgment, the exercise of a pure imagination. Compare the notes at [Gal
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017). There is not a faculty of the
mind, however brilliant in itself, which will not be ultimately ruined
by indulgence in the carnal propensities of our nature. The effect of
intemperance on the noble faculties of the soul is well known; and alas,
there are too many instances in which the light of genius, in those
endowed with splendid gifts, at the bar, in the pulpit, and in the
senate, is extinguished by it, to need a particular description. But
there is one vice preeminently, which prevails all over the pagan world,
(Compare the notes at [Rom 1:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#027))
and extensively in Christian lands, which more than all others, blunts
the moral sense, pollutes the memory, defiles the imagination, hardens
the heart. and sends a withering influence through all the faculties of
the soul.

"The soul grows clotted by contagion,

Embodies, and embrutes, till she quite lose

The divine property of her first being."

Of this passion, Burns beautifully and truly said -

"But oh! it hardens a' within,

And petrifies the feeling."

From all these passions the Christian pilgrim is to abstain.

[1 Peter 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe1 2:12</span></span>

Having your conversation honest - Your conduct. See the notes at [Phi
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#027). That is, lead upright and
consistent lives. Compare the notes at [Phi
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008).

Among the Gentiles - The pagans by whom you are surrounded, and who will
certainly observe your conduct. See the notes at [Th1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#012), "That ye may walk honestly
toward them that are without." Compare [Rom
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013).

That, whereas they speak against you as evil doers - Margin, "wherein."
Greek ἐν ᾥ en hō - "in what;" either referring "to time," and meaning
that at the very time when they speak against you in this manner they
may be silenced by seeing your upright lives; or meaning "in respect to
which" - that is, that in respect to the very matters for which they
reproach you they may see by your meek and upright conduct that there is
really no ground for reproach. Wetstein adopts the former, but the
question which is meant is not very important. Bloomfield supposes it to
mean inasmuch, whereas. The sentiment is a correct one, whichever
interpretation is adopted. It should be true that at the very time when
the enemies of religion reproach us, they should see that we are
actuated by Christian principles, and that in the very matter for which
we are reproached we are conscientious and honest.

They may, by your good works, which they shall behold - Greek, "which
they shall closely or narrowly inspect." The meaning is, that upon a
close and narrow examination, they may see that you are actuated by
upright principles, and ultimately be disposed to do you justice. It is
to be remembered that the pagan were very little acquainted with the
nature of Christianity; and it is known that in the early ages they
charged on Christians the most abominable vices, and even accused them
of practices at which human nature revolts. The meaning of Peter is,
that while they charged these things on Christians, whether from
ignorance or malice, they ought so to live as that a more full
acquaintance with them, and a closer inspection of their conduct, would
disarm their prejudices, and show that their charges were entirely
unfounded. The truth taught here is, "that our conduct as Christians
should be such as to bear the strictest scrutiny; such that the closest
examination will lead our enemies to the conviction that we are upright
and honest." This may be done by every Christian this his religion
solemnly requires him to do.

Glorify God - Honor God; that is, that they may be convinced by your
conduct of the pure and holy nature of that religion which he has
revealed, and be led also to love and worship him. See the notes at [Mat
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016).

In the day of visitation - Many different opinions have been entertained
of the meaning of this phrase, some referring it to the day of judgment;
some to times of persecution; some to the destruction of Jerusalem; and
some to the time when the gospel was preached among the Gentiles, as a
period when God visited them with mercy. The word "visitation" (ἐπισκοπή
episkopē,) means the act of visiting or being visited for any purpose,
usually with the notion of inspecting conduct, of inflicting punishment,
or of conferring favors. Compare [Mat
25:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#036), [Mat
25:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#043); [Luk
1:68](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#068), [Luk
1:78](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#078); [Luk
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#016); [Luk
19:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#044), in the sense of visiting for
the purpose of punishing, the word is often used in the Septuagint for
the Hebrew פּקד paaqad, though there is no instance in which the word is
so used in the New Testament, unless it be in the verse before us. The
"visitation" here referred to is undoubtedly that of God; and the
reference is to some time when he would make a "visitation" to people
for some purpose, and when the fact that the Gentiles had narrowly
inspected the conduct of Christians would lead them to honor him.

The only question is, to what visitation of that kind the apostle
referred. The prevailing use of the word in the New Testament would seem
to lead us to suppose that the "visitation" referred to was designed to
confer favors rather than to inflict punishment, and indeed the word
seems to have somewhat of a technical character, and to have been
familiarly used by Christians to denote God's coming to people to bless
them; to pour out his Spirit upon them; to revive religion. This seems
to me to be its meaning here; and, if so, the sense is, that when God
appeared among people to accompany the preaching of the gospel with
saving power, the result of the observed conduct of Christians would be
to lead those around them to honor him by giving up their hearts to Him;
that is, their consistent lives would be the means of the revival and
extension of true religion. And is it not always so? Is not the pure and
holy walk of Christians an occasion of His bending His footsteps down to
earth to bless dying sinners, and to scatter spiritual blessings with a
liberal hand? Compare the notes at [Co1
14:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#024).

[1 Peter 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe1 2:13</span></span>

Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man - Greek, "to every creation
of man," (ἀνθρωπίνῃ κτίσει anthrōpinē ktisei The meaning is, to every
institution or appointment of man; to wit, of those who are in
authority, or who are appointed to administer government. The laws,
institutes, and appointments of such a government may be spoken of as
the creation of man; that is, as what man makes. Of course, what is here
said must be understood with the limitation everywhere implied, that
what is ordained by those in authority is not contrary to the law of
God. See the notes at [Act 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#019). On
the general duty here enjoined of subjection to civil authority, see the
notes at [Rom 13:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001).

For the Lord's sake - Because he has required it, and has entrusted this
power to civil rulers. See the notes at [Rom
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#005). Compare the notes at [Eph
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#007).

Whether it be to the king - It has been commonly supposed that there is
reference here to the Roman emperor, who might be called king, because
in him the supreme power resided. The common title of the Roman
sovereign was, as used by the Greek writers, ᾀυτοκράτωρ autokratōr, and
among the Romans themselves, "imperator," (emperor;) but the title king
was also given to the sovereign. [Joh
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#015), "we have no king but Cesar."
[Act 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#007), "and these all do contrary
to the decrees of Cesar, saying that there is another king, one Jesus."
Peter undoubtedly had particular reference to the Roman emperors, but he
uses a general term, which would be applicable to all in whom the
supreme power resided, and the injunction here would require submission
to such authority, by whatever name it might be called. The meaning is,
that we are to be subject to that authority whether exercised by the
sovereign in person, or by those who are appointed by him.

As supreme - Not supreme in the sense of being superior to God, or not
being subject to him, but in the sense of being over all subordinate
officers.

[1 Peter 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pe1 2:14</span></span>

Or unto governors - Subordinate officers, appointed by the chief
magistrate, over provinces. Perhaps Roman proconsuls are here
particularly intended.

As unto them that are sent by him - By the king, or the Roman emperor.
They represent the supreme power.

For the punishment of evil doers - One of the leading ends of
government. "The Roman governors had the power of life and death in such
conquered provinces as those mentioned in [Pe1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)" - Doddridge. Ulpian, the
celebrated Roman lawyer, who flourished two hundred years after Christ,
thus describes the power of the governors of the Roman provinces: "It is
the duty of a good and vigilant president to see to it that his province
be peaceable and quiet. And that he ought to make diligent search after
sacrilegious persons, robbers, man-stealers, and thieves, and to punish
everyone according to their guilt." Again, "They who govern whole
provinces, have the power of sending to the mines." And again," The
presidents of provinces have the highest authority, next to the
emperor." Peter has described the office of the Roman governors in
language nearly resembling that of Ulpian. See Lardner's Credibility,
(Works, i. 77, edit. 8vo., Lond. 1829)

And for the praise of them that do well - Praise here stands opposed to
punishment, and means commendation, applause, reward. That is, it is a
part of their business to reward in a suitable manner those who are
upright and virtuous as citizens. This would be by protecting their
persons and property; by defending their rights, and, perhaps, by
admitting those to share the honors and emoluments of office who showed
that they were worthy to be trusted. It is as important a part of the
functions of magistracy to protect the innocent, as it is to punish the
wicked.

[1 Peter 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pe1 2:15</span></span>

For so is the will of God - That is, it is in accordance with the divine
will that in this way you should put them to silence.

That with well doing - By a life of uprightness and benevolence.

Ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men - See the notes at
[Tit 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#008). The reference here is to men
who brought charges against Christians, by accusing them of being
inimical to the government, or insubordinate, or guilty of crimes. Such
charges, it is well known, were often brought against them by their
enemies in the early ages of Christianity. Peter says they were brought
by foolish men, perhaps using the word foolish in the sense of
evil-disposed, or wicked, as it is often used in the Bible. Yet, though
there might be malice at the bottom, the charges were really based on
ignorance. They were not thoroughly acquainted with the principles of
the Christian religion; and the way to meet those charges was to act in
every way as became good citizens, and so as "to live them down." One of
the best ways of meeting the accusations of our enemies is to lead a
life of strict integrity. It is not easy for the wicked to reply to this
argument.

[1 Peter 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pe1 2:16</span></span>

As free - That is, they were to consider themselves as freemen, as
having a right to liberty. The Jews boasted much of their freedom, and
regarded it as a birthright privilege that they were free, [Joh
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#033). They never willingly
acknowledged their subjection to any other power, but claimed it as an
elementary idea of their civil constitution that God only was their
Sovereign. They were indeed conquered by the Romans, and paid tribute,
but they did it because they were compelled to do it, and it was even a
question much debated among them whether they should do it or not [Mat
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#017). Josephus has often referred to
the fact that the Jews rebelled against the Romans under the plea that
they were a free people, and that they were subject only to God. This
idea of essential freedom the Jews had when they became Christians, and
everything in Christianity tended to inspire them with the love of
liberty.

They who were converted to the Christian faith, whether from among the
Jews or the Gentiles, were made to feel that they were the children of
God; that his law was the supreme rule of their lives; that in the
ultimate resort they were subject to him alone; that they were redeemed,
and that, therefore, the yoke of bondage could not be properly imposed
on them; that God "had made of one blood all nations of men, for to
dwell on all the face of the earth," [Act
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026); and that, therefore, they were
on a level before him. The meaning here is, that they were not to
consider themselves as slaves, or to act as slaves. In their subjection
to civil authority they were not to forget that they were freemen in the
highest sense, and that liberty was an invaluable blessing. They had
been made free by the Son of God, [Joh
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#032), [Joh
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#036). They were free from sin and
condemnation. They acknowledged Christ as their supreme Head, and the
whole spirit and tendency of his religion prompted to the exercise of
freedom.

They were not to submit to the chains of slavery; not to allow their
consciences to be bound, or their essential liberty to be interfered
with; nor in their subjection to the civil magistrate were they ever to
regard themselves otherwise than as freemen. As a matter of fact,
Christianity has always been the friend and promoter of liberty. Its
influence emancipated the slaves throughout the Roman Empire; and all
the civil freedom which we enjoy, and which there is in the world, can
be traced to the influence of the Christian religion. To spread the
gospel in its purity everywhere would be to break every yoke of
oppression and bondage, and to make people everywhere free. It is the
essential right of every man who is a Christian to be a freeman - to be
free to worship God; to read the Bible; to enjoy the avails of his own
labor; to train up his children in the way in which he shall deem best;
to form his own plans of life, and to pursue his own ends, provided only
that he does not interfere with the equal rights of others - and every
system which prevents this, whether it be that of civil government, of
ecclesiastical law, or of domestic slavery, is contrary to the religion
of the Saviour.

And not using your liberty for a cloke of maliciousness - Margin, as in
Greek, "having." Not making your freedom a mere pretext under which to
practice all kinds of evil. The word rendered "maliciousness" - κακία
kakia - means more than our word maliciousness does; for it denotes evil
of any kind, or all kinds. The word maliciousness refers rather to
enmity of heart, ill-will, an intention to injure. The apostle has
reference to an abuse of freedom, which has often occurred. The pretence
of these who have acted in this manner has been, that the freedom of the
gospel implied deliverance from all kinds of restraint; that they were
under no yoke, and bound by no laws; that, being the children of God,
they had a right to all kinds of enjoyment and indulgence; that even the
moral law ceased to bind them, and that they had a right to make the
most of liberty in all respects. Hence, they have given themselves up to
all sorts of sensual indulgence, claiming exemption from the restraints
of morality as well as of civil law, and sinking into the deepest abyss
of vice. Not a few have done this who have professed to be Christians;
and, occasionally, a fanatical sect now appears who make the freedom
which they say Christianity confers, a pretext for indulgence in the
most base and degrading vices. The apostles saw this tendency in human
nature, and in nothing are they more careful than to guard against this
abuse.

But as the servants of God - Not free from all restraint; not at liberty
to indulge in all things, but bound to serve God in the faithful
obedience of his laws. Thus bound to obey and serve him, they could not
be at liberty to indulge in those things which would be in violation of
his laws, and which would dishonor him. See this sentiment explained in
the notes at [Co1 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#022); [Co1
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#021).

[1 Peter 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe1 2:17</span></span>

Honor all men - That is, show them the respect which is due to them
according to their personal worth, and to the rank and office which they
sustain. See the notes at [Rom 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#007).

Love the brotherhood - The whole fraternity of Christians, regarded as a
band of brothers. The word used here occurs only in this place and in
[Pe1 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#009), where it is rendered
"brethren." The idea expressed here occurs often in the New Testament.
See the notes at [Joh 13:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034).

Fear God - A duty everywhere enjoined in the Bible, as one of the first
duties of religion. Compare [Lev
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#017); [Psa
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007); [Psa
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#014); [Pro
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007); [Pro
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#013); [Pro
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#010); [Pro
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#017); See the [Rom
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#018) note; [Co2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001) note. The word fear, when used to
express our duty to God, means that we are to reverence and honor him.
Religion, in one aspect, is described as the fear of God; in another, as
the love of God; in another, as submission to his will, etc. A holy
veneration or fear is always an elementary principle of religion. It is
the fear, not so much of punishment as of his disapprobation; not so
much the dread of suffering as the dread of doing wrong.

Honor the king - Referring here primarily to the Roman sovereign, but
implying that we are always to respect those who have the rule over us.
See the notes at [Rom 13:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001). The
doctrine taught in these verses [Rom
13:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013) is, that we are faithfully to
perform all the relative duties of life. There are duties which we owe
to ourselves, which are of importance in their place, and which we are
by no means at liberty to neglect. But we also owe duties to our
fellow-men, to our Christian brethren, and to those who have the rule
over us; and religion, while it is honored by our faithful performance
of our duty to ourselves, is more openly honored by our performance of
our duties to those to whom we sustain important relations in life. Many
of the duties which we owe to ourselves are, from the nature of the
case, hidden from public observation. All that pertains to the
examination of the heart; to our private devotions; to the subjugation
of our evil passions; to our individual communion with God, must be
concealed from public view. Not so, however, with those duties which
pertain to others. In respect to them, we are open to public view. The
eye of the world is upon us. The judgment of the world in regard to us
is made up from their observation of the manner in which we perform
them. If religion fails there, they judge that it fails altogether; and
however devout we may be in private, if it is not seen by the world that
our religion leads to the faithful performance of the duties which we
owe in the various relations of life, it will be regarded as of little
value.

[1 Peter 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pe1 2:18</span></span>

Servants, be subject to your masters - On the duty here enjoined, see
the notes at [Eph 6:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005). The Greek
word used here (οἰκέται oiketai) is not the same which is employed in
Ephesians, (δοῦλοι douloi.) The word here means properly "domestics" -
those employed about a house, or living in the same house - from οἶκος
oikos, "house." These persons might have been slaves, or might not. The
word would apply to them, whether they were hired, or whether they were
owned as slaves. The word should not and cannot be employed to prove
that slavery existed in the churches to which Peter wrote, and still
less to prove that he approved of slavery, or regarded it as a good
institution. The exhortation here would be, and still is, strictly
applicable to any persons employed as domestics, though they had
voluntarily hired themselves out to be such. It would be incumbent on
them, while they remained in that condition, to perform with fidelity
their duties as Christians, and to bear with Christian meekness all the
wrongs which they might suffer from those in whose service they were.

Those who are hired, and who are under a necessity of "going out to
service" for a living, are not always free from hard usage, for there
are trials incident to that condition of life which cannot be always
avoided. It might be better, in many cases, to bear much than to attempt
a change of situation, even though they were entirely at liberty to do
so. It must be admitted, however, that the exhortation here will have
more force if it is supposed that the reference is to slaves, and there
can be no doubt that many of this class were early converted to the
Christian faith. The word here rendered "masters" (δεσπόταις despotais)
is not the same which is used in [Eph
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005), (κυρίοις kuriois.) Neither of
these words necessarily implies that those who were under them were
slaves. The word used here is applicable to the head of a family,
whatever may be the condition of those under him. It is frequently
applied to God, and to Christ; and it cannot be maintained that those to
whom God sustains the relation of δεσπότης despotēs, or "master," are
"slaves." See [Luk 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#029); [Act
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#024); [Ti2
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#021); [Pe2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001); [Jde
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#004); [Rev
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#010). The word, indeed, is one that
might be applied to those who were owners of slaves. If that be the
meaning here, it is not said, however, that those to whom it is applied
were Christians. It is rather implied that they were pursuing such a
course as was inconsistent with real piety. Those who were under them
are represented as suffering grievous wrongs.

With all fear - That is, with all proper reverence and respect. See the
notes at [Eph 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005).

Not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward - The word
rendered "froward" (σκολιοῖς skoliois) means properly "crooked, bent;"
then perverse, wicked, unjust, peevish. Anyone who is a servant or
domestic is liable to be employed in the service of such a master; but
while the relation continues, the servant should perform his duty with
fidelity, whatever may be the character of the master. Slaves are
certainly liable to this; and even those who voluntarily engage as
servants to others, cannot always be sure that they will have kind
employers. Though the terms used here do not necessarily imply that
those to whom the apostle gave this direction were slaves, yet it may be
presumed that they probably were, since slavery abounded throughout the
Roman empire; but the directions will apply to all who are engaged in
the service of others, and are therefore of permanent value. Slavery
will, sooner or later, under the influence of the gospel, wholly cease
in the world, and instructions addressed to masters and slaves will have
no permanent value; but it will always be true that there will be those
employed as domestics, and it is the duty of all who are thus engaged to
evince true fidelity and a Christian spirit themselves, whatever may be
the character of their employers.

[1 Peter 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pe1 2:19</span></span>

For this is thank-worthy - Margin, "thank." Greek, "This is grace,"
(χάρις charis). Doddridge renders the expression, "This is graceful
indeed." Various interpretations of this expression have been proposed;
but the meaning evidently is, that it is acceptable to God, (see [Pe1
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#020), "this is acceptable to God" -
χάρις παρὰ Θεῷ charis para Theō;) that is, this will be regarded by him
with favor. It does not mean that it was worthy of thanks, or that God
would thank them for doing it, (compare [Luk
17:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#009);) but that such conduct would
meet with his approbation.

If a man for conscience toward God - If, in the conscientious discharge
of his duty, or if, in the endurance of this wrong, he regards himself
as serving God. That is, if he feels that God, by his providence, has
placed him in the circumstances in which he is, and that it is a duty
which he owes to him to bear every trial incident to that condition with
a submissive spirit. If he does this, he will evince the true nature of
religion, and will be graciously accepted of God.

Endure grief - That is, endure that which is suited to produce grief, or
that which is wrong.

Suffering wrongfully - Suffering injury, or where there is "injustice,"
(πάσχων ἀδίκως paschōn adikō̄s.) This, though a general remark, has
particular reference to servants, and to their duty in the relation
which they sustain to their masters. In view of what is here said, we
may remark:

\(1\) that if this has reference to slaves, as has been usually
supposed, it proves that they are very liable to be abused; that they
have little or no security against being wronged; and that it was a
special and very desirable characteristic of those who were in that
condition, to be able to bear wrong with a proper spirit. It is
impossible so to modify slavery that this shall not be the case; for the
whole system is one of oppression, and there can be nothing that shall
effectually secure the slave from being ill-treated.

\(2\) It would follow from this passage, if this refers to slavery, that
that is a very hard and undesirable condition of life; for that is a
very undesirable condition where the principal virtue. which they who
are in it are required to exercise, is "patience under wrongs." Such a
condition cannot be in accordance with the gospel, and cannot be
designed by God to be permanent. The relation of parent and child is
never thus represented. It is never said or implied in the Scriptures
that the principal virtue to which children are exhorted is patience
under wrongs; nor, in addressing them, is it ever supposed that the most
prominent thing in their condition is, that they would need the exercise
of such patience.

\(3\) it is acceptable to God, if we bear wrong with a proper spirit,
from whatever quarter it may come. Our proper business in life is, to do
the will of God; to evince the right spirit, however others may treat
us; and to show, even under excessive wrong, the sustaining power and
the excellence of true religion. Each one who is oppressed and wronged,
therefore, has an eminent opportunity to show a spirit which will honor
the gospel; and the slave and the martyr may do more to honor the gospel
than if they were both permitted to enjoy liberty and life undisturbed.

[1 Peter 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pe1 2:20</span></span>

For what glory is it - What honor or credit would it be.

If, when ye be buffeted for your faults - That is, if you are punished
when you deserve it. The word "buffet" (κολαφίζω kolaphizō) - means, to
strike with the fist; and then to strike in any way; to maltreat, [Mat
26:67](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#067); [Mar
14:65](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#065); [Co1
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#011); [Co2
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007). Perhaps there may be a reference
here to the manner in which servants were commonly treated, or the kind
of pun ishment to which they were exposed. They would be likely to be
struck in sudden anger, either by the hand, or by anything that was
accessible. The word rendered "for your faults," is sinning,
(ἁμαρτάνοντες hamartanontes.) That is, "if being guilty of an offence,
or having done wrong." The idea is, that if they were justly punished,
and should take it patiently, there would be no credit or honor in it.

Ye shall take it patiently - "If, even then, you evince an uncomplaining
spirit, and bear it with the utmost calmness and patience, it would be
regarded as comparatively no virtue, and as entitling you to no honor.
The feeling of all who saw it would be that you deserved it, and there
would be nothing to excite their sympathy or compassion. The patience
evinced might indeed be as great as in the other case, but there would
be the feeling that you deserved all that you received, and the spirit
evinced in that case could not be regarded as entitled to any particular
praise. If your masters are inflicting on you only what you deserve, it
would be in the highest degree shameful for you to rise up against them,
and resist them, for it would be only adding to the wrong which you had
already done." The expression here is, doubtless, to be understood
comparatively. The meaning is not that absolutely there would be no more
credit due to one who should bear his punishment patiently when he had
done wrong, than if he had met it with resistance and complaining; but
that there is very little credit in that compared with the patience
which an innocent person evinces, who, from regard to the will of God,
and by control over all the natural feelings of resentment, meekly
endures wrong.

This expresses the common feeling of our nature. We attribute no
particular credit to one who submits to a just punishment even with a
calm temper. We feel that it would be wrong in the highest degree for
him to do otherwise. So it is when calamities are brought on a man on
account of his sins. If it is seen to be the fruit of intemperance or
crime, we do not feel that there is any great virtue exhibited if he
bears it with a calm temper. But if he is overwhelmed with calamity when
it seems to have no particular connection with his sins, or to be a
punishment for any particular fault; if he suffers at the hand of man,
where there is manifest injustice done him, and yet evinces a calm,
submissive, and meek temper, we feel that in such cases there is eminent
virtue.

This is acceptable with God - Margin, as in [Pe1
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#019), "thank." It is that which is
agreeable to him, or with which he is pleased.

[1 Peter 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pe1 2:21</span></span>

For even hereunto were ye called - Such a spirit is required by the very
nature of your Christian vocation; you were called into the church in
order that you might evince it. See the notes at [Th1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#003).

Because Christ also suffered for us - Margin, "some read, for you." The
latest editions of the Greek Testament adopt the reading "for you." The
sense, however, is not essentially varied. The object is, to hold up the
example of Christ to those who were called to suffer, and to say to them
that they should bear their trials in the same spirit that he evinced in
his. See the notes at [Phi 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010).

Leaving us an example - The apostle does not say that this was the only
object for which Christ suffered, but that it was an object, and an
important one. The word rendered "example" (ὑπογραμμὸν hupogrammon)
occurs nowhere else in the New Testament. It means properly "a writing
copy," such as is set for children; or an outline or sketch for a
painter to fill up; and then, in general, an example, a pattern for
imitation.

That ye should follow his steps - That we should follow him, as if we
trod exactly along behind him, and should place our feet precisely where
his were. The meaning is, that there should be the closest imitation or
resemblance. The things in which we are to imitate him are specified in
the following verses.

[1 Peter 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pe1 2:22</span></span>

Who did no sin - Who was in all respects perfectly holy. There is an
allusion here to [Isa 53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009); and the
sense is, that he was entirely innocent, and that he suffered without
having committed any crime. In this connection the meaning is, that we
are to be careful that, if we suffer, it should be without committing
any crime. We should so live, as the Saviour did, as not to deserve to
be punished, and thus only shall we entirely follow his example. It is
as much our duty to live so as not to deserve the reproaches of others,
as it is to bear them with patience when we are called to suffer them.
The first thing in regard to hard treatment from others, is so to live
that there shall be no just occasion for it; the next is, if reproaches
come upon us when we have not deserved them, to bear them as the Saviour
did. If he suffered unjustly, we should esteem it to be no strange thing
that we should; if he bore the injuries done him with meekness, we
should learn that it is possible for us to do it also; and should learn
also that we have not the spirit of his religion unless we actually do
it. On the expression used here, compare the [Isa
53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009) note; [Heb
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026) note.

Neither was guile found in his mouth - There was no deceit, hypocrisy,
or insincerity. He was in all respects what he professed to be, and he
imposed on no one by any false and unfounded claim. All this has
reference to the time when the Saviour was put to death; and the sense
is, that though he was condemned as an impostor, yet that the charge was
wholly unfounded. As in his whole life before he was perfectly sincere,
so he was eminently on that solemn occasion.

[1 Peter 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pe1 2:23</span></span>

Who, when he was reviled, reviled not again - He did not use harsh and
opprobrious words in return for those which he received:

\(1\) He was reviled. He was accused of being a seditious man; spoken of
as a deceiver; charged with being in league with Beelzebub, the "prince
of the devils" and condemned as a blasphemer against God. This was done:

\(a\) by the great and the influential of the land;

\(b\) in the most public manner;

\(c\) with a design to alienate his friends from him;

\(d\) with most cutting and severe sarcasm and irony; and,

\(e\) in reference to everything that would most affect a man of
delicate and tender sensibility.

\(2\) he did not revile those who had reproached him. He asked that
justice might be done. He demanded that if he had spoken evil, they
should bear witness of the evil; but beyond that he did not go. He used
no harsh language. He showed no anger. He called for no revenge. He
prayed that they might robe forgiven. He calmly stood and bore it all,
for he came to endure all kinds of suffering in order that he might set
us an example, and make an atonement for our sins.

When he suffered, he threatened not - That is, when he suffered
injustice from others, in his trial and in his death, he did not
threaten punishment. He did not call down the wrath of heaven. He did
not even predict that they would be punished; he expressed no wish that
they should be.

But committed himself to him that judgeth righteously - Margin, his
cause. The sense is much the same. The meaning is, that he committed his
cause, his name, his interests, the whole case, to God. The meaning of
the phrase "that judgeth righteously" here is, that God would do him
exact justice. Though wronged by people, he felt assured that he would
do right. He would rescue his name from these reproaches; he would give
him the honor in the world which he deserved; and he would bring upon
those who had wronged him all that was necessary in order to show his
disapprobation of what they had done, and all that would be necessary to
give the highest support to the cause of virtue. Compare [Luk
23:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046). This is the example which is
set before us when we are wronged. The whole example embraces these
points:

\(1\) We should see to it that we ourselves are guiltless in the matter
for which we are reproached or accused. Before we fancy that we are
suffering as Christ did, we should be sure that our lives are such as
not to deserve reproach. We cannot indeed hope to be as pure in all
things as he was; but we may so live that if we are reproached and
reviled we may be certain that it is not for any wrong that we have done
to others, or that we do not deserve it from our fellow-men.

\(2\) When we are reproached and reviled, we should feel that we were
called to this by our profession; that it was one of the things which we
were taught to expect when we became Christians; that it is what the
prophets and apostles endured, and what the Master himself suffered in
an eminent degree; and that if we meet with the scorn of the great, the
frivilous, the rich, the powerful, it is no more than the Saviour did,
and no more than we have been taught to expect will be our portion. It
may be well, too, to remember our unworthiness; and to reflect, that
though we have done no wrong to the individual who reviles us yet that
we are sinners, and that such reproaches may not be a useless admonisher
of our being guilty before God. So David felt when reproached by Shimei:
"So let him curse, because the Lord hath said unto him, Curse David. Who
shall then say, Wherefore hast thou done so?" [Sa2
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#010).

\(3\) when this occurs, we should calmly and confidently commit our
cause to God. Our name, our character, our influence, our reputation,
while living and after we are dead, we should leave entirely with him.
We should not seek nor desire revenge. We should not call down the wrath
of God on our persecutors and slanderers. We should calmly feel that God
will give us the measure of reputation which we ought to have in the
world, and that he will suffer no ultimate injustice to be done us.
"Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust also in him, and he shall bring it
to pass; and he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and
thy judgment as the noon-day," [Psa
37:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#005). The Latin Vulgate has here,
"But he committed himself to him who judged him unjustly," judicanti se
injuste; that is, to Pontius Pilate, meaning that he left himself in his
hands, though he knew that the sentence was unjust. But there is no
authority for this in the Greek, and this is one of the instances in
which that version departs from the original.

[1 Peter 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pe1 2:24</span></span>

Who his own self - See the notes at [Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003), on the phrase "when he had by
himself purged our sins." The meaning is, that he did it in his own
proper person; he did not make expiation by offering a bloody victim,
but was himself the sacrifice.

Bare our sins - There is an allusion here undoubtedly to [Isa
53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004), [Isa
53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012). See the meaning of the phrase
"to bear sins" fully considered in the notes at those places. As this
cannot mean that Christ so took upon himself the sins of people as to
become himself a sinner, it must mean that he put himself in the place
of sinners, and bore that which those sins deserved; that is, that he
endured in his own person that which, if it had been inflicted on the
sinner himself, would have been a proper expression of the divine
displeasure against sin, or would have been a proper punishment for sin.
See the notes at [Co2 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021). He was
treated as if he had been a sinner, in order that we might be treated as
if we had not sinned; that is, as if we were righteous. There is no
other way in which we can conceive that one bears the sins of another.
They cannot be literally transferred to another; and all that can be
meant is, that he should take the consequences on himself, and suffer as
if he had committed the transgressions himself.

(See also the supplementary notes at [Co2
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021); Rom. 4; 5; and [Gal
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013), in which the subject of
imputation is discussed at large)

In his own body - This alludes undoubtedly to his sufferings. The
sufferings which he endured on the cross were such as if he had been
guilty; that is, he was treated as he would have been if he had been a
sinner. He was treated as a criminal; crucified as those most guilty
were; endured the same kind of physical pain that the guilty do who are
punished for their own sins; and passed through mental sorrows strongly
resembling - as much so as the case admitted of - what the guilty
themselves experience when they are left to distressing anguish of mind,
and are abandoned by God. The sufferings of the Saviour were in all
respects made as nearly like the sufferings of the most guilty, as the
sufferings of a perfectly innocent being could be.

On the tree - Margin, "to the tree" Greek, ἐπὶ τὸ ξύλον epi to xulon.
The meaning is rather, as in the text, that while himself on the cross,
he bore the sorrows which our sins deserved. It does not mean that he
conveyed our sorrows there, but that while there he suffered under the
intolerable burden, and was by that burden crushed in death. The phrase
"on the tree," literally "on the wood," means the cross. The same Greek
word is used in [Act 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#030); [Act
10:39](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#039); [Act
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#029); [Gal
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013), as applicable to the cross, in
all of which places it is rendered "tree."

That we, being dead to sins - In virtue of his having thus been
suspended on a cross; that is, his being put to death as an atoning
sacrifice was the means by which we become dead to sin, and live to God.
The phrase "being dead to sins" is, in the original, ταῖς ἁμαρτίαις
ἀπογενόμενοι tais hamartiais apogenomenoi - literally, "to be absent
from sins." The Greek word was probably used (by an euphemism) to denote
to die, that is, to be absent from the world. This is a milder and less
repulsive word than to say to die. It is not elsewhere used in the New
Testament. The meaning is, that we being effectually separated from sin
- that is, being so that it no longer influences us - should live unto
God. We are to be, in regard to sin, as if we were dead; and it is to
have no more influence over us than if we were in our graves. See the
notes at [Rom 6:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002). The means by
which this is brought about is the death of Christ (See the notes at
[Rom 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008)) for as he died literally on
the cross on account of our sins, the effect has been to lead us to see
the evil of transgression, and to lead new, and holy lives.

Should live unto righteousness - Though dead in respect to sin, yet we
have real life in another respect. We are made alive unto God to
righteousness, to true holiness. See the [Rom
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011) note; [Gal
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020) note.

By whose stripes - This is taken from [Isa
53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005). See it explained in the notes on
that verse. The word rendered "stripes" (μώλωπι mōlōpi) means, properly,
the livid and swollen mark of a blow; the mark designated by us when we
use the expression "black and blue." It is not properly a bloody wound,
but that made by pinching, beating, scourging. The idea seems to be that
the Saviour was scourged or whipped; and that the effect on us is the
same in producing spiritual healing, or in recovering us from our
faults, as if we had been scourged ourselves. By faith we see the
bruises inflicted on him, the black and blue spots made by beating; we
remember that they were on account of our sins, and not for his; and the
effect in reclaiming us is the same as if they had been inflicted on us.

Ye were healed - Sin is often spoken of as a disease, and redemption
from it as a restoration from a deadly malady. See this explained in the
notes at [Isa 53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005).

[1 Peter 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pe1 2:25</span></span>

For ye were as sheep going astray - Here also is an allusion to [Isa
53:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#006), "All we like sheep have gone
astray." See the notes at that verse. The figure is plain. We were like
a flock without a shepherd. We had wandered far away from the true fold,
and were following our own paths. We were without a protector, and were
exposed to every kind of danger. This aptly and forcibly expresses the
condition of the whole race before God recovers people by the plan of
salvation. A flock thus wandering without a shepherd, conductor, or
guide, is in a most pitiable condition; and so was man in his wanderings
before he was sought out and brought back to the true fold by the Great
Shepherd.

But are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls - To
Christ, who thus came to seek and save those who were lost. He is often
called a Shepherd. See the notes at John 10:1-16. The word rendered
"bishop," (ἐπίσκοπος episkopos,) means "overseer." It may be applied to
one who inspects or oversees anything, as public works, or the execution
of treaties; to anyone who is an inspector of wares offered for sale;
or, in general, to anyone who is a superintendent. It is applied in the
New Testament to those who are appointed to watch over the interests of
the church, and especially to the officers of the church. Here it is
applied to the Lord Jesus as the great Guardian and Superintendent of
his church; and the title of universal Bishop belongs to him alone!

Remarks On 1 Peter 2

In the conclusion of this chapter we may remark:

\(1\) That there is something very beautiful in the expression "Bishop
of souls." It implies that the soul is the special care of the Saviour;
that it is the object of his special interest; and that it is of great
value - so great that it is that which mainly deserves regard. He is the
Bishop of the soul in a sense quite distinct from any care which he
manifests for the body. That too, in the proper way, is the object of
his care; but that has no importance compared with the soul. Our care is
principally employed in respect to the body; the care of the Redeemer
has special reference to the soul.

\(2\) it follows that the welfare of the soul may be committed to him
with confidence. It is the object of his special guardianship, and he
will not be unfaithful to the trust reposed in him. There is nothing
more safe than the human soul is when it is committed in faith to the
keeping of the Son of God. Compare [Ti2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012).

\(3\) as, therefore, he has shown his regard for us in seeking us when
we were wandering and lost; as he came on the kind and benevolent errand
to find us and bring us back to himself, let us show our gratitude to
him by resolving to wander no more. As we regard our own safety and
happiness, let us commit ourselves to him as our great Shepherd, to
follow where he leads us, and to be ever under his pastoral inspection.
We had all wandered away. We had gone where there was no happiness and
no protector. We had no one to provide for us, to care for us, to pity
us. We were exposed to certain ruin. In that state he pitied us, sought
us out, brought us back. If we had remained where we were, or had gone
further in our wanderings, we should have gone certainly to destruction.
He has sought us out; be has led us back; he has taken us under his own
protection and guidance; and we shall be safe as long as we follow where
he leads, and no longer. To him then, a Shepherd who never forsakes his
flock, let us at all times commit ourselves, following where he leads,
feeling that under him our great interests are secure.

\(4\) we may learn from this chapter, indeed, as we may from every other
part of the New Testament, that in doing this we may be called to
suffer. We may be reproached and reviled as the great Shepherd himself
was. We may become the objects of public scorn on account of our devoted
attachment to him. We may suffer in name, in feeling, in property, in
our business, by our honest attachment to the principles of his gospel.
Many who are his followers may be in circumstances of poverty or
oppression. They may be held in bondage; they may be deprived of their
rights; they may feel that their lot in life is a hard one, and that the
world seems to have conspired against them to do them wrong; but let us
in all these circumstances look to Him "who made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and became obedient
unto death, even the death of the cross," [Phi
2:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007); and let us remember that it is
"enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the servant as
his lord," [Mat 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#025). In view of the
example of our Master, and of all the promises of support in the Bible,
let us bear with patience all the trials of life, whether arising from
poverty, an humble condition, or the reproaches of a wicked world. Our
trials will soon be ended; and soon, under the direction of the
"Shepherd and Bishop of souls," we shall be brought to a world where
trials and sorrows are unknown.

\(5\) in our trials here, let it be our main object so to live that our
sufferings shall not be on account of our own faults. See [Pe1
2:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#019). Our Saviour so lived. He was
persecuted, reviled, mocked, condemned to die. But it was for no fault
of his. In all his varied and prolonged sufferings, he had the
ever-abiding consciousness that he was innocent; he had the firm
conviction that it would yet be seen and confessed by all the world that
he was "holy, harmless, undefiled," [Pe1
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#023). His were not the sufferings
produced by a guilty conscience, or by the recollection that he had
wronged anyone. So, if we must suffer, let our trials come upon us. Be
it our first aim to have a conscience void of offence, to wrong no one,
to give no occasion for reproaches and revilings, to do our duty
faithfully to God and to people. Then, if trials come, we shall feel
that we suffer as our Master did; and then we may, as he did, commit our
cause "to him that judgeth righteously," assured that in due time "he
will bring forth our righteousness as the light, and our judgment as the
noon-day," [Psa 37:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#006).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Chapter 3](pe1003)

</div>
