<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Peter Index](pe2)  
  [Previous](pe2001)  [Next](pe2003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Peter Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001)

[2 Peter](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pe2 2:0</span></span>

The general subject of this chapter is stated in the first verse, and it
embraces these points:

\(1\) that it might be expected that there would be false teachers among
Christians, as there were false prophets in ancient times;

\(2\) that they would introduce destructive errors, leading many astray;
and,

\(3\) that they would be certainly punished. The design of the chapter
is to illustrate and defend these points.

I. That there would be such false teachers the apostle expressly states
in [Pe2 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001); and incidentally in that
verse, and elsewhere in the chapter, he notices some of their
characteristics, or some of the doctrines which they would hold.

\(a\) They would deny the Lord that bought them, [Pe2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001). See the notes at that verse.

\(b\) They would be influenced by covetousness, and their object in
their attempting to seduce others from the faith, and to induce them to
become followers of themselves, would be to make money, [Pe2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#003).

\(c\) They would be corrupt, beastly, and licentious in their conduct;
and it would be one design of their teaching to show that the indulgence
of gross passions was not inconsistent with religion; [Pe2
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#010), "that walk after the flesh, in
the lust of uncleanness;" [Pe2 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#012),
"as natural brute beasts;" "shall perish in their own corruption;" [Pe2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014), "having eyes full of adultery,
and that cannot cease from sin;" [Pe2
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#022), "the dog has returned to his own
vomit again."

\(d\) They would be proud, arrogant, and self-willed; men who would
despise all proper government, and who would be thoroughly radical in
their views; [Pe2 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#010), "and despise
government; presumptuous are they and self-willed, they are not afraid
to speak evil of dignities;" [Pe2
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#018), "they speak great swelling words
of vanity."

\(e\) They were persons who had been formerly of corrupt lives, but who
had become professing Christians. This is implied in [Pe2
2:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#020). They are spoken of as having
"escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ;" as "having known the ways of righteousness,"
but as having turned again to their former corrupt practices and lusts;
"it has happened to them according to the true proverb," etc. There were
various classes of persons in primitive times, coming under the general
appellation of the term "Gnostic," to whom this description would apply,
and it is probable that they had begun to broach their doctrines in the
times of the apostles. Among those persons were the Ebionites,
Corinthians, Nicolaitanes, etc.

II\. These false teachers would obtain followers, and their teachings
would be likely to allure many. This is intimated more than once in the
chapter: [Pe2 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#002), "and many shall
follow their pernicious ways;" [Pe2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#003), "and through covetousness shall
they with feigned words make merchandise of you;" [Pe2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014), "beguiling unstable souls."
Compare [Pe2 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#018).

III\. They would certainly be punished. A large part of the chapter is
taken up in proving this point, and especially in showing from the
examples of others who had erred in a similar manner, that they could
not escape destruction. In doing this, the apostle refers to the
following facts and illustrations:

\(1\) The case of the angels that sinned, and that were cast down to
hell, [Pe2 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#004). If God brought such
dreadful punishment on those who were once before his throne, wicked men
could have no hope of escape.

\(2\) the case of the wicked in the time of Noah, who were cut off by
the flood, [Pe2 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#005).

\(3\) the case of Sodom and Gomorrah, [Pe2
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#006).

\(4\) the "character" of the persons referred to was such that they
could have no hope of escape.

\(a\) They were corrupt, sensual, presumptuous, and self-willed, and
were even worse than the rebel angels had been - men that seemed to be
made to be taken and destroyed, [Pe2
2:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#010).

\(b\) They were spots and blemishes, sensual and adulterers, emulating
the example of Balaam, who was rebuked by even a dumb ass for his
iniquity, [Pe2 2:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#013).

\(c\) They allured others to sin under the specious promise of liberty,
while they were themselves the slaves of debased appetites, and gross
and sensual passions, [Pe2 2:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#017).

From the entire description in this chapter, it is clear that the
persons referred to, though once professors of religion, had become
eminently abandoned and corrupt. It may not, indeed, be easy to identify
them with any particular sect or class then existing and now known in
history, though not a few of the sects in the early Christian church
bore a strong resemblance to this description; but there have been those
in every age who have strongly resembled these persons; and this
chapter, therefore, possesses great value as containing important
warnings against the arts of false teachers, and the danger of being
seduced by them from the truth. Compare the introduction to the Epistle
of Jude, Sections 3 and 4.

[2 Peter 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe2 2:1</span></span>

But there were false prophets also among the people - In the previous
chapter, [Pe2 2:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#019), Peter had
appealed to the prophecies as containing unanswerable proofs of the
truth of the Christian religion. He says, however, that he did not mean
to say that all who claimed to be prophets were true messengers of God.
There were many who pretended to be such, who only led the people
astray. It is unnecessary to say, that such men have abounded in all
ages where there have been true prophets.

Even as there shall be false teachers among you - The fact that false
teachers would arise in the church is often adverted to in the New
Testament. Compare [Mat 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#005), [Mat
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024); [Act
20:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#029).

Who privily - That is, in a secret manner, or under plausible arts and
pretences. They would not at first make an open avowal of their
doctrines, but would, in fact, while their teachings seemed to be in
accordance with truth, covertly maintain opinions which would sap the
very foundations of religion. The Greek word here used, and which is
rendered "who privily shall bring in," (παρεισάγω pareisagō,) means
properly "to lead in by the side of others; to lead in along with
others." Nothing could better express the usual way in which error is
introduced. It is "by the side," or "along with," other doctrines which
are true; that is, while the mind is turned mainly to other subjects,
and is off its guard, gently and silently to lay down some principle,
which, being admitted, would lead to the error, or from which the error
would follow as a natural consequence. Those who inculcate error rarely
do it openly. If they would at once boldly "deny the Lord that bought
them," it would be easy to meet them, and the mass of professed
Christians would be in no danger of embracing the error. But when
principles are laid down which may lead to that; when doubts on remote
points are suggested which may involve it; or when a long train of
reasoning is pursued which may secretly tend to it; there is much more
probability that the mind will be corrupted from the truth.

Damnable heresies - αἱρέσεις ἀπωλείας haireseis apōleias. "Heresies of
destruction;" that is, heresies that will be followed by destruction.
The Greek word which is rendered "damnable," is the same which in the
close of the verse is rendered "destruction." It is so rendered also in
[Mat 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013); [Rom
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022); [Phi
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019); [Pe2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#016) - in all of which places it
refers to the future loss of the soul The same word also is rendered
"perdition" in [Joh 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012); [Phi
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#028); [Ti1
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#009); [Heb
10:39](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#039); [Pe2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#007); [Rev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008), [Rev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011) - in all which places it has the
same reference. On the meaning of the word rendered "heresies," see the
[Act 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#014) note; [Co1
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#019) note. The idea of "sect" or
"party" is that which is conveyed by this word, rather than doctrinal
errors; but it is evident that in this case the formation of the sect or
party, as is the fact in most cases, would be founded on error of
doctrine.

The thing which these false teachers would attempt would be divisions,
alienations, or parties, in the church, but these would be based on the
erroneous doctrines which they would promulgate. What would be the
particular doctrine in this case is immediately specified, to wit, that
they "would deny the Lord that bought them." The idea then is, that
these false teachers would form sects or parties in the church, of a
destructive or ruinous nature, founded on a denial of the Lord that
bought them. Such a formation of sects would be ruinous to piety, to
good morals, and to the soul. The authors of these sects, holding the
views which they did, and influenced by the motives which they would be,
and practicing the morals which they would practice, as growing out of
their principles, would bring upon themselves swift and certain
destruction. It is not possible now to determine to what particular
class of errorists the apostle had reference here, but it is generally
supposed that it was to some form of the Gnostic belief. There were many
early sects of so-called "heretics" to whom what he here says would be
applicable.

Even denying the Lord that bought them - This must mean that they held
doctrines which were in fact a denial of the Lord, or the tendency of
which would be a denial of the Lord, for it cannot be supposed that,
while they professed to be Christians, they would openly and avowedly
deny him. To "deny the Lord" may be either to deny his existence, his
claims, or his attributes; it is to withhold from him, in our belief and
profession, anything which is essential to a proper conception of him.
The particular thing, however, which is mentioned here as entering into
that self-denial, is something connected with the fact that he had
""bought"" them. It was such a denial of the Lord "as having bought
them," as to be in fact a renunciation of the uniqueness of the
Christian religion. There has been much difference of opinion as to the
meaning of the word "Lord" in this place - whether it refers to God the
Father. or to the Lord Jesus Christ. The Greek word is Δεσπότης
Despotēs. Many expositors have maintained that it refers to the Father,
and that when it is said that he had "bought" them, it means in a
general sense that he was the Author of the plan of redemption, and had
causeD them to be purchased or redeemed. Michaelis supposes that the
Gnostics are referred to as denying the Father by asserting that he was
not the Creator of the universe, maintaining that it was created by an
inferior being - Introduction to New Testament, iv. 360. Whitby, Benson,
Slade, and many others, maintain that this refers to the Father as
having originated the plan by which men are redeemed; and the same
opinion is held, of necessity, by those who deny the doctrine of general
atonement. The only arguments to show that it refers to God the Father
would be,

\(1\) that the word used here Δεσπότην Despotēn is not the usual term
(κύριος kurios) by which the Lord Jesus is designated in the New
Testament; and,

\(2\) that the admission that it refers to the Lord Jesus would lead
inevitably to the conclusion that some will perish for whom Christ died.

That it does, however, refer to the Lord Jesus, seems to me to be plain
from the following considerations:

\(1\) It is the obvious interpretation; that which would be given by the
great mass of Christians, and about which there could never have been
any hesitancy if it had not been supposed that it would lead to the
doctrine of general atonement. As to the alleged fact that the word
used, Δεσπότης Despotēs, is not that which is commonly applied to the
Lord Jesus, that may be admitted to be true, but still the word here may
be understood as applied to him. It properly means "a master" as opposed
to a servant; then it is used as denoting supreme authority, and is thus
applied to God, and may be in that sense to the Lord Jesus Christ, as
head over all things, or as having supreme authority over the church. It
occurs in the New Testament only in the following places: [Ti1
6:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#001); [Tit
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#009); [Pe1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#018), where it is rendered "masters;"
[Luk 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#029); [Act
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#024),; [Rev
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#010), where it is rendered "Lord," and
is applied to God; and in [Jde 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#004),
and in the passage before us, in both which places it is rendered
"Lord," and is probably to be regarded as applied to the Lord Jesus.
There is nothing in the proper signification of the word which would
forbid this.

\(2\) the phrase is one that is properly applicable to the Lord Jesus as
having "bought" us with his blood. The Greek word is ἀγοράζω agorazō - a
word which means properly "to market, to buy, to purchase," and then to
redeem, or acquire for oneself by a price paid, or by a ransom. It is
rendered "buy" or "bought" in the following places in the New Testament:
[Mat 13:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#044), [Mat
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#046); [Mat
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#015); [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012); [Mat
25:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#009); [Mat
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#007); [Mar
6:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#036); [Mar
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#015); [Mar
15:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#046); [Mar
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#001); [Luk
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#013); [Luk
14:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#018); [Luk
17:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#028); [Luk
19:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#045); [Luk
22:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#036); [Joh
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#008); [Joh
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#005); [Joh
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#029); [Co1
7:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#030); [Rev
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#018); [Rev
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#017); [Rev
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#011) - in all which places it is
applicable to ordinary transactions of "buying." In the following places
it is also rendered "bought," as applicable to the redeemed, as being
bought or purchased by the Lord Jesus: [Co1
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020); [Co1
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#023), "Ye are 'bought' with a price;"
and in the following places it is rendered "redeemed," [Rev
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009); [Rev
14:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#003). It does not elsewhere occur in
the New Testament. It is true that in a large sense this word might be
applied to the Father as having caused his people to be redeemed, or as
being the Author of the plan of redemption; but it is also true that the
word is more properly applicable to the Lord Jesus, and that, when used
with reference to redemption, it is uniformly given to him in the New
Testament. Compare the passages referred to above.

It is strictly and properly true only of the Son of God that he has
"bought" us. The Father indeed is represented as making the arrangement,
as giving his Son to die, and as the great Source of all the blessings
secured by redemption; but the "purchase" was actually made by the Son
of God by his sacrifice on the cross. Whatever there was of the nature
of "a price" was paid by him; and whatever obligations may grow out of
the fact that we are purchased or ransomed are due particularly to him;
[Co2 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#015). These considerations seem
to me to make it clear that Peter referred here to the Lord Jesus
Christ, and that he meant to say that the false teachers mentioned held
doctrines which were in fact a "denial" of that Saviour. He does not
specify particularly what constituted such a denial; but it is plain
that any doctrine which represented him, his person, or his work, as
essentially different from what was the truth, would amount to such a
denial.

If he were Divine, and that fact was denied, making him wholly a
different being; if he actually made an expiatory sacrifice by his
death, and that fact was denied, and he was held to be a mere religious
teacher, changing essentially the character of the work which he came to
perform; if he, in some proper sense, "bought" them with his blood, and
that fact was denied in such a way that according to their views it was
not strictly proper to speak of him as having bought them at all, which
would be the case if he were a mere prophet or religious teacher, then
it is clear that such a representation would be in fact a denial of his
true nature and work. That some of these views entered into their denial
of him is clear, for it was with reference to the fact that he had
bought them, or redeemed them, that they denied him.

And bring upon themselves swift destruction - The destruction here
referred to can be only that which will occur in the future world, for
there can be no evidence that Peter meant to say that this would destroy
their health, their property, or their lives. The Greek word (ἀπώλειαν
apōleian) is the same which is used in the former part of the verse, in
the phrase "damnable heresies." See the notes. In regard, then, to this
important passage, we may remark:

\(1\) that the apostle evidently believed that some would perish for
whom Christ died.

\(2\) if this is so, then the same truth may be expressed by saying that
he died for others besides those who will be saved that is, that the
atonement was not confined merely to the elect. This one passage,
therefore, demonstrates the doctrine of general atonement. This
conclusion would be drawn from it by the great mass of readers, and it
may be presumed, therefore, that this is the fair interpretation of the
passage.

(See the supplementary [Co2 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#014) note;
[Heb 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009) note for a general view of
the question regarding the extent of the atonement. On this text Scott
has well observed: "Doubtless Christ intended to redeem those, and those
only, who he foresaw would eventually be saved by faith in him; yet his
ransom was of infinite sufficiency, and people are continually addressed
according to their profession." Christ has indeed laid down such a price
as that all the human family may claim and find salvation in him. An
unhappy ambiguity of terms has made this controversy very much a war of
words. When the author here says, "Christ died for others besides those
who will be saved," he does not use the words in the common sense of an
actual design, on the part of Christ to save everyone. The reader will
see, by consulting the notes above referred to, how much disputing might
be saved by a careful definition of terms.)

\(3\) it follows that people may destroy themselves by a denial of the
great and vital "doctrines" of religion. It cannot be a harmless thing,
then, to hold erroneous opinions; nor can men be safe who deny the
fundamental doctrines of Christianity. It is truth, not error, that
saves the soul; and an erroneous opinion on any subject may be as
dangerous to a man's ultimate peace, happiness, and prosperity, as a
wrong course of life. How many men have been ruined in their worldly
prospects, their health, and their lives, by holding false sentiments on
the subject of morals, or in regard to medical treatment! Who would
regard it as a harmless thing if a son should deny in respect to his
father that he was a man of truth, probity, and honesty, or should
attribute to him a character which does not belong to him - a character
just the reverse of truth? Can the same thing be innocent in regard to
God our Saviour?

\(4\) people bring destruction "on themselves." No one compels them to
deny the Lord that bought them; no one forces them to embrace any
dangerous error. If people perish, they perish by their own fault, for:

\(a\) ample provision was made for their salvation as well as for
others;

\(b\) they were freely invited to be saved;

\(c\) it was, in itself, just as easy for them to embrace the truth as
it was for others; and,

\(d\) it was as easy to embrace the truth as to embrace error.

[2 Peter 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pe2 2:2</span></span>

And many shall follow their pernicious ways - Margin: "lascivious." A
large number of manuscripts and versions read "lascivious" here -
ἀσελγείαις aselgeiais - instead of "pernicious" - ἀπωλείαις apōleiais
(see Wetstein), and this reading is adopted in the editions of the Greek
Testament by Tittman, Griesbach, and Hahn, and it seems probable that
this is the correct reading. This will agree well with the account
elsewhere given of these teachers, that their doctrines tended to
licentiousness, [Pe2 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#010), [Pe2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014), [Pe2
2:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#018). It is a very remarkable
circumstance, that those who have denied the essential doctrines of the
gospel have been so frequently licentious in their own conduct, and have
inculcated opinions which tended to licentiousness. Many of the forms of
religious error have somehow had a connection with this vice. People who
are corrupt at heart often seek to obtain the sanction of religion for
their corruptions.

By reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of -

\(1\) because they were professors of religion, and religion would seem
to be held responsible for their conduct; and,

\(2\) because they were professed teachers of religion, and, by many,
would be understood as expounding the true doctrines of the gospel.

[2 Peter 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pe2 2:3</span></span>

And through covetousness - This shows what one of the things was by
which they were influenced - a thing which, like licentiousness, usually
exerts a powerful influence over the teachers of error. The religious
principle is the strongest that is implanted in the human bosom: and men
who can obtain a livelihood in no other way, or who are too unprincipled
or too indolent to labor for an honest living, often turn public
teachers of religion, and adopt the kind of doctrines that will be
likely to give them the greatest power over the purses of others. True
religion, indeed, requires of its friends to devote all that they have
to the service of God and to the promotion of his cause; but it is very
easy to pervert this requirement, so that the teacher of error shall
take advantage of it for his own aggrandizement.

Shall they with feigned words - Greek formed, fashioned; then those
which are formed for the occasion - feigned, false, deceitful. The idea
is, thug the doctrines which they would defend were not maintained by
solid and substantial arguments, but that they would make use of
plausible reasoning made up for the occasion.

Make merchandise of you - Treat you not as rational beings but as a bale
of goods, or any other article of traffic. That is, they would endeavor
to make money out of them, and regard them only as fitted to promote
that object.

Whose judgment - Whose condemnation.

Now of a long time lingereth not - Greek, "of old; long since." The idea
seems to be, that justice had been long attentive to their movements,
and was on its way to their destruction. It was not a new thing - that
is, there was no new principle involved in their destruction; but it was
a principle which had always been in operation, and which would
certainly be applicable to them, and of a long time justice had been
impatient to do the work which it was accustomed to do. What had
occurred to the angels that sinned, [Pe2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#004) to the old world, [Pe2
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#005) and to Sodom and Gomorrah, [Pe2
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#006) would occur to them; and the same
justice which had overthrown them might be regarded as on its way to
effect their destruction. Compare the notes at [Isa
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#004).

And their damnation slumbereth not - Their condemnation, (Notes, [Co1
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029)) yet here referring to future
punishment. "Mr. Blackwell observes, that this is a most beautiful
figure, representing the vengeance that shall destroy such incorrigible
sinners as an angel of judgment pursuing them on the wing, continually
approaching nearer and nearer, and in the mean time keeping a watchful
eye upon them, that he may at length discharge an unerring blow" -
Doddridge. It is not uncommon to speak of "sleepless justice;" and the
idea here is, that however justice may have seemed to slumber or to
linger, it was not really so, but that it had on them an everwatchful
eye, and was on its way to do that which was right in regard to them. A
sinner should never forget that there is an eye of unslumbering
vigilance always upon him, and that everything that he does is witnessed
by one who will yet render exact justice to all men. No person, however
careful to conceal his sins, or however bold in transgression, or
however unconcerned he may seem to be, can hope that justice will always
linger, or destruction always slumber.

[2 Peter 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pe2 2:4</span></span>

For if God spared not the angels that sinned - The apostle now proceeds
to the proof of the proposition that these persons would be punished. It
is to be remembered that they had been, or were even then, professing
Christians, though they had really, if not in form, apostatized from the
faith [Pe2 2:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#020), and a part of the
proofs, therefore, are derived from the cases of those who had
apostatized from the service of God. He appeals, therefore, to the case
of the angels that had revolted. Neither their former rank, their
dignity, nor their holiness, saved them from being thrust down to hell;
and if God punished them so severely, then false teachers could not hope
to escape. The apostle, by the "angels" here, refers undoubtedly to a
revolt in heaven - an event referred to in [Jde
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#006), and everywhere implied in the
Scriptures. When that occurred, however - why they revolted, or what was
the number of the apostates - we have not the slightest information, and
on these points conjecture would be useless. In the supposition that it
occurred, there is no improbability; for there is nothing more absurd in
the belief that angels have revolted than that men have; and if there
are evil angels, as there is no more reason to doubt than that there are
evil men, it is morally certain that they must have fallen at some
period from a state of holiness, for it cannot be believed that God made
them wicked.

But cast them down to hell - Greek ταρταρώσας tartarōsas - "thrusting
them down to Tartarus." The word here used occurs nowhere else in the
New Testament, though it is common in the Classical writers. It is a
verb formed from Τάρταρος Tartaros, Tartarus, which in Greek mythology
was the lower part, or abyss of Hades, ᾍδης Hadēs, where the shades of
the wicked were supposed to be imprisoned and tormented, and
corresponded to the Jewish word Γεέννα Geenna - "Gehenna." It was
regarded, commonly, as beneath the earth; as entered through the grave;
as dark, dismal, gloomy; and as a place of punishment. Compare the [Job
10:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#021) notes, and [Mat
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022) note. The word here is one that
properly refers to a place of punishment, since the whole argument
relates to that, and since it cannot be pretended that the "angels that
sinned" were removed to a place of happiness on account of their
transgression. It must also refer to punishment in some other world than
this, for there is no evidence that This world is made a place of
punishment for fallen angels.

And delivered them into chains of darkness - "Where darkness lies like
chains upon them" - Robinson, Lexicon. The meaning seems to be, that
they are confined in that dark prisonhouse as if by chains. We are not
to suppose that spirits are literally bound; but it was common to bind
or fetter prisoners who were in dungeons, and the representation here is
taken from that fact. This representation that the mass of fallen angels
are confined in "Tartarus," or in hell, is not inconsistent with the
representations which elsewhere occur that their leader is permitted to
roam the earth, and that even many of those spirits are allowed to tempt
men. It may be still true that the mass are con fined within the limits
of their dark abode; and it may even be true also that Satan and those
who axe permitted to roam the earth are under bondage, and are permitted
to range only within certain bounds, and that they are so secured that
they will be brought to trial at the last day.

To be reserved unto judgment - [Jde
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#006), "to the judgment of the great
day." They will then, with the revolted inhabitants of this world, be
brought to trial for their crimes. That the fallen angels will be
punished after the judgment is apparent from [Rev
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#010). The argument in this verse is,
that if God punished the angels who revolted from Him, it is a fair
inference that He will punish wicked people, though they were once
professors of religion.

[2 Peter 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe2 2:5</span></span>

And spared not the old world - The world before the flood. The argument
here is, that he cut off that wicked race, and thus showed that he would
punish the guilty. By that awful act of sweeping away the inhabitants of
a world, he showed that people could not sin with impunity, and that the
incorrigibly wicked must perish.

But saved Noah the eighth person - This reference to Noah, like the
reference to Lot in [Pe2 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#007), seems to
have been thrown in in the progress of the argument as an incidental
remark, to show that the righteous, however few in number, would be
saved when the wicked were cut off. The phrase "Noah the eighth," means
Noah, one of eight; that is, Noah and seven others. This idiom is found,
says Dr. Bloomfield, in the best writers - from Herodotus and Thucydides
downward. See examples in Wetstein. The meaning in this place then is,
that eight persons, and eight only of that race, were saved; thus
showing, that while the wicked would be punished, however numerous they
might be, the righteous, however few, would be saved.

A preacher of righteousness - In [Gen
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#009), it is said of Noah that he was "a
just man and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God;" and
it may be presumed that during his long life he was faithful in
reproving the wickedness of his age, and warned the world of the
judgment that was preparing for it. Compare the notes at [Heb
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#007).

Bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly - Upon all the world
besides that pious family. The argument here is, that if God would cut
off a wicked race in this manner, the principle is settled that the
wicked will not escape.

[2 Peter 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pe2 2:6</span></span>

And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes - [Gen
19:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024). This is a third example to
demonstrate that God will punish the wicked. Compare the notes at [Jde
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007). The word here rendered "turning
into ashes" τεφρωσας tephrōsas, occurs nowhere else in the New
Testament. It is from τέφρα tefra, ashes, and means to reduce to ashes,
and then to consume or destroy.

Condemned them with an overthrow - By the fact of their being
overthrown, he showed that they were to be condemned, or that he
disapproved their conduct. Their calamity came expressly on account of
their enormous sins; as it is frequently the case now that the awful
judgments that come upon the licentious and the intemperate, are as
plain a proof of the divine disapprobation as were the calamities that
came upon Sodom and Gomorrah.

Making them an ensample ... - That is, they were a demonstration that
God disapproved of the crimes for which they were punished, and would
disapprove of the same crimes in every age and in every land. The
punishment of one wicked man or people always becomes a warning to all
others.

[2 Peter 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pe2 2:7</span></span>

And delivered just Lot - [Gen 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#016).
This case is incidentally referred to, to show that God makes a
distinction between the righteous and the wicked; and that while the
latter will be destroyed, the former will be saved. See [Pe2
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#009). Lot is called "just," because he
preserved himself uncontaminated amidst the surrounding wickedness. As
long as he lived in Sodom he maintained the character of an upright and
holy man.

Vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked - By the corrupt and
licentious conduct of the wicked around him. On the word "conversation,"
see the notes at [Phi 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#027). The
original phrase, which is rendered "filthy," has reference to
licentiousness. The corruption of Sodom was open and shameless; and as
Lot was compelled to see much of it, his heart was pained. The word here
rendered "vexed," means that he was wearied or burdened. The crimes of
those around him he found it hard to bear with.

[2 Peter 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pe2 2:8</span></span>

For that righteous man dwelling among them - The Latin Vulgate renders
this, "For in seeing and hearing he was just;" meaning that he
maintained his uprightness, or that he did not become contaminated by
the vices of Sodom. Many expositors have supposed that this is the
correct rendering; but the most natural and the most common explanation
is that which is found in our version. According to that, the meaning
is, that compelled as he was, while living among them, to see and to
hear what was going on, his soul was constantly troubled.

In seeing and hearing - Seeing their open acts of depravity, and hearing
their vile conversation. The effect which this had on the mind of Lot is
not mentioned in Genesis, but nothing is more probable than the
statement here made by Peter. Whether this statement was founded on
tradition, or whether it is a suggestion of inspiration to the mind of
Peter, cannot be determined. The words rendered "seeing" and "hearing"
may refer to the ACT of seeing, or to the object seen. Wetstein and
Robinson suppose that they refer here to the latter, and that the sense
is, that he was troubled by what he saw and heard. The meaning is not
materially different. Those who live among the wicked are compelled to
see and hear much that pains their hearts, and it is well if they do not
become indifferent to it, or contaminated by it. "Vexed" his "righteous
soul from day to day with" their "unlawful deeds."

Tortured or tormented his soul - ἐβασάνιζεν ebasanizen Compare [Mat
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#006), [Mat
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029); [Luk
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#028); [Rev
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#005); [Rev
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#010); [Rev
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#010); [Rev
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#010), where the same word is rendered
"tormented." The use of this word would seem to imply that there was
something active on the part of Lot which produced this distress on
account of their conduct. He was not merely troubled as if his soul were
passively acted on, but there were strong mental exercises of a positive
kind, arising perhaps from anxious solicitude how he might prevent their
evil conduct, or from painful reflections on the consequences of their
deeds to themselves, or from earnest pleadings in their behalf before
God, or from reproofs and warnings of the wicked. At all events, the
language is such as would seem to indicate that he was not a mere
passive observer of their conduct. This, it would seem, was "from day to
day," that is, it was constant. There were doubtless reasons why Lot
should remain among such a people, and why, when he might so easily have
done it, he did not remove to another place.

Perhaps it was one purpose of his remaining to endeavor to do them good,
as it is often the duty of good men now to reside among the wicked for
the same purpose. Lot is supposed to have resided in Sodom - then
probably the most corrupt place on the earth - for 16 years; and we have
in that fact an instructive demonstration that a good man may maintain
the life of religion in his soul when surrounded by the wicked, and an
illustration of the effects which the conduct of the wicked will have on
a man of true piety when he is compelled to witness it constantly. We
may learn from the record made of Lot what those effect will be, and
what is evidence that one is truly pious who lives among the wicked.

\(1\) he will not be contaminated with their wickedness, or will not
conform to their evil customs.

\(2\) he will not become indifferent to it, but his heart will be more
and more affected by their depravity. Compare [Psa
119:136](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#136); [Luk
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041); [Act
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#016).

\(3\) he will have not only constant, but growing solicitude in regard
to it - solicitude that will be felt every day: "He vexed his soul from
day to day." It will not only be at intervals that his mind will be
affected by their conduct, but it will be an habitual and constant
thing. True piety is not fitful, periodical, and spasmodic; it is
constant and steady. It is not a "jet" that occasionally bursts out; it
is a fountain always flowing.

\(4\) he will seek to do them good. We may suppose that this was the
case with Lot; we are certain that it is a characteristic of true
religion to seek to do good to all, however wicked they may be.

\(5\) he will secure their confidence. He will practice no improper arts
to do this, but it will be one of the usual results of a life of
integrity, that a good man will secure the confidence of even the
wicked. It does not appear that Lot lost that confidence, and the whole
narrative in Genesis leads us to suppose that even the inhabitants of
Sodom regarded him as a good man. The wicked may hate a good man because
he is good; but if a man lives as he should, they will regard him as
upright, and they will give him the credit of it when he dies, if they
should withhold it while he lives.

[2 Peter 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pe2 2:9</span></span>

The Lord knoweth ... - That is, the cases referred to show that God is
able to deliver his people when tempted, and understands the best way in
which it should be done. He sees a way to do it when we cannot, though
it is often a way which we should not have thought of. He can send an
angel to take his tempted people by the hand; he can interpose and
destroy the power of the tempter; he can raise up earthly friends; he
can deliver his people completely and forever from temptation, by their
removal to heaven.

And to reserve the unjust - As he does the rebel angels, [Pe2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#004). The case of the angels shows that
God can keep wicked men, as if under bonds, reserved for their final
trial at his bar. Though they seem to go at large, yet they are under
his control, and are kept by him with reference to their ultimate
arraignment.

[2 Peter 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe2 2:10</span></span>

But chiefly - That is, it may be presumed that the principles just laid
down would be applicable in an eminent degree to such persons as he
proceeds to designate.

That walk after the flesh - That live for the indulgence of their carnal
appetites. Notes, [Rom 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001).

In the lust of uncleanness - In polluted pleasures. Compare the notes at
[Pe2 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#002).

And despise government - Margin: "dominion." That is, they regard all
government in the state, the church, and the family, as an evil.
Advocates for unbridled freedom of all sorts; declaimers on liberty and
on the evils of oppression; defenders of what they regard as the rights
of injured man, and yet secretly themselves lusting for the exercise of
the very power which they would deny to others - they make no just
distinctions about what constitutes true freedom, and in their zeal
array themselves against government in all forms. No topic of
declamation would be more popular than this, and from none would they
hope to secure more followers; for if they could succeed in removing all
respect for the just restraints of law, the way would be open for the
accomplishment of their own purposes, in setting up a dominion ever the
minds of others. It is a common result of such views, that men of this
description become impatient of the government of God himself, and seek
to throw off all authority, and to live in the unrestrained indulgence
of their vicious propensities.

Presumptuous are they - Τολμηταὶ Tolmētai - daring, bold, audacious,
presumptuous men.

Self-willed - αὐθάδεις authadeis. See the notes at [Tit
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007).

They are not afraid to speak evil of dignities - The word rendered
"dignities" here, (δόξας doxas,) means properly honor, glory, splendor;
then that which is fitted to inspire respect; that which is dignified or
exalted. It is applied here to men of exalted rank; and the meaning is,
that they did not regard rank, or station, or office - thus violating
the plainest rules of propriety and of religion. See the notes at [Act
23:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#004). Jude, between whose language
and that of Peter in this chapter there is a remarkable resemblance, has
expressed this more fully. He says, [Pe2
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#008), "These filthy dreamers defile the
flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities." It is one of the
effects of religion to produce respect for superiors; but when men are
self-willed, and when they purpose to give indulgence to corrupt
propensities, it is natural for them to dislike all government.
Accordingly, it is by no means an unfrequent effect of certain forms of
error to lead men to speak disrespectfully of those in authority, and to
attempt to throw off all the restraints of law. It is a very certain
indication that men hold wrong opinions when they show disrespect to
those in authority, and despise the restraints of law.

[2 Peter 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pe2 2:11</span></span>

Whereas angels - The object, by the reference to angels here, is to show
that they, even when manifesting the greatest zeal in a righteous cause,
and even when opposing others, did not make use of reproachful terms, or
of harsh and violent language. It is not known precisely to what Peter
alludes here, nor on what the statement here is based. There can be
little doubt, however, as Benson has remarked, that, from the strong
resemblance between what Peter says and what Jude says, [Jde
1:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009), there is allusion to the same
thing, and probably both referred to some common tradition among the
Jews respecting the contention of the archangel Michael with the devil
about the body of Moses. See the notes at [Jde
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009). As the statement in Jude is the
most full, it is proper to explain the passage before us by a reference
to that; and we may suppose that, though Peter uses the plural term, and
speaks of "angels," yet that he really had the case of Michael in his
eye, and meant to refer to that as an example of what the angels do.
Whatever may have been the origin of this tradition, no one can doubt
that what is here said of the angels accords with probability, and no
one can prove that it is not true.

Which are greater in power and might - And who might, therefore, if it
were in any case proper, speak freely of things of an exalted rank and
dignity. It would be more becoming for them than for men. On this
difficult passage, see the notes at [Jde
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009).

Bring not railing accusation - They simply say, "The Lord rebuke thee,"
[Jde 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009). Compare [Zac
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#002). The Greek here is, "bring not
blasphemous or reproachful judgment, or condemnation" - βλάσφημον κρίσιν
blasphēmon krisin. They abhor all scurrility and violence of language;
they simply state matters as they are. No one can doubt that this
accords with what we should expect of the angels; and that if they had
occasion to speak of those who were opposers, it would be in a calm and
serious manner, not seeking to overwhelm them by reproaches.

Against them - Margin, "against themselves." So the Vulgate. The more
correct reading is "against them;" that is, against those who might be
regarded as their adversaries, [Jde
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009), or those of their own rank who
had done wrong - the fallen angels.

Before the Lord - When standing before the Lord; or when represented as
reporting the conduct of evil spirits. Compare [Zac
3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001). This phrase, however, is
missing in many manuscripts. See Wetstein.

[2 Peter 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe2 2:12</span></span>

But these, as natural brute beasts - These persons, who resemble so much
irrational animals which are made to be taken and destroyed. The point
of the comparison is, that they are like fierce and savage beasts that
exercise no control over their appetites, and that seeM to be made only
to be destroyed. These persons, by their fierce and ungovernable
passions, appear to be made only for destruction, and rush blindly on to
it. The word rendered "natural," (which, however, is lacking in several
manuscripts), means "as they are by nature," following the bent of their
natural appetites and passions. The idea is, that they exercised no more
restraint over their passions than beasts do over their propensities.
They were entirely under the dominion of their natural appetites, and
did not allow their reason or conscience to exert any constraint. The
word rendered "brute," means without reason; irrational. Man has reason,
and should allow it to control his passions; the brutes have no rational
nature, and it is to be expected that they will act out their
propensities without restraint. Man, as an animal, has many passions and
appetites resembling those of the brute creation, but he is also endowed
with a higher nature, which is designed to regulate and control his
inferior propensities, and to keep them in subordination to the
requirements of law. If a man sinks himself to the level of brutes, he
must expect to be treated like brutes; and as wild and savage animals -
lions, and panthers, and wolves, and bears - are regarded as dangerous,
and as "made to be taken and destroyed," so the same destiny must come
upon men who make themselves like them.

Made to be taken and destroyed - They are not only useless to society,
but destructive; and men feel that it is right to destroy them. We are
not to suppose that this teaches that the only object which God had in
view in making wild animals was that they might be destroyed; but that
people so regard them.

Speak evil of the things that they understand not - Of objects whose
worth and value they cannot appreciate. This is no uncommon thing among
people, especially in regard to the works and ways of God.

And shall utterly perish in their own corruption - Their views will be
the means of their ruin; and they render them fit for it, just as much
as the fierce passions of the wild animals do.

[2 Peter 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe2 2:13</span></span>

And shall receive the reward of unrighteousness - The appropriate
recompense of their wickedness in the future world. Such people do not
always receive the due recompense of their deeds in the present life;
and as it is a great and immutable principle that all will be treated,
under the government of God, as they deserve, or that justice will be
rendered to every rational being, it follows that there must be
punishment in the future state.

As they that count it pleasure to riot in the day-time - As especially
wicked, shameless, and abandoned men; for only such revel in open day.
Compare the [Act 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#015) note; [Th1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#007) note.

Spots they are and blemishes - That is, they are like a dark spot on a
pure garment, or like a deformity on an otherwise beautiful person. They
are a scandal and disgrace to the Christian profession.

Sporting themselves - The Greek word here means to live delicately or
luxuriously; to revel. The idea is not exactly that of sporting, or
playing, or amusing themselves; but it is that they take advantage of
their views to live in riot and luxury. Under the garb of the Christian
profession, they give indulgence to the most corrupt passions.

With their own deceivings - Jude, in the parallel place, [Jde
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#012), has, "These are spots in your
feasts of charity, when they feast with you." Several versions, and a
few manuscripts also, here read "feasts" instead of "deceivings,"
(ἀγάπαῖς agapais for ἀπάταις apatais.) The common reading, however, is
undoubtedly the correct one, (see Wetstein, in loc.); and the meaning
is, that they took advantage of their false views to turn even the
sacred feasts of charity, or perhaps the Lord's Supper itself, into an
occasion of sensual indulgence. Compare the notes at [Co1
11:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#020). The difference between these
persons, and those in the church at Corinth, seems to have been that
these did it at design, and for the purpose of leading others into sin;
those who were in the church at Corinth erred through ignorance.

While they feast with you - συνευωχούμενοι suneuōchoumenoi. This word
means to feast several together; to feast with anyone; and the reference
seems to be to some festival which was celebrated by Christians, where
men and women were assembled together, [Pe2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014), and where they could convert the
festival into a scene of riot and disorder. If the Lord's Supper was
celebrated by them as it was at Corinth, that would furnish such an
occasion; or if it was preceded by a "feast of charity" (notes, [Jde
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#012)), that would furnish such an
occasion. It would seem to be probable that a festival of some kind was
connected with the observance of the Lord's Supper (notes, [Co1
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#021)), and that this was converted by
these persons into a scene of riot and disorder.

[2 Peter 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pe2 2:14</span></span>

Having eyes full of adultery - Margin, as in the Greek, "an adulteress;"
that is, gazing with desire after such persons. The word "full" is
designed to denote that the corrupt passion referred to had wholly
seized and occupied their minds. The eye was, as it were, full of this
passion; it saw nothing else but some occasion for its indulgence; it
expressed nothing else but the desire. The reference here is to the
sacred festival mentioned in the previous verse; and the meaning is,
that they celebrated that festival with licentious feelings, giving free
indulgence to their corrupt desires by gazing on the females who were
assembled with them. In the passion here referred to, the "eye" is
usually the first offender, the inlet to corrupt desires, and the medium
by which they are expressed. Compare the notes at [Mat
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028). The wanton glance is a principal
occasion of exciting the sin; and there is much often in dress, and
mien, and gesture, to charm the eye and to deepen the debasing passion.

And that cannot cease from sin - They cannot look on the females who may
be present without sinning. Compare [Mat
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028). There are many men in whom the
presence of the most virtuous woman only excites impure and corrupt
desires. The expression here does not mean that they have no natural
ability to cease from sin, or that they are impelled to it by any
physical necessity, but only that they are so corrupt and unprincipled
that they certainly will sin always.

Beguiling unstable souls - Those who are not strong in Christian
principle, or who are naturally fluctuating and irresolute. The word
rendered beguiling means to bait, to entrap, and would be applicable to
the methods practiced in hunting. Here it means that it was one of their
arts to place specious allurements before those who were known not to
have settled principles or firmness, in order to allure them to sin.
Compare [Ti2 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#006).

An heart they have exercised with covetous practices - Skilled in the
arts which covetous men adopt in order to cheat others out of their
property. A leading purpose which influenced these men was to obtain
money. One of the most certain ways for dishonest men to do this is to
make use of the religious principle; to corrupt and control the
conscience; to make others believe that they are eminently holy, or that
they are the special favorites of heaven; and when they can do this,
they have the purses of others at command. For the religious principle
is the most powerful of all principles; and he who can control that, can
control all that a man possesses. The idea here is that these persons
had made this their study, and had learned the ways in which men could
be induced to part with their money under religious pretences. We should
always be on our guard when professedly religious teachers propose to
have much to do with money matters. While we should always be ready to
aid every good cause, yet we should remember that unprincipled and
indolent men often assume the mask of religion that they may practice
their arts on the credulity of others, and that their real aim is to
obtain their property, not to save their souls.

Cursed children - This is a Hebraism, meaning literally, "children of
the curse," that is, persons devoted to the curse, or who will certainly
be destroyed.

[2 Peter 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pe2 2:15</span></span>

Which have forsaken the right way - The straight path of honesty and
integrity. Religion is often represented as a straight path, and to do
wrong is to go out of that path in a crooked way.

Following the way of Balaam the son of Bosor - See [Num
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#005), following. In the Book of
Numbers, Balaam is called the son of "Beor." Perhaps the name Beor was
corrupted into Bosor; or, as Rosenmuller suggests, the father of Balaam
may have had two names. Schleusner (Lexicon) supposes that it was
changed by the Greeks because it was more easily pronounced. The
Septuagint, however, reads it as Βεὼρ Beōr - "Beor." The meaning here
is, that they IMitAted Balaam. The particular point to which Peter
refers in which they imitated him, seems to have been the love of gain,
or covetousness. Possibly, however, he might have designed to refer to a
more general resemblance, for in fact they imitated him in the following
things:

\(1\) in being professed religious teachers, or the servants of God;

\(2\) in their covetousness;

\(3\) in inducing others to sin, referring to the same kind of sins in
both cases.

Balaam counselled the Moabites to entice the children of Israel to
illicit connection with their women, thus introducing licentiousness
into the camp of the Hebrews ([Num
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#016); compare [Num
25:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001)); and in like manner these
teachers led others into licentiousness, thus corrupting the church.

Who loved the wages of unrighteousness - Who was supremely influenced by
the love of gain, and was capable of being employed, for a price, in a
wicked design; thus prostituting his high office, as a professed prophet
of the Most High, to base and ignoble ends. That Balaam, though he
professed to be influenced by a supreme regard to the will of God [Num
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#018), [Num
22:38](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#038), was really influenced by the
desire of reward, and was willing to prostitute his great office to
secure such a reward, there can be no doubt.

\(1\) the elders of Moab and of Midian came to Balaam with "the rewards
of divination in their hand" [Num
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#007), and with promises from Balak of
promoting him to great honor, if he would curse the children of Israel,
[Num 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#017).

\(2\) Balaam was disposed to go with them, and was restrained from going
at once only by a direct and solemn prohibition from the Lord, [Num
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#011).

\(3\) notwithstanding this solemn prohibition, and not with standing he
said to the ambassadors from Balak that he would do only as God
directed, though Balak should give him his house full of silver and
gold, [Num 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#018), yet he did not
regard the matter as settled, but proposed to them that they should wait
another night, with the hope that the Lord would give a more favourable
direction in reference to their request, thus showing that his heart was
in the service which they required, and that his inclination was to
avail himself of their offer, [Num
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#019).

\(4\) when he did obtain permission to go, it was only to say that which
the Lord should direct him to say, [Num
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#020); but he went with a perverse
heart, with a secret wish to comply with the desire of Balak, and with a
knowledge that he was doing wrong, [Num
22:34](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#034), and was restrained from
uttering the curse which Balak desired only by an influence from above
which he could not control. Balaam was undoubtedly a wicked man, and was
constrained by a power from on high to utter sentiments which God meant
should be uttered, but which Balaam would never have expressed of his
own accord.

[2 Peter 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pe2 2:16</span></span>

But was rebuked for his iniquity - The object of Peter in this seems to
be to show that God employed the very extraordinary means of causing the
ass on which he rode to speak, because his iniquity was so monstrous.
The guilt of thus debasing his high office, and going forth to curse the
people of God - a people who had done him no wrong, and given no
occasion for his malediction - was so extraordinary, that means as
extraordinary were proper to express it. If God employed means so
extraordinary to rebuke "his" depravity, it was to be expected that in
some appropriate way he would express his sense of the wickedness of
those who resembled him.

The dumb ass, speaking with man's voice - [Num
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#028). God seems to have designed that
both Balsam and Balak should be convinced that the children of Israel
were his people; and so important was it that this conviction should
rest fully on the minds of the rations through whom they passed, that he
would not suffer even a pretended prophet to make use of his influence
to curse them. He designed that all that influence should be in favor of
the cause of truth, thus furnishing a striking instance of the use which
he often makes of wicked men. To convince Balaam of the error of his
course, and to make him sensible that God was an observer of his
conduct, and to induce him to utter only what he should direct, nothing
would be better suited than this miracle. The very animal upon which he
rode, mute and naturally stupid, was made to utter a reproof; a reproof
as directly from heaven as though the stones had cried out beneath his
feet, or the trees of the wood had uttered the language of remonstrance.
As to the nature of the miracle here referred to, it may be remarked:

\(1\) that it was as easy for God to perform this miracle as any other;
and,

\(2\) that it was a miracle that would be as likely to be effectual, and
to answer the purpose, as any other.

No one can show that it could not have occurred; and the occasion was
one in which some decided rebuke, in language beyond that of conscience,
was necessary.

Forbade the madness of the prophet - That is, the mad or perverse design
of the prophet. The word here rendered "madness" means, properly, being
aside from a right mind. It is not found elsewhere in the New Testament.
It is used here to denote that Balaam was engaged in an enterprise which
indicated a headstrong disposition; an acting contrary to reason and
sober sense. He was so under the influence of avarice and ambition that
his sober sense was blinded, and he acted like a madman. He knew indeed
what was right, and had professed a purpose to do what was right, but he
did not allow that to control him; but, for the sake of gain, went
against his own sober conviction, and against what he knew to be the
will of God. He was so mad or infatuated that he allowed neither reason,
nor conscience, nor the will of God, to control him!

[2 Peter 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe2 2:17</span></span>

These are wells without water - [Jde
1:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#012) employs several other epithets
to describe the same class of persons. The language employed both by
Peter and Jude is singularly terse, pointed, and emphatic. Nothing to an
oriental mind would be more expressive than to say of professed
religious teachers, that they were "wells without water." It was always
a sad disappointment to a traveler in the hot sands of the desert to
come to a well where it was expected that water might be found, and to
find it dry. It only aggravated the trials of the thirsty and weary
traveler. Such were these religious teachers. In a world, not unaptly
compared, in regard to its real comforts, to the wastes and sands of the
desert, they would only grievously disappoint the expectations of all
those who were seeking for the refreshing influences of the truths of
the gospel. There are many such teachers in the world.

Clouds that are carried with a tempest - Clouds that are driven about by
the wind, and that send down no rain upon the earth. They promise rain,
only to be followed by disappointment. Substantially the same idea is
conveyed by this as by the previous phrase. "The Arabs compare persons
who put on the appearance of virtue, when yet they are destitute of all
goodness, to a light cloud which makes a show of rain, and afterward
vanishes" - Benson. The sense is this: The cloud, as it rises, promises
rain. The expectation of the farmer is excited that the thirsty earth is
to be refreshed with needful showers. Instead of this, however, the wind
"gets into" the cloud; it is driven about, and no rain falls, or it ends
in a destructive tornado which sweeps everything before it. So of these
religious teachers. Instruction in regard to the way of salvation was
expected from them; but, instead of that, they disappointed the
expectations of those who were desirous of knowing the way of life, and
their doctrines only tended to destroy.

To whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever - The word rendered
"mist" here, (ζόφος zophos,) means properly muskiness, thick gloom,
darkness, (see [Pe2 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#004)); and the
phrase "mist of darkness" is designed to denote "intense" darkness, or
the thickest darkness. It refers undoubtedly to the place of future
punishment, which is often represented as a place of intense darkness.
See the notes at [Mat 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012). When it is
said that this is "reserved" for them, it means that it is prepared for
them, or is kept in a state of readiness to receive them. It is like a
jail or penitentiary which is built in anticipation that there will be
criminals, and with the expectation that there will be a need for it. So
God has constructed the great prison-house of the universe, the world
where the wicked are to dwell, with the knowledge that there would be
occasion for it; and so he keeps it from age to age that it may be ready
to receive the wicked when the sentence of condemnation shall be passed
upon them. Compare [Mat 25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041). The
word "forever" is a word which denotes properly eternity, (εἰς αἰώνα eis
aiōna,) and is such a word as could not have been used if it had been
meant that they would not suffer forever. Compare the notes at [Mat
25:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046).

[2 Peter 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pe2 2:18</span></span>

For when they speak great swelling words of vanity - When they make
pretensions to wisdom and learning, or seem to attach great importance
to what they say, and urge it in a pompous and positive manner. Truth is
simple, and delights in simple statements. It expects to make its way by
its own intrinsic force, and is willing to pass for what it is worth.
Error is noisy and declamatory, and hopes to succeed by substituting
sound for sense, and by such tones and arts as shall induce men to
believe that what is said is true, when it is known by the speaker to be
false.

They allure through the lusts of the flesh - The same word is used here
which in [Pe2 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014) is rendered
"beguiling," and in [Jam 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#014)
"enticed." It does not elsewhere occur in the New Testament. It means
that they make use of deceitful arts to allure, ensnare, or beguile
others. The "means" which it is here said they employed, were "the lusts
of the flesh;" that is, they promised unlimited indulgence to the carnal
appetites, or taught such doctrines that their followers would feel
themselves free to give unrestrained liberty to such propensities. This
has been quite a common method in the world, of inducing people to
embrace false doctrines.

Through much wantonness - See the notes at [Ti2
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#006). The meaning here is, that they
made use of every variety of lascivious arts to beguile others under
religious pretences. This has been often done in the world; for religion
has been abused to give seducers access to the confidence of the
innocent, only that they might betray and ruin them. It is right that
for all such the "mist of darkness should be reserved forever;" and if
there were not a place of punishment prepared for such men, there would
be defect in the moral administration of the universe.

Those that were clean escaped from them who live in error - Margin, "for
a little while." The difference between the margin and the text here
arises from a difference of reading in the Greek. Most of the later
editions of the Greek Testament coincide with the reading in the margin,
(ὀλίγως oligōs,) meaning "little, but a little, scarcely." This accords
better with the scope of the passage; and, according to this, it means
that they had "almost escaped" from the snares and influences of those
who live in error and sin. They had begun to think of their ways; they
had broken off many of their evil habits; and there was hope that they
would be entirely reformed, and would become decided Christians, but
they were allured again to the sins in which they had so long indulged.
This seems to me to accord with the design of the passage, and it
certainly accords with what frequently occurs, that those who are
addicted to habits of vice become apparently interested in religion, and
abandon many of their evil practices, but are again allured by the
seductive influences of sin, and relapse into their former habits. In
the case referred to here it was by professedly religious teachers - and
is this never done now? Are there none for example, who have been
addicted to habits of intemperance, who had been almost reformed, but
who are led back again by the influence of religious teachers? Not
directly and openly, indeed, would they lead them into habits of
intemperance. But, when their reformation is begun, its success and its
completion depend on total abstinence from all that intoxicates. In this
condition, nothing more is necessary to secure their entire reformation
and safety than mere abstinence; and nothing more may be necessary to
lead them into their former practices than the example of others who
indulge in moderate drinking, or than the doctrine inculcated by a
religious teacher that such moderate drinking is not contrary to the
spirit of the Bible.

[2 Peter 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pe2 2:19</span></span>

While they promise them liberty - True religion always promises and
produces liberty (see the notes at [Joh
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#036)), but the particular liberty
which these persons seem to have promised, was freedom from what they
regarded as needless restraint, or from strict and narrow views of
religion.

They themselves are the servants of corruption - They are the slaves of
gross and corrupt passions, themselves utter strangers to freedom, and
bound in the chains of servitude. These passions and appetites have
obtained the entire mastery over them, and brought them into the
severest bondage. This is often the case with those who deride the
restraints of serious piety. They are themselves the slaves of appetite,
or of the rules of fashionable life, or of the laws of honor, or of
vicious indulgences. "He is a freeman whom the truth makes free, and all
are slaves besides." Compare the notes at [Co2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017).

For of whom a man is overcome ... - Or rather "by what (ᾧ hō) anyone is
overcome;" that is, "whatever" gets the mastery of him, whether it be
avarice, or sensuality, or pride, or any form of error. See the notes at
[Rom 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#016), where this sentiment is
explained.

[2 Peter 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pe2 2:20</span></span>

For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world - This does
not necessarily mean that they had been true Christians, and had fallen
from grace. People may outwardly reform, and escape from the open
corruptions which prevail around them, or which they had themselves
practiced, and still have no true grace at heart.

Through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesses Christ - Neither
does This imply that they were true Christians, or that they had ever
had any saving knowledge of the Redeemer. There is a knowledge of the
doctrines and duties of religion which may lead sinners to abandon their
outward vices, which has no connection with saving grace. They may
profess religion, and may Know enough of religion to understand that it
requires them to abandon their vicious habits, and still never be true
Christians.

They are again entangled therein and overcome - The word rendered
"entangled," (ἐμπλέκω emplekō,) from which is derived our word
"implicate," means to braid in, to interweave; then to involve in, to
entangle. It means here that they become implicated in those vices like
an animal that is entangled in a net.

The latter end is worse with them than the beginning - This is usually
the case. Apostates become worse than they were before their professed
conversion. "Reformed" drunkards, if they go back to their "cups" again,
become more abandoned than ever. Thus, it is with those who have been
addicted to any habits of vice, and who profess to become religious, and
then fall away. The "reasons" for this may be:

\(1\) that they are willing now to show to others that they are no
longer under the restraints by which they had professedly bound
themselves;

\(2\) that God gives them up to indulgence with fewer restraints than
formerly; and,

\(3\) their old companions in sin may be at special pains to court their
society, and to lead them into temptation, in order to obtain a triumph
over virtue and religion.

[2 Peter 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pe2 2:21</span></span>

For it had been better for them ... - Compare the notes at [Mat
26:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#024). It would have been better for
them, for:

\(1\) then they would not have dishonored the cause of religion as they
have now done;

\(2\) they would not have sunk so deep in profligacy as they now have;
and,

\(3\) they would not have incurred so aggravated a condemnation in the
world of woe. If people are resolved on being wicked, they had better
never pretend to be good. If they are to be cast off at last, it had
better not be as apostates from the cause of virtue and religion.

[2 Peter 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pe2 2:22</span></span>

But it is happened unto them according to the true proverb - The meaning
of the proverbs here quoted is, that they have returned to their former
vile manner of life. Under all the appearances of reformation, still
their evil nature remained, as really as that of the dog or the swine,
and that nature finally prevailed. There was no thorough internal
change, any more than there is in the swine when it is washed, or in the
dog. This passage, therefore, would seem to demonstrate that there never
had been any real change of heart, and of course there had been no
falling away from true religion. It should not, therefore, he quoted to
prove that true Chrisfinns may fall from grace and perish. The dog and
the swine had never been anything else than the dog and the swine, and
these persons had never been anything else than sinners.

The dog is turned to his own vomit again - That is, to eat it up. The
passage would seem to imply, that whatever pains should be taken to
change the habits of the dog, he would return to them again. The
quotation here is from [Pro 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#011); "As
a dog returneth to his vomit, so a feel returneth to his folly." A
similar proverb is found in the Rabbinical writers. Of the truth of the
disgusting fact here affirmed of the dog, there can be no doubt.
Phaedrus (Fab. 27.) states a fact still more offensive respecting its
habits. In the view of the Orientals, the dog was reckoned among the
most vile and disgusting of all animals. Compare [Deu
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#018); [Sa1
17:43](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#043); [Sa2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#008); [Sa2
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#008); [Sa2
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#009); [Mat
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006); [Phi
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#002). See also Horace, II. Epis. 1, 26:

Vixisset canis immundus, vel amica luto sus.

On the use of this proverb, see Wetstein, in loc.

And the sow that was washed ... - This proverb is not found in the Old
Testament, but it was common in the Rabbinical writings, and is found in
the Greek classics. See Wetstein, in loc. Its meaning is plain, and of
the truth of what is affirmed no one can have any doubt. No matter how
clean the swine is made by washing, this would not prevent it, in the
slightest degree, from rolling in filth again. It will act out its real
nature. So it is with the sinner. No external reformation will certainly
prevent his returning to his former habits; and when he does return, we
can only say that he is acting according to his real nature - a nature
which has never been changed, any more than the nature of the dog or the
swine. On the characteristics of the persons referred to in this
chapter, [Pe2 2:9-19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#009), see the
introduction, Section 3.

This passage is often quoted to prove "the possibility of falling from
grace, and from a very high degree of it too." But it is one of the last
passages in the Bible that should be adduced to prove that doctrine. The
true point of this passage is to show that the persons referred to never
"were changed;" that whatever external reformation might have occurred,
their nature remained the same; and that when they apostatized from
their outward profession, they merely acted out their nature, and showed
that in fact there had been "no" real change. This passage will prove -
what there are abundant facts to confirm - that persons may reform
externally, and then return again to their former corrupt habits; it can
never be made to prove that one true Christian will fall away and
perish. It will also prove that we should rely on no mere external
reformation, no outward cleansing, as certain evidence of piety.
Thousands who have been externally reformed have ultimately shown that
they. had no religion, and there is nothing in mere outward reformation
that can suit us for heaven. God looks upon the heart; and it is only
the religion that has its seat there, that can secure our final
salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter Chapter 3](pe2003)

</div>
