<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Philippians Index](phi)  
  [Previous](phi003)  [Next](col000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philippians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001)

[Philippians](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">phi 4:0</span></span>

This chapter Phil. 4 comprises the following points:

I. Exhortations.

II\. Solemn commands to live as became Christians.

III\. The expression of a grateful acknowledgment of the favors which he
had received from them; and,

IV\. The customary salutations.

I. Exhortations; [Phi 4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001).

\(1\) he exhorts them to stand fast in the Lord; [Phi
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001).

\(2\) he entreats Euodias and Syntyche, who appear to have been
alienated from each other, to be reconciled; [Phi
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#002).

\(3\) he entreats one whom he calls a "true yoke-fellow" to render
assistance to those women who had labored with him in the gospel; [Phi
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003).

II\. Commands; [Phi 4:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#004). He commands
them to rejoice in the Lord always, [Phi
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#004); to let their moderation be known
to all, [Phi 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005); to have no anxiety
about worldly matters, but in all their necessities to go to God, [Phi
4:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006); and to do whatever was honest,
just, pure, lovely, and of good report, [Phi
4:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008).

III\. A grateful acknowledgment of their kindness; [Phi
4:10-19](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#010). He says that their care of
him had been manifested again, in such a way as to be highly grateful to
his feelings; [Phi 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#010). He did not
indeed say that he had suffered, for he had learned, in whatever state
he was, to be content [Phi 4:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#011);
but they had shown a proper spirit in endeavoring to relieve his
necessities; [Phi 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#014). He remarks
that their church was the only one that had aided him when he was in
Macedonia, and that they had sent to him more than once when he was in
Thessalonica, and says that their favor now was an offering acceptable
to God, who would abundantly reward them; [Phi
4:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#015).

IV\. Salutations; [Phi 4:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#021).

[Philippians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">phi 4:1</span></span>

Therefore, my brethren dearly beloved and longed for - Doddridge unites
this verse with the previous chapter, and supposes that it is the proper
close of the solemn statement which the apostle makes there. The word
"therefore" - ὥστε hōste - has undoubted reference to the remarks made
there; and the meaning is, that in view of the fact that there were many
professed Christians who were not sincere - that the "citizenship" of
all true Christians was in heaven, and that Christians looked for the
coming of the Lord Jesus, who would make them like to himself, the
apostle exhorts them to stand fast in the Lord. The accumulation of
epithets of endearment in this verse shows his tender regard for them,
and is expressive of his earnest solicitude for their welfare, and his
deep conviction of their danger. The term "longed for" is expressive of
strong affection; see [Phi 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#008), and
[Phi 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#026).

My joy - The source of my joy. He rejoiced in the fact that they had
been converted under him; and in their holy walk, and their friendship.
Our chief joy is in our friends; and the chief happiness of a minister
of the gospel is in the pure lives of those to whom he ministers; see
[Jo3 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#004).

And crown - Compare [Th1 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#019). The
word "crown" means a circlet, chaplet, or diadem:

\(1\) as the emblem of royal dignity - the symbol of office;

\(2\) as the prize conferred on victors in the public games, [Co1
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#025), and hence, as an emblem of the
rewards of a future life; [Ti2 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008);
[Jam 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#012); [Pe1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#004);

\(3\) anything that is an ornament or honor, as one glories in a crown;
compare [Pro 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#004), "A virtuous woman
is a crown to her husband;" [Pro
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#024), "The crown of the wise is their
riches;" [Pro 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#031), "The hoary head
is a crown of glory;" [Pro 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#006),
"Children's children are the crown of old men."

The idea here is, that the church at Philippi was that in which the
apostle gloried. He regarded it as a high honor to have been the means
of founding such a church, and he looked upon it with the same interest
with which a monarch looks upon the diadem which he wears.

So stand fast in the Lord - In the service of the Lord, and in the
strength which he imparts; see the notes at [Eph
6:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013).

[Philippians 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">phi 4:2</span></span>

I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntyche - These are doubtless the names
of females. The name Syntyche is sometimes the name of a man; but, if
these persons are referred to in [Phi
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003), there can be no doubt that they
were females. Nothing more is known of them than is here mentioned. It
has been commonly supposed that they were deaconesses, who preached the
gospel to those of their own sex; but there is no certain evidence of
this. All that is known is, that there was some disagreement between
them, and the apostle entreats them to be reconciled to each other.

That they be of the same mind - That they be united, or reconciled.
Whether the difference related to doctrine, or to something else, we
cannot determine from this phrase. The language is such as would
properly relate to any difference.

In the Lord - In their Christian walk and plans. They were doubtless
professing Christians, and the apostle exhorts them to make the Lord the
great object of their affections, and in their regard for him, to bury
all their petty differences and animosities.

[Philippians 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">phi 4:3</span></span>

And I entreat thee also, true yoke-fellow - It is not known to whom the
apostle refers here. No name is mentioned, and conjecture is useless.
All that is known is, that it was someone whom Paul regarded as
associated with himself in labor, and one who was so prominent at
Philippi that it would be understood who was referred to, without more
particularly mentioning him. The presumption, therefore. is, that it was
one of the ministers, or "bishops" (see the notes at [Phi
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001)) of Philippi, who had been
particularly associated with Paul when he was there. The Epistle was
addressed to the "church with the bishops and deacons" [Phi
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001); and the fact that this one had
been particularly associated with Paul, would serve to designate him
with sufficient particularity. Whether he was related to the women
referred to, is wholly unknown. Doddridge supposes that he might be the
husband of one of these women; but of that there is no evidence. The
term "yoke-fellow" - συζυγος suzugos - some have understood as a proper
name (Syzygus); but the proper import of the word is yoke-fellow, and
there is no reason to believe that it is used here to denote a proper
name. If it had been, it is probable that some other word than that used
here and rendered "true" - γνήσιος gnēsios - would have been employed.
The word "true" - γνήσιος gnēsios - means that he was sincere, faithful,
worthy of confidence. Paul had had evidence of his sincerity and
fidelity; and he was a proper person, therefore, to whom to entrust a
delicate and important business.

Help those women - The common opinion is, tidal the women here referred
to were Euodias and Syntyche, and that the office which the friend of
Paul was asked to perform was, to secure a reconciliation between them.
There is, however, no certain evidence of this The reference seems
rather to be to influential females who had rendered important
assistance to Paul when he was there. The kind of "help" which was to be
imparted was probably by counsel, and friendly cooperation in the duties
which they were called to perform, There is no evidence that it refers
to pecuniary aid; and, had it referred to a reconciliation of those who
were at variance, it is probable that some other word would have been
used than that rendered here as "help" - συλλαμβάνου sullambanou.

Which laboured with me in the gospel - As Paul did not permit women to
preach (see [Ti1 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#012); compare the
notes at [Co1 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#005)), he must have
referred here to some other services which they had rendered. There were
deaconesses in the primitive churches (see the [Rom
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#001) note; [Ti1
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#009)., note), to whom was probably
entrusted particularly the care of the female members of a church. In
the custom which prevailed in the oriental world, of excluding females
from the public gaze, and of confining them to their houses, it would
not be practicable for the apostles to have access to them. The duties
of instructing and exhorting them were then probably entrusted chiefly
to pious females; and in this way important aid would be rendered in the
gospel. Paul could regard such as "laboring with him," though they were
not engaged in preaching.

With Clement also - That is, they were associated with Clement, and with
the other fellow-laborers of Paul, in aiding him in the gospel. Clement
as doubtless someone who was well known among them; and the apostle felt
that, by associating them with him, as having been real helpers in the
gospel, their claim to respectful attention would be better appreciated.
Who Clement was, is unknown. Most of the ancients say it was Clement of
Rome, one of the primitive fathers. But there is no evidence of this.
The name Clement was common, and there is no improbability in supposing
that there might have been a preacher of this name in the church at
Philippi.

Whose names are in the book of life - see the notes at [Isa
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#003). The phrase, "the book of life,"
which occurs here, and in [Rev 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#005);
[Rev 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#008); [Rev
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#012), [Rev
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#015); [Rev
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027); [Rev
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#019), is a Jewish phrase, and refers
originally to a record or catalogue of names, as the roll of an army. It
then means to be among the living, as the name of an individual would be
erased from a catalog when he was deceased. The word "life" here refers
to eternal life; and the whole phrase refers to those who were enrolled
among the true friends of God, or who would certainly be saved. The use
of this phrase here implies the belief of Paul that these persons were
true Christians. Names that are written in the book of life will not be
blotted out. If the hand of God records them there who can obliterate
them?

[Philippians 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">phi 4:4</span></span>

Rejoice in the Lord alway - see the notes at [Phi
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#001). It is the privilege of Christians
to do this, not at certain periods and at distant intervals, but at all
times they may rejoice that there is a God and Saviour; they may rejoice
in the character, law, and government of God - in his promises, and in
communion with him. The Christian, therefore, may be, and should be,
always a happy man. If everything else changes, yet the Lord does not
change; if the sources of all other joy are dried up, yet this is not;
and there is not a moment of a Christian's life in which he may not find
joy in the character, law, and promises of God.

[Philippians 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">phi 4:5</span></span>

Let your moderation be known unto all men - That is, let it be such that
others may see it. This does not mean that they were to make an
ostentatious display of it, but that it should be such a characteristic
of their lives that it would be constantly visible to others. The word
"moderation" - ἐπιεικὲς epieikes - refers to restraint on the passions,
general soberness of living, being free from all excesses. The word
properly means that which is fit or suitable, and then propriety,
gentleness, mildness - They were to indulge in no excess of passion, or
dress, or eating, or drinking. They were to govern their appetites,
restrain their temper, and to be examples of what was proper for people
in view of the expectation that the Lord would soon appear.

The Lord is at hand - Is near; see the [Phi
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020) note; [Co1
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#022) note. This has the appearance of
being a phrase in common use among the early Christians, and as being
designed to keep before their minds a lively impression of an event
which ought, by its anticipation, to produce an important effect.
Whether, by this phrase, they commonly understood the coming of the Lord
to destroy Jerusalem, or to remove them by death, or to judge the world,
or to reign personally on the earth, it is impossible now to determine,
and is not very material to a proper understanding of its use here. The
idea is, that the expectation that the Lord Jesus will "come," ought to
be allowed to produce moderation of our passions, in our manner of
living, in our expectations of what this world can furnish, and in our
desires of earthly good. On him who feels that he is soon to die, and to
stand at the bar of God - on him who expects soon to see the Lord Jesus
coming in the clouds of heaven, it cannot fail to have this effect.
People indulge their passions - are extravagant in their plans of life,
and in their expectations of earthly good for themselves and for their
families, because they have no realizing sense of the truth that there
is before them a vast eternity. He that has a lively expectation that
heaven will soon be his, will form very moderate expectations of what
this world can furnish.

[Philippians 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">phi 4:6</span></span>

Be careful for nothing - That is, be not anxious or solicitous about the
things of the present life. The word used here - μεριμνᾶτε merimnate -
does not mean that we are to exercise no care about worldly matters - no
care to preserve our property, or to provide for our families (compare
[Ti1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#008)); but that there is to be
such confidence in God as to free the mind from anxiety, and such a
sense of dependence on him as to keep it calm; see the subject explained
in the notes on [Mat 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#025).

But in everything - Everything in reference to the supply of your wants,
and the wants of your families; everything in respect to afflictions,
embarrassments, and trials; and everything relating to your spiritual
condition. There is nothing which pertains to body, mind, estate,
friends, conflicts, losses, trials, hopes, fears, in reference to which
we may not go and spread it all out before the Lord.

By prayer and supplication - The word rendered "supplication" is a
stronger term than the former. It is the mode of prayer which especially
arises from the sense of "need," or "want" - from δέομαι deomai, "to
want, to need."

With thanksgiving - Thanksgiving connected with prayer. We can always
find something to be thankful for, no matter what may be the burden of
our wants, or the special subject of our petitions. When we pray for the
supply of our wants, we may be thankful for that kind providence which
has hitherto befriended us; when we pray for restoration from sickness,
we may be thankful for the health we have hitherto enjoyed, and for
God's merciful interposition in the former days of trial, and for his
goodness in now sparing our lives; when we pray that our children and
friends may be preserved from danger and death, we may remember how
often God has interposed to save them; when, oppressed with a sense of
sin, we pray for pardon, we have abundant cause of thanksgiving that
there is a glorious way by which we may be saved. The greatest sufferer
that lives in this world of redeeming love, and who has the offer of
heaven before him, has cause of gratitude.

Let your request be made known unto God - Not as if you were to give him
information, but to express to him your wants. God needs not to be
informed of our necessities, but he requires that we come and express
them to him; compare [Eze 36:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#037). "Thus
saith the Lord God, I will yet for this be inquired of by the house of
Israel to do it for them."

[Philippians 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">phi 4:7</span></span>

And the peace of God - The peace which God gives. The peace here
particularly referred to is that which is felt when we have no anxious
care about the supply of our needs, and when we go confidently and
commit everything into the hands of God. "Thou wilt keep him in perfect
peace whose mind is stayed on thee;" [Isa
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#003); see the notes at [Joh
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027).

Which passeth all understanding - That is, which surpasses all that
people had conceived or imagined. The expression is one that denotes
that the peace imparted is of the highest possible kind. The apostle
Paul frequently used terms which had somewhat of a hyperbolical cast
(see the notes on [Eph 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#019); compare
[Joh 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#025), and the language here is
that which one would use who designed to speak of that which was of the
highest order. The Christian, committing his way to God, and feeling
that he will order all things aright, has a peace which is nowhere else
known. Nothing else will furnish it but religion. No confidence that a
man can have in his own powers; no reliance which he can repose on his
own plans or on the promises or fidelity of his fellow-men, and no
calculations which he can make on the course of events, can impart such
peace to the soul as simple confidence in God.

Shall keep your hearts and minds - That is, shall keep them from anxiety
and agitation. The idea is, that by thus making our requests known to
God, and going to him in view of all our trials and wants, the mind
would be preserved from distressing anxiety. The way to find peace, and
to have the heart kept from trouble, is thus to go and spread out all
before the Lord; compare [Isa 26:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#003),
[Isa 26:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#020); [Isa
37:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#001). The word rendered here "shall
keep," is a military term, and means that the mind would be guarded as a
camp or castle is. It would be preserved from the intrusion of anxious
fears and alarms.

Through Christ Jesus - By his agency, or intervention. It is only in him
that the mind can be preserved in peace. It is not by mere confidence in
God, or by mere prayer, but it is by confidence in God as he is revealed
through the Redeemer, and by faith in him. Paul never lost sight of the
truth that all the security and happiness of a believer were to be
traced to the Saviour.

[Philippians 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">phi 4:8</span></span>

Finally, brethren - As for what remains - τὸ λοιπὸν to loipon - or as a
final counsel or exhortation.

Whatsoever things are true - In this exhortation the apostle assumes
that there were certain things admitted to be true, and pure, and good,
in the world, which had not been directly revealed, or which were
commonly regarded as such by the people of the world, and his object is
to show them that such things ought to be exhibited by the Christian.
Everything that was honest and just toward God and toward people was to
be practiced by them, and they were in all things to be examples of the
highest kind of morality. They were not to exhibit partial virtues; not
to perform one set of duties to the neglect or exclusion of others; not
to be faithful in their duties to God, and to neglect their duty to
people, not to be punctual in their religious rites, and neglectful of
the comment laws of morality; but they were to do everything that could
be regarded as the fair subject of commendation, and that was implied in
the highest moral character. The word true refers here to everything
that was the reverse of falsehood. They were to be true to their
engagements; true to their promises; true in their statements; and true
in their friendships. They were to maintain the truth about God; about
eternity; about the judgment; and about every man's character. Truth is
a representation of things as they are; and they were constantly to live
under the correct impression of objects. A man who is false to his
engagements, or false in his statements and promises, is one who will
always disgrace religion.

Whatsoever things are honest - σεμνὰ semna. Properly, venerable,
reverend; then honorable, reputable. The word was originally used in
relation to the gods, and to the things that pertained to them, as being
worthy of honor or veneration - Passow. As applied to people, it
commonly means grave, dignified, worthy of veneration or regard. In the
New Testament it is rendered "grave" in [Ti1
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008), [Ti1
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#011), and [Tit
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#002), the only places where the word
occurs except this; and the noun (σεμνότης semnotēs) is rendered
"honesty" in [Ti1 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#002), and "gravity"
in [Ti1 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004), and [Tit
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#007). It occurs nowhere else in the New
Testament. The word, therefore, does not express precisely what the word
"honest" does with us, as confined to dealings or business transactions,
but rather has reference to what was regarded as worthy of reputation or
honor; what there was in the customs of society, in the respect due to
age and rank, and in the contact of the world, that deserved respect or
esteem. It includes indeed what is right in the transaction of business,
but it embraces also much more, and means that the Christian is to show
respect to all the venerable and proper customs of society, when they
did not violate conscience or interfere with the law of God; compare
[Ti1 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#007).

Whatsoever things are just - The things which are right between man and
man. A Christian should be just in all his dealings. His religion does
not exempt him from the strict laws which bind people to the exercise of
this virtue, and there is no way by which a professor of religion can do
more injury perhaps than by injustice and dishonesty in his dealings. It
is to be remembered that the people of the world, in estimating a
person's character, affix much more importance to the virtues of justice
and honesty than they do to regularity in observing the ordinances of
religion; and therefore if a Christian would make an impression on his
fellow-men favorable to religion, it is indispensable that he manifest
uncorrupted integrity in his dealings.

Whatsoever things are pure - Chaste - in thought, in feeling, and in the
conversation between the sexes; compare the notes at [Ti1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#002).

Whatsoever things are lovely - The word used here means properly what is
dear to anyone; then what is pleasing. Here it means what is amiable -
such a temper of mind that one can love it; or such as to be agreeable
to others. A Christian should not be sour, crabby, or irritable in his
temper - for nothing almost tends so much to injure the cause of
religion as a temper always chafed; a brow morose and stern; an eye that
is severe and unkind, and a disposition to find fault with everything.
And yet it is to be regretted that there are many persons who make no
pretensions to piety, who far surpass many professors of religion in the
virtue here commended. A sour and crabby temper in a professor of
religion will undo all the good that he attempts to do.

Whatsoever things are of good report - That is, whatsoever is truly
reputable in the world at large. There are actions which all people
agree in commending, and which in all ages and countries are regarded as
virtues. courtesy, urbanity, kindness, respect for parents, purity
between brothers and sisters, are among those virtues, and the Christian
should be a pattern and an example in them all. His usefulness depends
much more on the cultivation of these virtues than is commonly supposed.

If there be any virtue - If there is anything truly virtuous. Paul did
not suppose that he had given a full catalogue of the virtues which he
would have cultivated. He, therefore, adds, that if there was anything
else that had the nature of true virtue in it, they should be careful to
cultivate that also. The Christian should be a pattern and an example of
every virtue.

And if there be any praise - Anything worthy of praise, or that ought to
be praised.

Think on these things - Let them be the object of your careful attention
and study, so as to practice them. Think what they are; think on the
obligation to observe them; think on the influence which they would have
on the world around you.

[Philippians 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">phi 4:9</span></span>

Those things which ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and
seen in me, do - That is, what you have witnessed in me, and what you
have learned of me, and what you have heard about me, practice
yourselves. Paul refers them to his uniform conduct - to all that they
had seen, and known, and heard of him, as that which it was proper for
them to imitate. The same thing, substantially, he urges in [Phi
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#017); see the notes at that verse. It
could have been only the consciousness of a pure and upright life which
would make such counsel proper. How few are the people at this day who
can urge others to imitate all that they have seen in them, and learned
from them, and heard of them.

And the God of peace shall be with you - The God who gives peace;
compare [Heb 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#020); [Th1
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023); see also the notes at [Phi
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007). The meaning here is, that Paul,
by pursuing the course of life which he had led, and which he here
counsels them to follow, had found that it had been attended with the
blessing of the God of peace, and he felt the fullest assurance that the
same blessing would rest on them if they imitated his example. The way
to obtain the blessing of the God of peace, is to lead a holy life, and
to perform with faithfulness all the duties which we owe to God and to
our fellow-men.

[Philippians 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">phi 4:10</span></span>

But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly - The favor which Paul had received,
and for which he felt so much gratitude, had been received of the
Philippians; but he regarded "the Lord" as the source of it, and
rejoiced in it as the expression of his kindness. The effect was to lead
his heart with cheerfulness and joy up to God.

That now at the last - After so long a time. The reason why he had not
before received the favor, was not neglect or inattention on their part,
but the difficulty of having communication with him.

Your care of me hath flourished again - In the margin this is rendered
"is revived," and this is the proper meaning of the Greek word. It is a
word properly applicable to plants or flowers, meaning to grow green
again; to flourish again; to spring up again. Here the meaning is, that
they had been again prospered in their care of him, and to Paul it
seemed as if their care had sprung up anew.

Wherein ye were also careful - That is, they were desirous to render him
assistance, and to minister to his wants. Paul adds this, lest they
should think he was disposed to blame them for inattention.

But ye lacked opportunity - Because there were no persons going to Rome
from Philippi by whom they could send to him. The distance was
considerable, and it is not probable that the contact between the two
places was very constant.

[Philippians 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">phi 4:11</span></span>

Not that I speak in respect of want - Though Paul was doubtless often in
circumstances of necessity, yet he did not make these remarks on that
account. In his journeys, in his imprisonments, he could not but be at
times in want; but be had learned to bear all this; and that which most
impressed itself on his mind was the interest which the church ought to
show in the cause of religion, and the evidence which it would thus
furnish of attachment to the cause. As to his own personal trials, he
had learned to bear them, so that they did not give him great
uneasiness.

For I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content -
That is, to have a contented mind. Paul says that he had "learned" this.
Probably by nature he had a mind as prone to impatience as others, but
he had been in circumstances fitted to produce a different state of
feeling. He had had ample experience [Co2
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#026), and, in his life of trials, he
had acquired invaluable lessons on the subject. He had had abundant time
for reflection, and he had found that there was grace enough in the
gospel to enable him to bear trials with resignation. The considerations
by which he had been taught this, he does not state; but they were
probably such as the following: that it is wrong to complain at the
allotments of Providence; that a spirit of impatience does no good,
remedies no evil, and supplies no want; that God could provide for him
in a way which he could not foresee, and that the Saviour was able
abundantly to sustain him. A contented mind is an invaluable blessing,
and is one of the fruits of religion in the soul. It arises from the
belief that God is right in all his ways. Why should we be impatient,
restless, discontented? What evil will be remedied by it? what want
supplied? what calamity removed? "He that is of a merry heart hath a
continual feast" [Pro 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#015); and one
of the secrets of happiness is to have a mind satisfied with all the
allotments of Providence. The members of the Episcopal church
beautifully pray, every day: "Give us minds always contented with our
present condition." No prayer can be offered which will enter more
deeply into all our happiness on earth.

[Philippians 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">phi 4:12</span></span>

I know both how to be abased - To be in circumstances of want.

And I know how to abound - To have an abundance. lie had been in
circumstances where he had an ample supply for all his needs, and knew
what it was to have enough. It requires as much grace to keep the heart
right in prosperity, as it does in adversity, and perhaps more.
Adversity, of itself, does something to keep the mind in a right state;
prosperity does nothing.

Everywhere and in all things - In all my travels and imprisonments, and
in reference to everything that occurs, I learn important lessons on
these points.

I am instructed - The word used here - μεμύημαι memuēmai - is one that
is commonly used in relation to mysteries, and denoted being instructed
in the secret doctrines that were taught in the ancient "mysteries" -
Passow. In those mysteries, it was only the "initiated" who were made
acquainted with the lessons that were taught there. Paul says that he
had been initiated into the lessons taught by trials and by prosperity.
The secret and important lessons which these schools of adversity are
fitted to teach, he had had an ample opportunity of learning; and he had
faithfully embraced the doctrines thus taught.

Both to be full - That is, he had learned to have an ample supply of his
needs, and yet to observe the laws of temperance and soberness, and to
cherish gratitude for the mercies which he had enjoyed.

And to be hungry - That is, to be in circumstances of want, and yet not
to murmur or complain. He had learned to bear all this without
discontent. This was then, as it is now, no easy lesson to learn; and it
is not improper to suppose that, when Paul says that he had "been
instructed" in this, even he means to say that it was only by degrees
that he had acquired it. It is a lesson which we slowly learn, not to
complain at the allotments of Providence; not to be envious at the
prosperity of others; not to repine when our comforts are removed. There
may be another idea suggested here. The condition of Paul was not always
the same. He passed through great reverses. At one time he had
abundance; then he was reduced to want; now he was in a state which
might be regarded as affluent; then he was brought down to extreme
poverty. Yesterday, he was poor and hungry; today, all his necessities
are supplied.

Now, it is in these sudden reverses that grace is most needed, and in
these rapid changes of life that it is most difficult to learn the
lessons of calm contentment. People get accustomed to an even tenor of
life, no matter what it is, and learn to shape their temper and their
calculations according to it. But these lessons of philosophy vanish
when they pass suddenly from one extreme to another, and find their
condition in life suddenly changed. The garment that was adapted to
weather of an uniform temperature, whether of heat or cold, fails to be
suited to our needs when these transitions rapidly succeed each other.
Such changes are constantly occurring in life. God tries his people, not
by a steady course of prosperity, or by long-continued and uniform
adversity, but by transition from the one to the other; and it often
happens that the grace which would have been sufficient for either
continued prosperity or adversity, would fail in the transition from the
one to the other.

Hence, new grace is imparted for this new form of trial, and new traits
of Christian character are developed in these rapid transitions in life,
as some of the most beautiful exhibitions of the laws of matter are
brought out in the transitions produced in chemistry. The rapid changes
from heat to cold, or from a solid to a gaseous state, develop
properties before unknown, and acquaint us much more intimately with the
wonderful works of God. The gold or the diamond, unsubjected to the
action of intense heat, and to the changes produced by the powerful
agents brought to bear on them, might have continued to shine with
steady beauty and brilliancy; but we should never have witnessed the
special beauty and brilliancy which may be produced in rapid chemical
changes. And so there is many a beautiful trait of character which would
never have been known by either continued prosperity or adversity. There
might have been always a beautiful exhibition of virtue and piety, but
not tidal special manifestation which is produced in the transitions
from the one to the other.

[Philippians 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">phi 4:13</span></span>

I can do all things - From the experience which Paul had in these
various circumstances of life, he comes here to the general conclusion
that he could "do all things." He could bear any trial, perform any
duty, subdue any evil propensity of his nature, and meet all the
temptations incident to any condition of prosperity or adversity. His
own experience in the various changes of life had warranted him in
arriving at this conclusion; and he now expresses the firm confidence
that nothing would be required of him which he would not be able to
perform. In Paul, this declaration was not a vain self-reliance, nor was
it the mere result of his former experience. He knew well where the
strength was to be obtained by which to do all things, and on that arm
that was able to uphold him he confidently relied.

Through Christ which strengtheneth me - See the notes at [Joh
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005). Of the strength which Christ can
impart, Paul had had abundant experience; and now his whole reliance was
there. It was not in any native ability which he had; not in any vigor
of body or of mind; not in any power which there was in his own
resolutions; it was in the strength that he derived from the Redeemer.
By that he was enabled to bear cold, fatigue, and hunger; by that, he
met temptations and persecutions; and by that, he engaged in the
performance of his arduous duties let us learn, hence:

\(1\) that we need not sink under any trial, for there is one who can
strengthen us.

\(2\) that we need not yield to temptation. There is one who is able to
make a way for our escape.

\(3\) that we need not be harassed, and vexed, and tortured with
improper thoughts and unholy desires. There is one who can enable us to
banish such thoughts from the mind, and restore the right balance to the
affections of the soul.

\(4\) that we need not dread what is to come. Trials, temptations,
poverty, want, persecution, may await us; but we need not sink into
despondency. At every step of life, Christ is able to strengthen us, and
can bring us triumphantly through. What a privilege it is, therefore, to
be a Christian - to feel, in the trials of life, that we have one
friend, unchanging and most mighty, who can always help us! How
cheerfully should we engage in our duties, and meet the trials that are
before us, leaning on the arm of our Almighty Redeemer! Let us not
shrink from duty; let us not dread persecution let us not fear the bed
of death. In all circumstances, Christ, our unchanging Friend, can
uphold us. Let the eye and the affections of the heart be fixed on him;
let the simple, fervent, believing prayer be directed always to him when
trials come, when temptations assail, when duty presses hard upon us,
and when a crowd of unholy and forbidden thoughts rush into the soul:
and we shall be safe.

[Philippians 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">phi 4:14</span></span>

Notwithstanding, ye have well done - Though he had learned the grace of
contentment, and though he knew that Christ could enable him to do all
things, it was well for them to show sympathy for his sufferings; for it
evinced a proper regard for a benefactor and an apostle.

Ye did communicate - You took part with my affliction. That is, you
sympathized with me, and assisted me in bearing it. The relief which
they had sent, not only supplied his wants, but it sustained him by the
certainty that he was not forgotten.

[Philippians 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">phi 4:15</span></span>

In the beginning of the gospel - "At the time when I first preached the
gospel to you; or when the gospel began its benign influence on your
hearts."

When I departed from Macedonia - See [Act
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#014). The last place that Paul
visited in Macedonia, at that time, was Berea. There a tumult was
excited by the Jews, and it was necessary for him to go away. He left
Macedonia to go to Athens; and left it in haste, amidst scenes of
persecution, and when he needed sympathizing aid. At that time, as well
as when he was in Thessalonica [Act
17:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#001), he needed the assistance of
others to supply his wants; and he says that aid was not withheld. The
meaning here is, that this aid was sent to him "as he was departing from
Macedonia;" that is, alike in Thessalonica and afterward. This was about
twelve years before this Epistle was written - Doddridge.

No church communicated with me - No church so participated with me in my
sufferings and necessities, as to send to my relief; compare [Co2
11:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#008). Why they did not, Paul does
not intimate. it is not necessary to suppose that he meant to blame
them. They might not have been acquainted with his necessities. All that
is implied here is, that he specially commends the Philippians for their
attention to him.

[Philippians 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">phi 4:16</span></span>

For even in Thessalonica; - see the notes, [Act
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#001). Paul remained there long enough
to establish a flourishing church. He met, indeed, with much opposition
and persecution there; and, hence, it was necessary that his wants
should be supplied by others.

[Philippians 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">phi 4:17</span></span>

Not because I desire a gift - "The reason why I rejoice in the reception
of what you have sent to me, is not that I am covetous." From the
interest with which he had spoken of their attention to him, some might
perhaps be disposed to say, that it arose from this cause. He says,
therefore, that, grateful as he was for the favor which he had received,
his chief interest in it arose from the fact that it would contribute
ultimately to their own good. It showed that they were governed by
Christian principle, and this would not fall to be rewarded. What Paul
states here is by no means impossible; though it may not be very common.
In the reception of layouts from others, it is practicable to rejoice in
them mainly, because their bestowment will be a means of good to the
benefactor himself. All our selfish feelings and gratifications may be
absorbed and lost in the superior joy which we have in seeing others
actuated by a right spirit, and in the belief that they will be
rewarded. This feeling is one of the fruits of Christian kindness. It is
that which leads us to look away from self, and to rejoice in every
evidence that others will be made happy.

I desire fruit - The word "fruit" is often used in the Scriptures, as
elsewhere, to denote results, or that which is produced. Thus, we speak
of punishment as the fruit of sin, poverty as the fruit of idleness, and
happiness as the fruit of a virtuous life. The language is taken from
the fact, that a man reaps or gathers the fruit or result of that which
he plants.

To your account - A phrase taken from commercial dealings. The apostle
wished that it might be set down to their credit. He desired that when
they came to appear before God, they might reap the benefit of all the
acts of kindness which they had shown him.

[Philippians 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">phi 4:18</span></span>

But I have all - Margin, "or, have received." The phrase here is
equivalent to, "I have received everything. I have all I want, and
desire no more." He was entirely satisfied. What they had sent to him
is, of course, now unknown. It is sufficient to know, that it was of
such a nature as to make his situation comfortable.

I am full - I have enough, This is a strong expression, denoting that
nothing was lacking.

Having received of Epaphroditus - see the notes at [Phi
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#025).

An odour of a sweet smell - This does not mean that it was such an odor
to Paul, but to God. He regarded it as an offering which they had made
to God himself; and he was persuaded that he would regard it as
acceptable to him. They had doubtless made the offering, not merely from
personal friendship for Paul, but because he was a minister of Christ,
and from love for his cause; and Paul felt assured that this offering
would be acceptable to him; compare [Mat
10:41-42](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#041). The word "odor" refers
properly to the pleasant fragrance produced in the temple by the burning
of incense; notes on [Luk 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#009). On the
meaning of the word rendered "a sweet smell," - εὐωδία euōdia - see the
notes at [Co2 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015). The whole language
here is taken from an act of worship; and the apostle regarded what he
had received from the Philippians as in fact a thank-offering to God,
and a presented with the spirit of true devotion to him. It was not,
indeed, a formal act of worship; but it was acceptable to God as an
expression of their regard for his cause.

A sacrifice acceptable - Acceptable to God; compare [Heb
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#016); notes, [Rom
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001).

Well-pleasing to God - Because it evinced a regard for true religion.
Hence, learn:

\(1\) that kindness done to the ministers of the gospel is regarded as
an acceptable offering to God.

\(2\) that kindness to the servants of God in distress and want, is as
well-pleasing to God as direct acts of worship.

\(3\) that such acts of benevolence are evidences of attachment to the
cause of religion, and are proofs of genuine piety; notes, [Mat
10:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#042).

[Philippians 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">phi 4:19</span></span>

But my God shall supply all your need - That is, "You have shown your
regard for me as a friend of God, by sending to me in my distress, and I
have confidence that, in return for all this, God will supply all your
needs, when you are in circumstances of necessity." Paul's confidence in
this seems not to have been founded on any express revelation; but on
the general principle that God would regard their offering with favor.
Nothing is lost, even in the present life, by doing good. In thousands
of instances it is abundantly repaid. The benevolent are not usually
poor; and if they are, God often raises up for them benefactions, and
sends supplies in a manner as unexpected, and hearing proofs of divine
interposition as decided, as when supplies were sent by the ravens to
the prophet.

According to his riches in glory - see the notes, [Eph
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#016). The word "riches" here means,
His abundant fullness; His possessing all things; His inexhaustible
ability to supply their needs. The phrase "in glory," is probably to he
connected with the following phrase, "in Christ Jesus;" and means that
the method of imparting supplies to people was through Jesus Christ, and
was a glorious method; or, that it was done in a glorious manner. It is
such an expression as Paul is accustomed to use, when speaking of what
God does. He is not satisfied with saying simply that it is so; but
connects with it the idea that whatever God does is done in a way worthy
of himself, and so as to illustrate his own perfections.

In Christ Jesus - By the medium of Christ; or through him. All the
favors that Paul expected for himself, or his fellow-men, he believed
would be conferred through the Redeemer. Even the supply of our temporal
needs comes to us through the Saviour. Were it not for the atonement,
there is no more reason to suppose that blessings would be conferred
upon people than that they would be on fallen angels. For them no
atonement has been made; and at the hand of justice they have received
only wretchedness and woe.

[Philippians 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">phi 4:20</span></span>

Now unto God and our Father, ... - see the notes at [Rom
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#027). It was common for Paul to
address such an ascription of praise to God, at the close of his
epistles.

[Philippians 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">phi 4:21</span></span>

Salute every saint in Christ Jesus - It was usual for him also to close
his epistles with affectionate salutations to various members of the
churches to which he wrote. These salutations are generally specific,
and mention the names, particularly if prominent members of the
churches; see the close of the Epistles to the Romans; 1 Corinthians;
Colossians, and 2 Timothy. In this Epistle, however, as in some others,
the salutation in general. Why none are specified in particular is not
certainly known.

The brethren which are with me ... - The word "brethren" here probably
refers to ministers that were with Paul as the "saints" in general are
mentioned in the next verse. It is possible that at Rome the ministers
were known by the general name of "the brethren" - Pierce.

[Philippians 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">phi 4:22</span></span>

All the saints salute you - All in Rome, where this Epistle was written.
No individuals are specified, perhaps because none of the Christians at
Rome wore personally known to the church at Philippi. They would,
however, feel a deep interest in a church which had thus the confidence
and affection of Paul. There is reason to believe that the bonds of
affection among the churches then were much stronger than they are now.
There was a generous warmth in the newness of the Christian affection -
the first ardor of love; and the common trials to which they were
exposed would serve to bind them closely together.

Chiefly they that are of Caesar's household - That is, of Nero, who was
at that time the reigning emperor. The name Caesar was given to all the
emperors after the time of Julius Caesar, as the name Pharaoh was the
common name of the kings of Egypt. The phrase used here - "the household
of Caesar" - may refer to the relatives of the emperor; and it is
certainly possible that some of them may have been converted to
Christianity. But it does not of necessity refer to those related to
him, but may be applied to his domestics, or to some of the officers of
the court that were more particularly employed around his person; and as
it is more probable that some of them would be converted than his own
relatives, it is more safe to suppose that they were intended; see the
notes at [Phi 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#013).

[Philippians 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">phi 4:23</span></span>

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, ... - notes, [Rom
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020).

In regard to the subscription at the end of this Epistle, it may be
remarked, as has been done of the other subscriptions at the end of the
Epistles, that it is of no authority whatever. There is no reason,
however, to doubt that in this case it is correct. The Epistle bears
internal evidence of having been written from Rome, and was doubtless
sent by Epaphroditus. See the introduction, section 3. There is
considerable variety in the subscription. The Greek is: "It was written
to the Philippians from Rome by Epaphroditus." The Syriac: "The Epistle
to the Philippians was written from Rome, and sent by Epaphroditus." The
Aethiopic: "To the Philippians, by Timothy."

Remarks On Philippians 4

The principal lessons taught in this closing chapter are the following:

1\. It is our duty to be firm in the Lord, in all the trials,
temptations, and persecutions to which we may be exposed; [Phi
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001). This duty should be pressed on
Christians by their teachers, and by each other, by all that is tender
and sacred in the Christian profession, and all that is endearing in
Christian friendship. Like Paul, we should appeal to others as "brethren
dearly beloved and longed for," and by all their affection for us we
should entreat them to be steadfast in the Christian profession. As
their "joy and crown," also, ministers should desire that their people
should be holy. Their own happiness and reward is to be closely
connected with the firmness with which their people maintain the
principles of the Christian faith. If Christians, therefore, wish to
impart the highest joy to their religious teachers, and to exalt them as
high as possible in future happiness and glory, they should strive to be
faithful to their great Master, and to be steadfast in attachment to his
cause.

2\. It is the duty of those who have from any cause been alienated, to
seek to be reconciled; [Phi 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#002). They
should be of the same mind. Almost nothing does more to hinder the cause
of religion than alienations and bickerings among its professed friends.
It is possible for them to live in harmony, and to be of the same mind
in the Lord; and such is the importance of this, that it well deserves
to be enforced by apostolic authority and persuasion. It may be
observed, also, that in the case referred to in this chapter - that of
Euodias and Syntyche - the exhortation to reconciliation is addressed to
both. Which was in the wrong, or whether both were, is not intimated,
and is not needful for us to know. It is enough to know that there was
alienation, and both of them were exhorted to see that the quarrel was
made up. So, in all cases where members of the church are at variance,
it is the business of both parties to seek to be reconciled, and neither
party is right if he waits for the other before he moves in the matter.
If you feel that you have been injured, go and tell your brother kindly
wherein you think he has done you wrong. He may at once explain the
matter, and show that you have misunderstood it, or he may make proper
confession or restitution. Or, if he will do neither, you will have done
your duty; [Mat 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015). If you are
conscious that you have injured, him, then nothing is more proper than
that you should go and make confession. The blame of the quarrel rests
wholly on you. And if some meddling third person has got up the quarrel
between you, then go and see your brother, and disappoint the devices of
the enemy of religion.

3\. It is our duty and our privilege to rejoice in the Lord always; [Phi
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#004). As God is unchanging, we may
always find joy in him. The character of God which we loved yesterday,
and in the contemplation of which we found happiness then, is the same
today, and its contemplation will furnish the same joy to us now. His
promises are the same; his government is the same; his readiness to
impart consolation is the same; the support which he can give in trial
and temptation is the same. Though in our own hearts we may find much
over which to mourn, yet when we look away from ourselves we may find
abundant sources of consolation and peace. The Christian, therefore, may
be always happy. If he will look to God and not to himself; to heaven
and not to earth, he will find permanent and substantial sources of
enjoyment. But in nothing else than God can we rejoice always. Our
friends. in whom we find comfort, are taken away; the property that we
thought would make us happy, fails to do so; and pleasures that we
thought would satisfy, pall upon the sense and make us wretched. No man
can be permanently happy who does not make the Lord the source of joy,
and who does not expect to find his chief pleasure in him.

4\. It is a privilege to be permitted to go and commit everything to
God; [Phi 4:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006). The mind may be in
such a state that it shall feel no anxiety about anything. We may feel
so certain that God will supply all our wants; that he will bestow upon
us all that is really necessary for us in this life and the next, and
that he will withhold from us nothing which it is not for our real good
to have withheld, that the mind may be constantly in a state of peace.
With a thankful heart for all the mercies which we have enjoyed - and in
all cases they are many - we may go and commit ourselves to God for all
that we need hereafter Such is the privilege of religion; such an
advantage is it to be a Christian. Such a state of mind will be followed
by peace. And it is only in such a way that true peace can be found. In
every other method there will be agitation of mind and deep anxiety. If
we have not this confidence in God, and this readiness to go and commit
all to him, we shall be perplexed with the cares of this life; losses
and disappointments will harass us; the changes which occur will weary
and wear out our spirits, and through life we shall be tossed as on a
restless ocean.

5\. It is the duty of Christians to be upright in every respect; [Phi
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008). Every friend of the Redeemer
should be a man of incorruptible and unsuspected integrity. He should be
one who can always be depended on to do what is right, and pure, and
true, and lovely. I know not that there is a more important verse in the
New Testament than the eighth verse of this chapter. It deserves to be
recorded in letters of gold in the dwelling of every Christian, and it
would be well if it could be made to shine on his way as if written in
characters of living light. There should be no virtue, no truth, no
noble plan of benevolence, no pure and holy undertaking in society, of
which the Christian should not be, according to his ability, the patron
and the friend. The reasons are obvious. It is not only because this is
in accordance with the law of God, but it is from its effect on the
community.

The people of the world judge of religion by the character of its
professed friends. It is not from what they hear in the pulpit, or learn
from the Bible, or from treatises on divinity; it is from what they see
in the lives of those who profess to follow Christ. They mark the
expression of the eye; the curl of the lip; the words that we speak -
and if they perceive peevishness and irritability, they set it down to
the credit of religion, They watch the conduct, the temper and
disposition, the manner of doing business, the respect which a man has
for truth, the way in which he keeps his promises, and set it all down
to the credit of religion. If a professed Christian fails in anyone of
these things, he dishonors religion and neutralizes all the good which
he might otherwise do. It is not only the man in the church who is
untrue, and dishonest, and unjust, and unlovely in his temper, that does
evil; it is he who is either false, or dishonest, or unjust, or unlovely
in his temper. One evil propensity will neutralize all that is good; and
one member of the church who fails to lead a moral and upright life will
do much to neutralize all the good that can be done by all the rest of
the church; compare [Ecc 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#001).

6\. It is the duty of Christians to show kindness to the ministers of
the gospel, especially in times and circumstances of want; [Phi
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#010), [Phi
4:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#014). Paul commended much what the
Philippians had done for him. Yet they had done no more than they ought
to do; see [Co1 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#011). He had
established the gospel among them, carrying it to them by great persona,
sacrifice and self-denial. What he had done for them had cost him much
more than what they had done for him - and was of much more value. He
had been in want. He was a prisoner; among strangers; incapable of
exerting himself for his own support; not in a situation to minister to
his own needs, as he had often done by tent-making, and in these
circumstances he needed the sympathizing help of friends. He was not a
man to be voluntarily dependent on others, or to be at any time a burden
to them. But circumstances beyond his control had made it necessary for
others to supply his needs.

The Philippians nobly responded to his claims on them, and did all that
he could ask. Their conduct is a good example for other Christians to
imitate in their treatment of the ministers of the gospel. Ministers now
are often in want. They become old, and are unable to labor; they are
sick, and cannot render the service which they have been accustomed to;
their families are afflicted, and they do not have the means of
providing for them comfortably in sickness. It is to be remembered also
that such cases often happen where a minister has spent the best part of
his life in the service of a people; where he has devoted his most
vigorous days to their welfare; where he has been unable to lay up
anything for sickness or old age; where he may have abandoned what would
have been a lucrative calling in life, for the purpose of preaching the
gospel. If there ever is a claim on the generosity of a people, his case
is one, and there is no debt of gratitude which a people ought more
cheerfully to pay than that of providing for the needs of an aged or an
afflicted and disabled servant of Christ, who has spent his best years
in endeavoring to train them and their children up for heaven.

Yet, it cannot be denied, that great injustice is often done in such
cases. The poor beast that has served a man and his family in the days
of his vigor, is often turned out in old age to die; and something like
this sometimes occurs in the treatment of ministers of the gospel. The
conduct of a people, generous in many other respects, is often
unaccountable in their treatment of their pastors; and one of the
lessons which ministers often have to learn, like their Master, by
bitter experience, is the ingratitude of those for whose welfare they
have toiled, and prayed, and wept.

7\. Let us learn to be contented with our present condition; [Phi
4:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#011). Paul learned this lesson. It
is not a native state of mind. It is a lesson to be acquired by
experience. By nature we are all restless and impatient; we are reaching
after things that we have not, and often after things that we cannot and
ought not to have. We are envious of the condition of others, and
suppose that if we had what they have we should be happy. Yet, if we
have right feelings, we shall always find enough in our present
condition to make us contented. We shall have such confidence in the
arrangements of Providence as to feel that things are ordered for the
best. If we are poor, and persecuted, and in want, or are prostrated by
sickness, we shall feel that there is some good reason why this is so
arranged - though the reason may not be known to us. If we are
benevolent, as we ought to be, we shall be willing that others shall be
made happy by what they possess, instead of coveting it for ourselves,
and desiring to wrest it from them.

If we are disposed to estimate our mercies, and not to give up our minds
to a spirit of complaining, we shall see enough around us to make us
contented. Paul was a prisoner; he was poor; he was among strangers; he
had neither wife nor children; he was about to be tried for his life,
and probably put to death - yet he learned to be content. He had a good
conscience; the hope of heaven; a sound intellect; a heart disposed to
do good, and confidence in God, and why should a man in such
circumstances complain? Says Jeremy Taylor, "Am I fallen into the hands
of publicans and sequestrators, who have taken all from me? What now?
Let me look about me. They have left me the sun and moon, fire and
water, a loving wife, and many friends to pity me, and some to relieve
me, and I can still discourse; and unless I list, they have not taken
away my merry countenance, and a cheerful spirit, and a good conscience;
they still have left me the providence of God, and all the promises of
the gospel, and my religion, and my hopes of heaven, and my charity to
them too; and still I sleep and digest; I eat and drink; I read and
meditate; I can walk in my neighbor's pleasant fields, and see the
varieties of natural beauties, and delight in all in which God delights,
that is, in virtue and wisdom, in the whole creation, and in God
himself. And he who hath so many causes of joy, and so great, is very
much in love with sorrow and peevishness. who loses all these pleasures,
and chooses to sit down upon his little handful of thorns" - Holy
Living, chapter ii. section vi. Let the whole of this section "on
Contentedness" be read. It is one of the most beautiful arguments for
contentment that ever proceeded from uninspired lips.

8\. In all these things; in all the duties and the trials of life; in
all our efforts to meet temptation, and to cultivate contentment with
our present condition, let us put our trust in the Saviour; [Phi
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#013). Paul said that he could "do all
things through Christ who strengthened him." His strength was there;
ours is there also. If we attempt these things, relying on out own
strength, we shall certainly fail. The bad passions of our nature will
get the ascendency, and we shall be left to discontent and complaining.
The arm that is to uphold us is that of the Redeemer; and relying on
that, we shall find no duty so arduous that we may not be able to
perform it; no temptation so formidable that we may not be able to meet
it; no trial so great that we may not be able to bear it; no situation
in life through which we may be called to pass, where we may not find
contentment and peace. And may God of his rich mercy give to each one
who shalt read these notes on this beautiful Epistle to the Philippians,
abundant grace thus to confide in the Saviour, and to practice all the
duties so tenderly enjoined on the Philippian Christians and on us by
this illustrious prisoner in the cause of Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians Introduction](col000)

</div>
