<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Philippians Index](phi.md)  
  [Previous](phi000)  [Next](phi002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philippians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001.md)

This chapter embraces the following points:

I. The salutation to the church, [Phi
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001.md).

II\. In [Phi 1:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#003.md), the apostle
expresses his gratitude for the evidence which they had given of love to
God, and for their fidelity in the gospel from the time when it was
first proclaimed among them. He says that he was confident that this
would continue, and that God, who had so mercifully imparted grace to
them to be faithful, would do it to the end.

III\. He expresses the earnest hope that they might abound more and more
in knowledge, and be without offence to the day of Christ; [Phi
1:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#009.md).

IV\. In [Phi 1:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#012.md), he states to
them what had been the effect of his imprisonment in Rome - presuming
that in would be grateful intelligence to them that even his
imprisonment had been overruled for the spread of the gospel. His
trials, he says, had been the means of the extension of the knowledge of
Christ even in the palace, and many Christians had been emboldened by
his sufferings to increased diligence in making known the truth. Some,
indeed, he says, preached Christ from unworthy motives, and with a view
to increase his affliction, but in the great fact that Christ was
preached, he says, he rejoiced. Forgetting himself and any injury which
they might design to do to him, he could sincerely rejoice that the
gospel was proclaimed - no matter by whom or with what motives. The
whole affair he trusted would be made conducive to his salvation. Christ
was the great end and aim of his life; and if he were made known
everything else was of minor importance.

V. The mention of the fact [Phi 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#021.md)
that his great aim in living was "Christ." leads him to advert to the
probability that he might soon be with him; [Phi
1:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#022.md). So great was his wish to be
with him, that he would hardly know which to choose - whether to die at
once, or to live and to make him known to others. Believing, however,
that his life might be still useful to them, he had an expectation of
considerable confidence that his life would be spared, and that he would
be released.

VI\. The chapter closes, [Phi 1:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#027.md),
with an earnest exhortation that they would live as became the gospel of
Christ. Whatever might befall him - whether he should be permitted to
see them, or should hear of them, he entreated that he might know that
they were living as became the gospel. They were not to he afraid of
their adversaries; and if called to suffer, they were to remember that
"it was given" them not only to believe on the Redeemer, but also to
suffer in his cause.

[Philippians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">phi 1:1</span></span>

Paul and Timotheus - Paul frequently unites some person with him in his
epistles; see the notes at [Co1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001.md).
It is clear from this, that Timothy was with Paul at Rome. Why he was
there is unknown. It is evident that he was not there as a prisoner with
Paul, and the probability is, that he was one of the friends who had
gone to Rome with a view to show his sympathy with him in his
sufferings; compare the notes at [Ti2
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#009.md). There was special propriety in
the fact that Timothy was joined with the apostle in writing the
Epistle, for he was with him when the church was founded, and doubtless
felt a deep interest in its welfare; Acts 16. Timothy had remained in
Macedonia after Paul went to Athens, and it is not improbable that he
had visited them afterward.

The servants of Jesus Christ - see the notes at [Rom
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001.md).

To all the saints in Christ Jesus - The common appellation given to the
church, denoting that it was holy; see the notes, [Rom
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007.md).

With the bishops - σὺν επισκόποις sun episkopois; see the notes, [Act
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028.md). The word used here occurs in
the New Testament only in the following places: [Act
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028.md), translated "overseers;" and
[Phi 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001.md); [Ti1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002.md); [Tit
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007.md); [Pe1
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#025.md), in each of which places it is
rendered as "bishop." The word properly means an inspector, overseer, or
guardian, and was given to the ministers of the gospel because they
exercised this care over the churches, or were appointed to oversee
their interests. It is a term, therefore, which might be given to any of
the officers of the churches, and was originally equivalent to the term
presbyter. It is evidently used in this sense here. It cannot be used to
denote a diocesan bishop; or a bishop having the care of the churches in
a large district of country, and of a superior rank to other ministers
of the gospel, because the word is used here in the plural number, and
it is in the highest degree improbable that there were dioceses in
Philippi. It is clear, moreover, that they were the only officers of the
church there except "deacons;" and the persons referred to, therefore,
must have been those who were invested simply with the pastoral office.
Thus, Jerome, one of the early fathers, says, respecting the word
bishop: "A presbyter is the same as a bishop. And until there arose
divisions in religion, churches were governed by a common counsel of
presbyters. But afterward, it was everywhere decreed, that one person,
elected from the presbyters, should be placed over the others."
"Philippi," says he, "is a single city of Macedonia; and certainly there
could not have been several like these who are now called bishops, at
one time in the same city. But as, at that time, they called the same
bishops whom they called presbyters also, the apostles spoke
indifferently of bishops as of presbyters." Annotations on the Epistle
to Titus, as quoted by Dr. Woods on Episcopacy, p. 63.

And deacons - On the appointment of deacons, and their duty, see the
notes at [Act 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001.md). The word "deacons"
does not occur before this place in the common version of the New
Testament, though the Greek word rendered here as "deacon" frequently
occurs. It is rendered "minister" and "ministers" in [Mat
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#026.md); [Mar
10:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#043.md); [Rom
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004.md); [Rom
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#008.md); [Co1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#005.md); [Co2
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006.md); [Co2
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#004.md); [Co2
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#015.md), [Co2
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023.md); [Gal
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#017.md); [Eph
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#007.md); [Eph
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#021.md); [Col
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#007.md), [Col
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023.md), [Col
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#025.md); [Col
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#007.md); [Ti1
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#006.md); "servant" and "servants," [Mat
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#013.md); [Mat
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#011.md); [Mar
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#025.md); [Joh
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#005.md), [Joh
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#009.md); [Joh
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#026.md); [Rom
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#001.md); and "deacon" or "deacons," [Phi
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001.md); [Ti1
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008.md), [Ti1
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#012.md). The word properly means
servants, and is then applied to the ministers of the gospel as being
the servants of Christ, and of the churches. Hence, it came especially
to denote those who had charge of the alms of the church, and who were
the overseers of the sick and the poor. In this sense the word is
probably used in the passage before us, as the officers here referred to
were distinct in some way from the bishops. The apostle here mentions
but two orders of ministers in the church at Philippi, and this account
is of great importance in its bearing on the question about the way in
which Christian churches were at first organized, and about the officers
which existed in them. In regard to this we may remark:

\(1\) That only two orders of ministers are mentioned. This is
undeniable, whatever rank they may have held.

\(2\) there is no intimation whatever that a minister like a prelatical
bishop had ever been appointed there, and that the incumbent of the
office was absent, or that the office was now vacant. If the bishop was
absent, as Bloomfield and others suppose, it is remarkable that no
allusion is made to him, and that Paul should have left the impression
that there were in fact but two "orders" there. If there were a prelate
there, why did not Paul refer to him with affectionate salutations? Why
does he refer to the two other "orders of clergy" without the slightest
allusion to the man who was set over them as "superior in ministerial
rank and power?" Was Paul jealous of this prelate? But if they had a
prelate, and the see was then vacant, why is there no reference to this
fact? Why no condolence at their loss? Why no prayer that God would send
them a man to enter into the vacant diocese? It is a mere assumption to
suppose, as the friends of prelacy often do, that they had a prelatical
bishop, but that he was then absent. But even granting this, it is an
inquiry which has never been answered, why Paul did not make some
reference to this fact, and ask their prayers for the absent prelate.

\(3\) the church was organized by the apostle Paul himself, and there
can be no doubt that it was organized on the "truly primitive and
apostolic plan."

\(4\) the church at Philippi was in the center of a large territory; was
the capital of Macedonia, and was not likely to be placed in subjection
to the diocesan of another region.

\(5\) it was surrounded by other churches, since we have express mention
of the church at Thessalonica, and the preaching of the gospel at Berea;
Acts 17.

\(6\) there is more than one bishop mentioned as connected with the
church in Philippi. But these could not have been bishops of the
Episcopal or prelatical order, if Episcopalians choose to say that they
were prelates, then it follows:

\(a\) that there was a plurality of such persons in the same diocese,
the same city, and the same church - which is contrary to the
fundamental idea of Episcopacy. It follows also,

\(b\) that there was entirely missing in the church at Philippi what the
Episcopalians call the "second order" of clergy; that a church was
organized by the apostles defective in one of the essential grades, with
a body of prelates without presbyters - that is, an order of men of
"superior" rank designated to exercise jurisdiction over "priests" who
had no existence.

If there were such presbyters or "priests" there, why did not Paul name
them? If their office was one that was contemplated in the church, and
was then vacant, how did this happen? And if this were so, why is there
no allusion to so remarkable a fact?

\(7\) it follows, therefore, that in this church there were only two
orders of officers; and further that it is right and proper to apply the
term "bishop" to the ordinary ministers of the churches. As no mention
is made of a prelate; as there are but two orders of men mentioned to
whom the care of the church was entrusted, it follows that there was one
church at least organized by the apostles without any prelate.

\(8\) the same thing may be observed in regard to the distinction
between "teaching" elders and "ruling" elders. No such distinction is
referred to here; and however useful such an office as that of ruling
elder may be, and certain as it is, that such an office existed in some
of the primitive churches, yet here is one church where no such officer
is found, and this fact proves that such an officer is not essential to
the Christian church.

[Philippians 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">phi 1:2</span></span>

Grace be unto you ... - See the note at [Rom
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007.md).

[Philippians 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">phi 1:3</span></span>

I thank my God upon every remembrance of you - Margin, "mention." The
Greek word means, "recollection, remembrance." But this recollection may
have been suggested either by his own reflections on what he had seen,
or by what he had heard of them by others, or by the favors which they
conferred on him reminding him of them. The meaning is, that as often as
he thought on them, from whatever cause, he had occasion of
thankfulness. He says that he thanked his God, intimating that the
conduct of the Philippians was a proof of the favor of God to him; that
is, he regarded their piety as one of the tokens of the favor of God to
his own soul - for in producing that piety he had been mainly
instrumental.

[Philippians 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">phi 1:4</span></span>

Always - There is much emphasis in the expressions which are used here.
Paul labors to show them that he never forgot them; that he always
remembered them in his prayers.

In every prayer of mine - This was a proof of particular and special
affection, that while there were so many objects demanding his prayers,
and so many other churches which he had founded, he never forgot them.
The person or object that we remember in every prayer must be very dear
to the heart.

For you all - Not for the church in general, but for the individual
members. "He industriously repeats the word 'all,' that he might show
that he loved them all equally well, and that he might the more
successfully excite them to the manifestation of the same love and
benevolence" - Wetstein.

Making request with joy - With joy at your consistent walk and
benevolent lives - mingling thanksgiving with my prayers in view of your
holy walk.

[Philippians 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">phi 1:5</span></span>

For your fellowship in the gospel - "For your liberality toward me, a
preacher of the gospel." - Wetstein. There has been, however, no little
difference of opinion about the meaning of this phrase. Many - as
Doddridge, Koppe, and others - suppose it refers to the fact that they
participated in the blessings of the gospel from the first day that he
preached it until the time when he wrote this Epistle. Others suppose
that it refers to their constancy in the Christian faith. Others - as
Pierce, Michaelis, Wetstein, Bloomfield, and Storr - suppose it refers
to their liberality in contributing to the support of the gospel; to
their participating with others, or sharing what they had in common with
others, for the maintenance of the gospel. That this is the true sense
seems apparent:

\(1\) because it accords with the scope of the Epistle, and what the
apostle elsewhere says of their benefactions. He speaks particularly of
their liberality, and indeed this was one of the principal occasions of
his writing the Epistle; [Phi 4:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#010.md),
[Phi 4:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#015.md).

\(2\) it accords with a frequent meaning of the word rendered
"fellowship" - κοινωνία koinōnia. It denotes that which is in common;
that of which we participate with others, communion, fellowship; [Act
2:42](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#042.md); [Co1
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#009.md); [Co1
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#016.md); [Plm
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#006.md); then it means communication,
distribution, contribution; [Rom
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#026.md); [Co2
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#013.md). That it cannot mean "accession
to the gospel" as has been supposed (see Robinson's Lexicon), is
apparent from what he adds - "from the first day until now." The
fellowship must have been something constant, and continually manifest -
and the general meaning is, that in relation to the gospel - to its
support, and privileges, and spirit, they all shared in common. They
felt a common interest in every thing that pertained to it, and they
showed this in every suitable way, and especially in ministering to the
wants of those who were appointed to preach it.

From the first day - The time when it was first preached to them. They
had been constant. This is honorable testimony. It is much to say of a
church or of an individual Christian, that they have been constant and
uniform in the requirements of the gospel. Alas, of how few can this be
said. On these verses [Phi 1:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#003.md) we
may remark:

\(1\) That one of the highest joys which a minister of the gospel can
have, is that furnished by the holy walk of the people to whom he has
ministered; compare [Jo3 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#004.md). It is
joy like that of a farmer when he sees his fields ripe for a rich
harvest; like that of a teacher in the good conduct and rapid progress
of his scholars; like that of a parent in the virtue, success, and piety
of his sons. Yet it is superior to all that. The interests are higher
and more important; the results are more far-reaching and pure; and the
joy is more disinterested. Probably there is nowhere else on earth any
happiness so pure, elevated, consoling, and rich, as that of a pastor in
the piety, peace, benevolence, and growing zeal of his people.

\(2\) it is right to commend Christians when they do well. Paul never
hesitated to do this, and never supposed that it would do injury.
Flattery would injure - but Paul never flattered. Commendation or
praise, in order to do good, and not to injure, should be:

\(a\) the simple statement of the truth;

\(b\) it should be without exaggeration;

\(c\) it should be connected with an equal readiness to rebuke when
wrong; to admonish when in error, and to counsel when one goes astray.

Constant fault-finding, scolding, or fretfulness, does no good in a
family, a school, or a church. The tendency is to dishearten, irritate,
and discourage. To commend a child when he does well, may be as
important, and as much a duty, as to rebuke him when he does ill. God is
as careful to commend his people when they do well, as he is to rebuke
them when they do wrong - and that parent, teacher, or pastor, has much
mistaken the path of wisdom, who supposes it to be his duty always to
find fault. In this world there is nothing that goes so far in promoting
happiness as a willingness to be pleased rather than displeased to be
satisfied rather than dissatisfied with the conduct of others.

\(3\) our absent friends should be remembered in our prayers. On our
knees before God is the best place to remember them. We know not their
condition. If they are sick, we cannot minister to their needs; if in
danger, we cannot run to their relief; if tempted, we cannot counsel
them. But God, who is with them, car do all this; and it is an
inestimable privilege thus to be permitted to commend them to his holy
care and keeping. Besides, it is a duty to do it. It is one way - and
the best way - to repay their kindness. A child may always be repaying
the kindness of absent parents by supplicating the divine blessing on
them each morning; and a brother may strengthen and continue his love
for a sister, and in part repay her tender love, by seeking, when far
away, the divine favor to be bestowed on her.

[Philippians 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">phi 1:6</span></span>

Being confident - This is strong language. It means to be fully and
firmly persuaded or convinced; participle, middle voice, from πείθω
peithō - to persuade; compare [Luk
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#031.md). "Neither will they be
persuaded, though one rose from the dead;" that is, they would not be
convinced; [Act 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#004.md); [Heb
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013.md); [Act
28:24](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#024.md). It means here that Paul was
entirely convinced of the truth of what he said. It is the language of a
man who had no doubt on the subject.

That he which hath begun a good work in you - The "good work" here
referred to, can be no other than religion, or true piety. This is
called the work of God; the work of the Lord; or the work of Christ;
[Joh 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#029.md); compare [Co1
15:58](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#058.md); [Co1
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010.md); [Phi
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#030.md). Paul affirms here that that work
was begun by God. It was not by their own agency or will; compare the
notes on [Joh 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013.md). It was on the fact
that it was begun by God, that he based his firm conviction that it
would be permanent. Had it been the agency of man, he would have had no
such conviction, for nothing that man does today can lay the foundation
of a certain conviction that he will do the same thing tomorrow. If the
perseverance of the Christian depended wholly on himself, therefore,
there could be no sure evidence that he would ever reach heaven.

Will perform it - Margin, "Or, finish" The Greek word - ἐπιτελέσει
epitelesei - means that he would carry it forward to completion; he
would perfect it. It is an intensive form of the word, meaning that it
would be carried through to the end. It occurs in the following places:
[Luk 13:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#032.md), "I do cures;" [Rom
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#028.md), "when I have performed this;"
[Co2 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001.md), "perfecting holiness;" [Co2
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#006.md), "so he would also finish in you;"
[Co2 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#011.md), "perform the doing of it;"
[Gal 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#003.md), "are ye now made perfect by
the flesh;" [Heb 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005.md), "when he was
about to make the tabernacle;" [Heb
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#006.md), "accomplishing this service;" and
[Pe1 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#009.md), "are accomplished in your
brethren." The word occurs nowhere else; and here means that God would
carry on the work which he had begun to completion. He would not leave
it unfinished. It would not he commenced and then abandoned. This would
or could be "performed" or "finished" only:

\(1\) by keeping them from falling from grace, and,

\(2\) by their ultimate entire perfection.

Until the day of Jesus Christ - The day when Christ shall so manifest
himself as to be the great attractive object, or the day when he shall
appear to glorify himself, so that it may be said emphatically to be his
day. That day is often called "his day," or "the day of the Lord,"
because it will be the day of his triumph and glory. It refers here to
the day when the Lord Jesus will appear to receive his people to himself
- the day of judgment. We may remark on this verse, that Paul believed
in the perseverance of saints. It would be impossible to express a
stronger conviction of the truth of that doctrine than he has done here.
Language could not be clearer, and nothing can be more unequivocal than
the declaration of his opinion that where God has begun a good work in
the soul, it will not be finally lost. The ground of this belief he has
not stated in full, but has merely hinted at it. It is based on the fact
that God had begun the good work. That ground of belief is something
like the following:

\(1\) It is in God alone. It is not in man in any sense. No reliance is
to be placed upon man in keeping himself. He is too weak; too
changeable; too ready to be led astray; too much disposed to yield to
temptation.

\(2\) the reliance, therefore, is on God; and the evidence that the
renewed man will be kept is this:

\(a\) God began the work of grace in the soul.

\(b\) He had a design in it. It was deliberate, and intentional. It was
not by chance or haphazard. It was because he had some object that was
worthy of his interposition.

\(c\) There is no reason why he should begin such a work and then
abandon it. It cannot be because he has no power to complete it, or
because there are more enemies to be overcome than he had supposed; or
because there are difficulties which he did not foresee; or because it
is not desirable that the work should be completed. Why then should he
abandon it?

\(d\) God abandons nothing that he undertakes. There are no unfinished
worlds or systems; no half-made and forsaken works of His hands. There
is no evidence in His works of creation of change of plan, or of having
forsaken what He began from disgust, or disappointment, or lack of power
to complete them. Why should there be in the salvation of the soul?

\(e\) He has promised to keep the renewed soul to eternal life; see [Joh
10:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#027.md); [Heb
6:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#017.md); compare [Rom
8:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029.md).

[Philippians 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">phi 1:7</span></span>

Even as it is meet for me to think this of you all - "There is a reason
why I should cherish this hope of you, and this confident expectation
that you will be saved. That reason is found in the evidence which you
have given that you are sincere Christians. Having evidence of that, it
is proper that I should believe that you will finally reach heaven."

Because I have you in my heart - Margin, "Ye have me in your." The Greek
will bear either, though the former translation is the most obvious. The
meaning is, that he was warmly attached to them, and had experienced
many proofs of their kindness; and that there was, therefore, a
propriety in his wishing for their salvation. Their conduct toward him,
moreover, in his trials, had convinced him that they were actuated by
Christian principle; and it was proper that he should believe that they
would be kept to eternal life.

Both in my bonds - While I have been a prisoner - referring to the care
which they had taken to minister to his needs; [Phi
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#010.md), [Phi
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#014.md), [Phi
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018.md).

And in the defence - Greek: apology. He is probably referring to the
time when he made his defense before Nero, and vindicated himself from
the charges which had been brought against him; see the notes at [Ti2
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#016.md). Perhaps he means here, that on
that occasion he was abandoned by those who should have stood by him,
but that the Philippians showed him all the attention which they could.
It is not impossible that they may have sent some of their number to
sympathize with him in his trials, and to assure him of the unabated
confidence of the church.

And confirmation of the gospel - In my efforts to defend the gospel, and
to make it known; see [Phi 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#017.md). The
allusion is probably to the fact that, in all his efforts to defend the
gospel, he had been sure of their sympathy and cooperation. Perhaps he
refers to some assistance which he had derived from them in this cause,
which is now to us unknown.

Ye all are partakers of my grace - Margin, "Or, with me of grace." The
meaning is, that as they had participated with him in the defense of the
gospel; as in all his troubles and persecutions they had made common
cause with him, so it followed that they would partake of the same
tokens of the divine favor. He expected that the divine blessing would
follow his efforts in the cause of the gospel, and he says that they
would share in the blessing. They had shown all the sympathy which they
could in his trials; they had nobly stood by him when others forsook
him; and he anticipated, as a matter of course, that they would all
share in the benefits which would flow to him in his efforts in the
cause of the Redeemer.

[Philippians 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">phi 1:8</span></span>

For God is my record - My witness; I can solemnly appeal to him.

How greatly I long after you all - To see you; and how much I desire
your welfare.

In the bowels of Jesus Christ - The word "bowels," in the Scriptures
denotes the upper viscera - the region of the heart and lungs: see the
notes at [Isa 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#011.md). That region was
regarded as the seat of affection, sympathy, and compassion, as the
heart is with us. The allusion here is to the sympathy, tenderness, and
love of the Redeemer; and probably the meaning is, that Paul regarded
them with something of the affection which the Lord Jesus had for them.
This was the tenderest and strongest expression which he could find to
denote the ardor of his attachment.

[Philippians 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">phi 1:9</span></span>

And this I pray - We pray for those whom we love, and whose welfare we
seek. We desire their happiness; and there is no way more appropriate of
expressing that desire than of going to God, and seeking it at his hand.
Paul proceeds to enumerate the blessings which he sought for them; and
it is worthy of observation that he did not ask riches, or worldly
prosperity, but that his supplications were confined to spiritual
blessings, and he sought these as the most desirable of all favors.

That your love may abound ... - Love to God; love to one another; love
to absent Christians; love to the world. This is an appropriate subject
of prayer. We cannot wish and pray for a better thing for our Christian
friends, than that they may abound in love. Nothing will promote their
welfare like this; and we had better pray for this, than that they may
obtain abundant riches, and share the honors and pleasures of the world.

In knowledge - The idea is, that he wished them to have intelligent
affection. It should not be mere blind affection, but that intelligent
love which is based on an enlarged view of divine things - on a just
apprehension of the claims of God.

And in all judgment - Margin, "sense;" compare the notes at [Heb
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#014.md). The word here means, the power
of discerning; and the meaning is, that he wished that their love should
be exercised with proper discrimination. It should be in proportion to
the relative value of objects; and the meaning of the whole is, that the
wished their religion to be intelligent and discriminating; to be based
on knowledge, and a proper sense of the relative value of objects, as
well as to be the tender affection of the heart.

[Philippians 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">phi 1:10</span></span>

That ye may approve things - Margin, "Or, try." The word used here
denotes the kind of trial to which metals are exposed in order to test
their nature; and the sense here is, that the apostle wished them so to
try the things that were of real value, as to discern that which was
true and genuine.

That are excellent - Margin: Or, "differ." The margin here more
correctly expresses the sense of the Greek word. The idea is, that he
wished them to be able to distinguish between things that differed from
each other; to have an intelligent apprehension of what was right and
wrong - of what was good and evil. He would not have them love and
approve all things indiscriminately. They should be esteemed according
to their real value. It is remarkable here how anxious the apostle was
not only that they should be Christians, but that they should be
intelligent Christians, and should understand the real worth and value
of objects.

That ye may be sincere - See the notes at [Eph
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#024.md). The word used here - εἰλικρινής
eilikrinēs - occurs nowhere else in the New Testament, except in [Pe2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001.md), where it is rendered "pure." The
noun εἰλικρίνεια eilikrineia, however, occurs in [Co1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008.md); [Co2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012.md); [Co2
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#017.md); in all which places it is
rendered "sincerity." The word properly means, "that which is judged in
sunshine" εἵλῃ κρίνω heilē krinō; and then "that which is clear and
manifest." It is that over which there are no clouds; which is not
doubtful and dark; which is pure and bright. The word "sincere" means
literally without wax (sine cera); that is, honey which is pure and
transparent. Applied to Christian character, it means that which is not
deceitful, ambiguous, hypocritical; that which is not mingled with
error, worldliness, and sin; that which does not proceed from selfish
and interested motives, and where there is nothing disguised. There is
no more desirable appellation that can be given to a man than to say
that he is sincere - a sincere friend, benefactor, Christian; and there
is nothing more lovely in the character of a Christian than sincerity.
It implies:

\(1\) that he is truly converted - that he has not assumed Christianity
as a mask;

\(2\) that his motives are disinterested and pure;

\(3\) that his conduct is free from double-dealing, trick, and cunning;

\(4\) that his words express the real sentiments of his heart;

\(5\) that he is true to his word, and faithful to his promises; and,

\(6\) that he is always what he professes to be. A sincere Christian
would bear to have the light let in upon him always; to have the
emotions of his heart seen; to be scanned everywhere, and at all times,
by people, by angels, and by God.

And without offence - Inoffensive to others. Not injuring them in
property, feelings, or reputation. This is a negative virtue, and is
often despised by the world. But it is much to say of a man that he
injures no one; that neither by example, nor opinions, nor conversation,
he leads them astray; that he never does injustice to their motives, and
never impedes their influence; that he never wounds their feelings, or
gives occasion for hard thoughts; and that he so lives that all may see
that his is a blameless life.

Till the day of Christ - See the notes at [Phi
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#006.md).

[Philippians 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">phi 1:11</span></span>

Being filled with the fruits of righteousness - That which righteousness
in the heart produces. The fruits, or results, will be seen in the life;
and those fruits are - honesty, truth, charity, kindness, meekness,
goodness. The wish of the apostle is, that they might show abundantly by
their lives that they were truly righteous. He does not refer to
liberality merely, but to everything which true piety in the heart is
fitted to produce in the life.

Which are by Jesus Christ -

\(1\) Which his religion is fitted to produce.

\(2\) which result from endeavoring to follow his example.

\(3\) which are produced by his agency on the heart.

Unto the glory and praise of God - His honor is never more promoted than
by the eminent holiness of his friends; see the notes at [Joh
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#008.md). If we wish, therefore, to honor
God, it should not be merely with the lips, or by acts of prayer and
praise; it should be by a life devoted to him. It is easy to render the
service of the lips; it is far more difficult to render that service
which consists in a life of patient and consistent piety; and in
proportion to the difficulty of it, is its value in his sight.

[Philippians 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">phi 1:12</span></span>

But I would ye should understand - Paul here turns to himself, and goes
into a somewhat extended account of his own feelings in his trials, and
of the effects of his imprisonment at Rome he wished them to understand
what his circumstances were, and what had been the effect of his
imprisonment, probably, for such reasons as these:

\(1\) They were tenderly attached to him, and would feel an interest in
all that pertained to him.

\(2\) it was possible that they might hear unfounded rumors about the
manner of his treatment, and he wished that they should understand the
exact truth.

\(3\) he had real intelligence to communicate to them that would be
joyful to them, about the effect of his imprisonment, and his treatment
there; and he wished them to rejoice with him.

That the things which happened unto me - The accusations against him,
and his imprisonment at Rome. He had been falsely accused, and had been
constrained to appeal to Caesar, and had been taken to Rome as a
prisoner; Acts 25-28. This arrest and imprisonment would seem to have
been against his success as a preacher; but he now says that the
contrary had been the fact.

Have fallen out - Have resulted in. Literally, "have come." Tyndale. "My
business is happened."

The furtherance - The increase, the promotion of the gospel. Instead of
being a hindrance, they have been rather an advantage.

[Philippians 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">phi 1:13</span></span>

So that my bonds in Christ - Margin, "for." The meaning is, his bonds in
the cause of Christ. He was imprisoned because he preached Christ (see
the notes, [Eph 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#020).md), and was really
suffering because of his attachment to the Redeemer. It was not for
crime, but for being a Christian for had he not been a Christian, he
would have escaped all this. The manner of Paul's imprisonment was, that
he was permitted to occupy a house by himself, though chained to a
soldier who was his guard; [Act 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#016.md).
He was not in a dungeon indeed, but he was not at liberty, and this was
a severe mode of confinement. Who would wish to be chained night and day
to a living witness of all that he did; to a spy on all his movements?
Who would wish to have such a man always with him, to hear all he said,
and to see all that he did? Who could well bear the feeling that he
could never be alone - and never be at liberty to do anything without
the permission of one too who probably had little disposition to be
indulgent?

Are manifest - That is, it has become known that I am imprisoned only
for the sake of Christ - Grotius. The true reason why I am thus accused
and imprisoned begins to be understood, and this has awakened sympathy
for me as an injured man. They see that it is not for crime, but that it
is on account of my religious opinions, and the conviction of my
innocence has spread abroad, and has produced a favorable impression in
regard to Christianity itself. It must have been a matter of much
importance for Paul to have this knowledge of the real cause why he was
imprisoned go abroad. Such a knowledge would do much to prepare others
to listen to what he had to say - for there is no man to whom we listen
more readily than to one who is suffering wrongfully.

In all the palace - Margin, "Or, Caesar's court." Greek, ἐν ὅλῳ τῷ
πραιτωρίῳ en holō tō praitōriō - in all the praetorium. This word
properly denotes the general's tent in a camp; then the house or palace
of a governor of a province, then any large hall, house, or palace. It
occurs in the New Testament only in the following places: [Mat
27:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#027.md), where it is rendered "common
hall"; [Mar 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#016.md), rendered
"Praetorium"; [Joh 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028.md), [Joh
18:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#033.md); [Joh
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#009.md); [Act
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#035.md), rendered "judgment hall"; and
here in [Phi 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#013.md). It is employed to
denote:

\(1\) the palace of Herod at Jerusalem, built with great magnificence at
the northern part of the upper city, westward of the temple, and
overlooking the temple;

\(2\) the palace of Herod at Caesarea, which was probably occupied by
the Roman procurator; and,

\(3\) in the place before us to denote either the palace of the emperor
at Rome, or the praetorian camp, the headquarters of the praetorian
guards or cohorts.

These cohorts were a body of select troops instituted by Augustus to
guard his person, and have charge of the city; see Robinson (Lexicon),
Bloomfield, Rosenmuller, and some others, understand this of the
praetorian camp, and suppose that Paul meant to say that the cause of
his imprisonment had become known to all the band of the praetorians.

Grotius says that the usual word to denote the residence of the emperor
at Rome was palatium - palace, but that those who resided in the
provinces were accustomed to the word "praetorium," and would use it
when speaking of the palace of the emperor. Chrysostom says that the
palace of the emperor was called praetorium, by a Latin word derived
from the Greek; see Erasmus in loc. Calvin supposes that the palace of
Nero is intended. The question about the meaning of the word is
important, as it bears on the inquiry to what extent the gospel was made
known at Rome in the time of Paul, and perhaps as to the question why he
was released from his imprisonment. It the knowledge of his innocence
had reached the palace, it was a ground of hope that he might be
acquitted; and if that palace is here intended, it is an interesting
fact, as showing that in some way the gospel had been introduced into
the family of the emperor himself. That the palace or residence of the
emperor is intended here, may be considered at least probable from the
following considerations:

\(1\) It is the name which would be likely to be used by the Jews who
came up from Judea and other provinces, to denote the chief place of
judgment, or the principal residence of the highest magistrate. So it
was used in Jerusalem, in Cesarea, and in the provinces generally, to
denote the residence of the general in the camp, or the procurator in
the cities - the highest representative of the Roman power.

\(2\) if the remark of Chrysostom, above referred to, be well founded,
that this was a common name given to the palace in Rome, then this goes
far to determine the question.

\(3\) in [Phi 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#022.md), Paul, in the
salutation of the saints at Rome to those of Philippi, mentions
particularly those of "Caesar's household." From this it would seem that
some of the family of the emperor had been made acquainted with the
Christian religion, and had been converted. In what way the knowledge of
the true cause of Paul's imprisonment had been circulated in the
"palace," is not now known. There was, however, close intimacy between
the military officers and the government, and it was probably by means
of some of the soldiers or officers who had the special charge of Paul,
that this had been communicated. To Paul, in his bonds, it must have
been a subject of great rejoicing, that the government became thus
apprised of the true character of the opposition which had been excited
against him; and it must have done much to reconcile him to the sorrows
and privations of imprisonment, that he was thus the means of
introducing religion to the very palace of the emperor.

And in all other places - Margin, to all others. The Greek will bear
either construction. But if, as has been supposed, the reference in the
word praetorium is to the palace, then this should be rendered "all
other places." It then means, that the knowledge of his innocence, and
the consequences of that knowledge in its happy influence in spreading
religion, were not confined to the palace, but were extended to other
places. The subject was generally understood, so that it might be said
that correct views of the matter pervaded the city, and the fact of his
imprisonment was accomplishing extensively the most happy effects on the
public mind.

[Philippians 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">phi 1:14</span></span>

And many of the brethren - Many Christians. It is evident from this,
that there were already "many" in Rome who professed Christianity.

In the Lord - In the Lord Jesus; that is, united to him and to each
other by a professed attachment to him. This is a common phrase to,
designate Christians.

Waxing confident by my bonds - Becoming increasingly bold and zealous in
consequence of my being confined. This might have been either:

\(1\) that from the very fact that so distinguished a champion of the
truth had been imprisoned, they were excited to do all they could in the
cause of the gospel. Or,

\(2\) they were aroused by the fact that the cause of his imprisonment
had become generally understood, and that there was a strong current of
popular favor setting toward Christianity in consequence of it. Or,

\(3\) they had had contact with Paul in his own "hired house," and had
been incited and encouraged by him to put forth great efforts in the
cause. Or,

\(4\) it would seem that some had been emboldened to promulgate their
views, and set themselves up as preachers, who would have been
restrained if Paul had been at liberty.

They were disposed to form parties, and to secure followers, and
rejoiced in an opportunity to increase their own popularity, and were
not unwilling thus to diminish the popularity and lessen the influence
of so great a man as Paul. Had he been at liberty, they would have had
no prospect of success; see [Phi 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#016.md).
To this may be added a suggestion by Theodoret. "Many of the brethren
have increased boldness - θάρσος tharsos - on account of my bonds. For
seeing me bear such hard things with pleasure, they announce that the
gospel (which sustains me) is divine." The same sentiment occurs in
Oecumen, and Theophylact; see Bloomfield. In Paul himself they had an
illustration of the power of religion, and being convinced of its truth,
they went and proclaimed it abroad.

To speak the word without fear - That is, they see that I remain safely
(compare [Act 28:30](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#030).md), and that there
is no danger of persecution, and, stimulated by my sufferings and
patience, they go and make the gospel known.

[Philippians 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">phi 1:15</span></span>

Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife - What was the ground
of this "envy and strife" the apostle does not mention. It would seem,
however, that even in Rome there was a party which was jealous of the
influence of Paul, and which supposed that this was a good opportunity
to diminish his influence, and to strengthen their own cause. He was not
now at large so as to be able: to meet and confute them. They had access
to the mass of the people. It was easy, under plausible pretences, to
insinuate hints about the ambitious aims, or improper influence of Paul,
or to take strong ground against him and in favor of their own views,
and they availed themselves of this opportunity. It would seem most
probable, though this is not mentioned, that these persons were
Judaizing teachers, professing Christianity, and who supposed that
Paul's views were derogatory to the honor of Moses and the Law.

And some also of good will - From pure motives, having no party aims to
accomplish, and not intending in any way to give me trouble.

[Philippians 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">phi 1:16</span></span>

The one preach Christ of contention - So as to form parties, and to
produce strifes among his professed followers.

Not sincerely - Not "purely" - ἁγνῶς hagnōs - not with pure motives or
intentions. Their real aim is not to preach Christ, but to produce
difficulty, and to stir up strife. They are ambitious people, and they
have no real regard for the welfare of the church and the honor of
religion.

Supposing to add affliction to my bonds - To make my trial the greater.
How they did this is unknown. Perhaps they were those who were strongly
imbued with Jewish notions, and who felt that his course tended to
diminish respect for the law of Moses, and who now took this opportunity
to promote their views, knowing that this would be particularly painful
to him when he was not at liberty to meet them openly, and to defend his
own opinions. It is possible also that they may have urged that Paul
himself had met with a signal reproof for the course which he had taken,
and, as a consequence, was now thrown into chains. Bloomfield suggests
that it was the opinion of many of the ancient expositors that they
endeavored to do this by so preaching as to excite the fury of the
multitude or the rulers against Paul, and to produce increased severity
in his punishment. But the way in which they did this is unknown, and
conjecture is altogether useless.

[Philippians 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">phi 1:17</span></span>

But the other of love - From pure motives, and from sincere affection to
me.

Knowing that I am set for the defense of the gospel - They believe that
I am an ambassador from God. They regard me as unjustly imprisoned, and
while I am disabled, they are willing to aid me in the great cause to
which my life is devoted. To alleviate his sorrows, and to carry forward
the great cause to defend which he was particularly appointed, they
engaged in the work which he could not now do, and went forth to
vindicate the gospel, and to make its claims better known. Coverdale
renders this: "for they know that I lie here for the defense of the
gospel." So Piscator, Michaelis, and Endius render it: supposing that
the meaning is, that he lay in prison for the defense of the gospel, or
as a consequence of his efforts to defend it. But this is not in
accordance with the usual meaning of the Greek word κεἶμαι keimai. It
means to lie, and, in the perfect passive, to be laid, set, placed. If
the apostle had referred to his being in prison, he would have added
that fact to the statement made. The sense is, that he was appointed to
be a defender of the gospel, and that they being well convinced of this,
went forth to promulgate and defend the truth. That fact was one of
Paul's chief consolations while he was thus in confinement.

[Philippians 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">phi 1:18</span></span>

What then? - What follows from this? What effect does it have on my
mind? Does the fact that some preach from a spirit of envy and
contention give me pain?

Notwithstanding every way - No matter in what way it is done. We are not
to suppose, however, that Paul was indifferent as to the way in which
the gospel was preached, or the spirit with which it was done; but the
meaning is, that it was a matter of rejoicing that it was done at all,
whatever the motives might be.

Whether in pretence or in truth - Whether as a mere pretext to cover up
some other design, or from pure motives. Their pretence was that they
preached the gospel because they believed it true and loved it; their
real object was to build up a party, and to diminish the influence and
authority of Paul.

Christ is preached - They made known the name of the Saviour, and
announced that the Messiah had come. They could not go forth under any
pretence as preachers, without making known some truth about the
Redeemer. So now, it is hardly possible that any persons should attempt
to preach, without stating some truth that would not otherwise be known.
The name of a Saviour will be announced, and that will be something.
Some views of his life and work will be presented, which, though they
may be far enough from full views, are yet better than none. Though
there may be much error in what is said, yet there will be also some
truth. It would be better to have preachers that were better instructed,
or that were more prudent, or that had purer motives, or that held a
more perfect system, yet it is much in our world to have the name of the
Redeemer announced in any way, and even to be told, in the most
stammering manner, and from whatever motives, that man has a Saviour.
The announcement of that fact in any way may save a soul; but ignorance
of it could save none.

And I therein do rejoice - This is an instance of great magnanimity on
the part of Paul, and nothing, perhaps, could better show his supreme
love for the Saviour. Paul preached to increase his afflictions, and the
tendency of that preaching was, probably, as it was designed to be, to
unsettle confidence in him, and to lessen his influence. Yet this did
not move him. The more important matter was secured, and Christ was made
known; and if this were secured, he was willing that his own name should
be cast into the shade. This may furnish valuable lessons to preachers
of the gospel now:

\(1\) When we are laid aside from preaching by sickness, we should
rejoice that others are in health, and are able to make the Saviour
known, though we are forgotten.

\(2\) when we are unpopular and unsuccessful, we should rejoice that
others are more popular and successful - for Christ is preached.

\(3\) when we have rivals, who have better plans than we for doing good,
and whose labors are crowned with success, we should not be envious or
jealous - for Christ is preached.

\(4\) when ministers of other denominations preach what we regard as
error, and their preaching becomes popular, and is attended with
success, we can find occasion to rejoice - for they preach Christ.

In the error we should not, we cannot rejoice; but in the fact that the
great truth is held up that Christ died for people, we can always find
abundant occasion for joy. Mingled as it may be with error, it may be
nevertheless the means of saving souls, and though we should rejoice
more if the truth were preached without any admixture of error, yet
still the very fact that Christ is made known lays the foundation for
gratitude and rejoicing. If all Christians and Christian ministers had
the feelings which Paul expresses here, there would be much less envy
and uncharitableness than there is now in the churches. May we not hope
that the time will yet come when all who preach the gospel will have
such supreme regard for the name and work of the Saviour, that they will
find sincere joy in the success of a rival denomination, or a rival
preacher, or in rival plans for doing good? Then, indeed, contentions
would cease, and the hearts of Christians, "like kindred drops," would
mingle into one.

[Philippians 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">phi 1:19</span></span>

For I know that this shall turn to my salvation - Will be a means of my
salvation. Whether the effect shall be to turn public favor toward the
Christian religion, and secure my release; or whether it shall be to
instigate my enemies more, so as to lead to my death; I am satisfied
that the result, so far as I am concerned, will be well. The word
"salvation," here, does not refer to his release from captivity, as
Koppe, Rosenmuller, Clarke, and others, suppose; for he was not
absolutely certain of that, and could not expect that to be effected by
"the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ" But the meaning is, that all
these dealings, including his imprisonment, and especially the conduct
of those who thought to add affliction to his bonds, would be among the
means of his salvation. Trying and painful as all this was, yet trial
and pain Paul reckoned among the means of grace; and he had no doubt
that this would prove so.

Through your prayer - See the notes at [Co2
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#011.md).

And the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ - To sustain me, and to
cause those happy results to come out of these trials. He needed the
same spirit which Jesus Christ had, to enable him to bear his trials
with patience, and to impart to him the consolations which he required.
He had no idea that these trials would produce these effects of their
own accord, nor that it could be by any strength of his own.

[Philippians 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">phi 1:20</span></span>

According to my earnest expectation - The word used here occurs but in
one other place in the New Testament; see it explained in the notes at
[Rom 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019.md). The earnest desire and hope
which Paul had was not, primarily, that he might be released; but it was
that, in all circumstances, he might be able to honor the gospel, living
or dying. To that he looked as a much more important matter than to save
his life. Life with him was the secondary consideration; the main thing
was, to stand up everywhere as the advocate of the gospel, to maintain
its truth, and to exhibit its spirit.

That in nothing I shall be ashamed - That I shall do nothing of which I
shall have occasion to be ashamed. That in these heavy trials, I may not
be left to deny the truth of the Christian religion; that, even before
the emperor, I may maintain its principles; and that the dread of death
may not lead me to do a dishonorable thing, or in any way so to shrink
from an avowal of my belief, as to give me or my friends occasion of
regret.

But that with all boldness - By my speaking the truth, and maintaining
my principles with all boldness; see the [Co2
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#004.md) note; [Eph
6:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#019.md) notes.

Christ shall be magnified - Shall be held up to the view of man as the
true and only Saviour, whatever becomes of me.

Whether it be by life - If I am permitted to live. He was not yet
certain how the case would terminate with him. He had not been put on
his trial, and, whether that trial would result in his acquittal or not,
he could not certainly know. But he felt assured that, if he was
acquitted, the effect would be to honor Christ. He would ascribe his
deliverance to his gracious interposition; he would devote himself with
new ardor to his service; and he felt assured, from his past efforts,
that he would be able to do something that would "magnify" Christ in the
estimation of mankind.

Or by death - If my trial shall result in my death. Then, he believed he
would be able to show such a spirit as to do honor to Christ and his
cause. He was not afraid to die, and he was persuaded that he would be
enabled to bear the pains of death in such a manner as to show the
sustaining power of religion, and the value of Christianity. Christ is
magnified in the death of Christians, when his gospel is seen to sustain
them; when, supported by its promises, they are enabled to go calmly
into the dark valley; and when, in the departing moments, they
confidently commit their eternal all into his hands. The effect of this
state of feeling on the mind of Paul must have been most happy. In
whatever way his trial terminated, he felt assured that the great object
for which he lived would be promoted. Christ would be honored, perhaps,
as much by his dying as a martyr, as by his living yet many years to
proclaim his gospel. He was, therefore, reconciled to his lot. He had no
anxiety. Come what might, the purpose which he had most at heart would
be secured, and the name of the Saviour would be honored.

[Philippians 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">phi 1:21</span></span>

For to me to live is Christ - My sole aim in living is to glorify
Christ. He is the supreme End of my life, and I value it only as being
devoted to his honor - Doddridge. His aim was not honor, learning, gold,
pleasure; it was, to glorify the Lord Jesus. This was the single purpose
of his soul - a purpose to which he devoted himself with as much
singleness and ardor as ever did a miser to the pursuit of gold, or a
devotee of pleasure to amusement, or an aspirant for fame to ambition.
This implied the following things:

\(1\) a purpose to know as much of Christ as it was possible to know -
to become as fully acquainted as he could with his rank, his character,
his plans, with the relations which he sustained to the Father, and with
the claims and influences of his religion; see [Phi
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010.md); [Eph
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#019.md); compare [Joh
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003.md).

\(2\) a purpose to imitate Christ - to make him the model of his life.
It was a design that his Spirit should reign in his heart, that the same
temper should actuate him, and that the same great end should be
constantly had in view.

\(3\) a purpose to make his religion known, as far as possible, among
mankind. To this, Paul seriously gave his life, and devoted his great
talents. His aim was to see on bow many minds he could impress the
sentiments of the Christian religion; to see to how many of the human
family he could make Christ known, to whom he was unknown before. Never
was there a man who gave himself with more ardor to any enterprise, than
Paul did to this; and never was one more successful, in any undertaking,
than he was in this.

\(4\) it was a purpose to enjoy Christ. He drew his comforts from him.
His happiness he found in communion with him. It was not in the works of
art; not in the pursuits of elegant literature; not in the frivolous and
fashionable world; but it was in communion with the Saviour, and in
endeavoring to please him.

Remarks On Philippians 1:21

\(1\) Paul never had occasion to regret this course. It produced no
sadness when he looked over his life. He never felt that he had had an
unworthy aim of living; he did not wish that his purpose had been
different when he came to die.

\(2\) if it was Paul's duty thus to live, it is no less that of every
Christian. What was there in his case that made it his duty to "live
unto Christ," which does not exist in the case of every sincere
Christian on earth? No believer, when he comes to die, will regret that
he has lived unto Christ; but how many, alas, regret that this has not
been the aim and purpose of their souls!

And to die is gain - Compare [Rev
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013.md). A sentiment similar to this
occurs frequently in the Greek and Latin classic writers. See Wetstein,
in loc., who has collected numerous such passages. With them, the
sentiment had its origin in the belief that they would be freed from
suffering, and admitted to some happy world beyond the grave. To them,
however, all this was conjecture and uncertainty. The word "gain," here,
means profit, advantage; and the meaning is, there would be an advantage
in dying above that of living. Important benefits would result to him
personally, should he die; and the only reason why he should wish at all
to live was, that he might be the means of benefiting others; [Phi
1:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#024.md). But how would it be gain to
die? What advantage would there be in Paul's circumstances? What in
ours? It may be answered, that it will be gain for a Christian to die in
the following respects:

\(1\) He will be then freed from sin. Here it is the source of perpetual
humiliation and sorrow; in heaven be will sin no more.

\(2\) he will be freed from doubts about his condition. Here the best
are liable to doubts about their personal piety, and often experience
many an anxious hour in reference to this point; in heaven, doubt will
be known no more.

\(3\) he will be freed from temptation. Here, no one knows when he may
be tempted, nor how powerful the temptation may be; in heaven, there
will be no allurement to lead him astray; no artful, cunning, and
skillful votaries of pleasure to place inducements before him to sin;
and no heart to yield to them, if there were.

\(4\) he will be delivered from all his enemies - from the slanderer,
the calumniator, the persecutor. Here the Christian is constantly liable
to have his motives called in question, or to be met with detraction and
slander; there, there will be none to do him injustice; all will rejoice
in the belief that he is pure,

\(5\) He will be delivered from suffering. Here he is constantly liable
to it. His health fails, his friends die, his mind is sad. There, there
shall be no separation of friends, no sickness, and no tears.

\(6\) he will be delivered from death. Here, death is always near -
dreadful, alarming, terrible to our nature. There, death will be known
no more. No face will ever turn pale, and no knees tremble, at his
approach; in all heaven there will never be seen a funeral procession,
nor will the soil there ever open its bosom to furnish a grave.

\(7\) to all this may be added the fact, that the Christian will be
surrounded by his best friends; that he will be reunited with those whom
he loved on earth; that he will be associated with the angels of light;
and that he will be admitted to the immediate presence of his Saviour
and his God! Why, then, should a Christian be afraid to die? And why
should he not hail that hour, when it comes, as the hour of his
deliverance, and rejoice that he is going home? Does the prisoner, long
confined in a dungeon, dread the hour which is to open his prison, and
permit him to return to his family and friends? Does the man in a
foreign land, long an exile, dread the hour when he shall embark on the
ocean to be conveyed where he may embrace the friends of his youth? Does
the sick man dread the hour which restores him to health; the afflicted,
the hour of comfort? the wanderer at night, the cheering light of
returning day? And why then should the Christian dread the hour which
will restore him to immortal rigor; which shall remove all his sorrows;
which shall introduce him to everlasting day?

Death is the crown of life:

Were death denied, poor man would live in vain:

Were death denied, to live would not be life.

Were death denied, even fools would wish to die.

Death wounds to cure; we fall; we rise; we reign!

Spring from our fetters; fasten in the skies;

Where blooming Eden withers in our sight.

Death gives us more than was in Eden lost,

The king of terrors is the prince of peace.

Night Thoughts, iii.

[Philippians 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">phi 1:22</span></span>

But if I live in the flesh - If I continue to live; if I am not
condemned and make a martyr at my approaching trial.

This is the fruit of my labour - The meaning of this passage, which has
given much perplexity to commentators, it seems to me is, "If I live in
the flesh, it will cost me labor; it will be attended, as it has been,
with much effort and anxious care, and I know not which to prefer -
whether to remain on the earth with these cares and the hope of doing
good, or to go at once to a world of rest." A more literal version of
the Greek will show that this is the meaning. Τοῦτό μοι καρπὸς ἔργου
Touto moi karpos ergou - "this to me is (or would be) the fruit of
labor." Coverdale, however, renders it: "Inasmuch as to live in the
flesh is fruitful to me for the work, I wot not what I shall choose." So
Luther: "But since to live in the flesh serves to produce more fruit."
And so Bloomfield: "But if my life in the flesh be of use to the gospel
(be it so, I say no more), verily what I shall choose I see and know
not."

See also Koppe, Rosenmuller, and Calvin, who give the same sense.
According to this, the meaning is, that if his life were of value to the
gospel, he was willing to live; or that it was a valuable object -
operae pretium - worth an effort thus to live. This sense accords well
with the connection, and the thought is a valuable one, but it is
somewhat doubtful whether it can be made out from the Greek. To do it,
it is necessary to suppose that μοι moi - "my" - is expletive (Koppe,
and that καὶ kai - "and" - is used in an unusual sense. See Erasmus.
According to the interpretation first suggested, it means, that Paul
felt that it would be gain to die, and that he was entirely willing;
that he felt that if he continued to live it would involve toil and
fatigue, and that, therefore, great as was the natural love of life, and
desirous as he was to do good, he did not know which to choose - an
immediate departure to the world of rest, or a prolonged life of toil
and pain, attended even with the hope that he might do good. There was
an intense desire to be with Christ, joined with the belief that his
life here must be attended with toil and anxiety; and on the other hand
an earnest wish to live in order to do good, and he knew not which to
prefer.

Yet - The sense has been obscured by this translation. The Greek word
(καὶ kai) means "and," and should have been so rendered here, in its
usual sense. "To die would be gain; my life here would be one of toil,
and I know not which to choose."

What I shall choose I wot not - I do not know which I should prefer, if
it were left to me. On each side there were important considerations,
and he knew not which overbalanced the other. Are not Christians often
in this state, that if it were left to themselves they would not know
which to choose, whether to live or to die?

[Philippians 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">phi 1:23</span></span>

For I am in a strait betwixt two - Two things, each of which I desire. I
earnestly long to be with Christ; and I desire to remain to be useful to
the world. The word rendered "I am in a strait" - συνέχομαι sunechomai -
means to be pressed on or constrained, as in a crowd; to feel oneself
pressed or pent up so as not to know what to do; and it here means that
he was in perplexity and doubt, and did not know what to choose. "The
words of the original are very emphatic. They appear to be derived from
a ship when lying at anchor, and when violent winds blow upon it that
would drive it out to sea. The apostle represents himself as in a
similar condition. His strong affection for them bound his heart to them
- as an anchor holds a ship to its moorings and yet there was a heavenly
influence bearing upon him - like the gale upon the vessel - which would
bear him away to heaven." Burder, in Ros. Alt. u. neu. Morgenland, in
loc.

Having a desire to depart - To die - to leave this world for a better.
People, as they are by nature, usually dread to die. Few are even made
willing to die. Almost none desire to die - and even then they wish it
only as the least of two evils. Pressed down by pain and sorrow; or sick
and weary of the world, the mind may be worked up into a desire to be
away. But this with the world is, in all cases, the result of
misanthropy, or morbid feeling, or disappointed ambition, or an
accumulation of many sorrows. Wetstein has adduced on this verse several
most beautiful passages from the classic writers, in which people
expressed a desire to depart - but all of them probably could be traced
to disappointed ambition, or to mental or bodily sorrows, or to
dissatisfaction with the world. It was from no such wish that Paul
desired to die. It was not because he hated man - for he ardently loved
him. It was not because he had been disappointed about wealth and honor
- for he had sought neither. It was not because he had not been
successful - for no man had been more so. It was not because he had been
subjected to pains and imprisonments - for he was willing to bear them.
It was not because he was old, and infirm, and a burden to the world -
for, from anything that appears, he was in the vigor of life, and in the
fullness of his strength. It was from a purer, higher motive than any of
these - the strength of attachment which bound him to the Saviour, and
which made him long to be with him.

And to be with Christ - We may remark on this expression:

\(1\) That this was the true reason why he wished to be away. It was his
strong love to Christ; his anxious wish to be with him; his firm belief
that in his presence was "fulness of joy."

\(2\) Paul believed that the soul of the Christian would be immediately
with the Saviour at death. It was evidently his expectation that he
would at once pass to his presence, and not that he would remain in an
intermediate state to some far distant period.

\(3\) the soul does not sleep at death. Paul expected to be with Christ,
and to be conscious of the fact - to see him, and to partake of his
glory.

\(4\) the soul of the believer is made happy at death. To be with Christ
is synonymous with being in heaven - for Christ is in heaven, and is its
glory. We may add:

\(a\) that this wish to be with Christ constitutes a marked difference
between a Christian and other people. Other people may be willing to
die; perhaps be desirous to die, because their sorrows are so great that
they feel that they cannot be borne. But the Christian desires to depart
from a different motive altogether. It is to be with Christ - and this
constitutes a broad line of distinction between him and other people.

\(b\) A mere willingness to die, or even a desire to die, is no certain
evidence of preparation for death. If this willingness or desire is
caused by mere intensity of suffering; if it is produced by disgust at
the world or by disappointment; if it arises from some view of fancied
Elysian fields beyond the grave, it constitutes no evidence whatever of
a preparation for death. I have seen not a few persons who were not
professed Christians on a bed of death, and not a few willing to die,
nay, not a few who wished to depart. But in the vast majority of
instances it was because they were sick of life, or because their pain
made them sigh for relief, or because they were so wretched that they
did not care what happened - and this they and their friends construed
into an evidence that they were prepared to die! In most instances this
is a miserable delusion; in no case is a mere willingness to die an
evidence of preparation for death.

Which is far better - Would be attended with more happiness; and would
be a higher, holier state than to remain on earth. This proves also that
the soul of the Christian at death is made at once happy - for a state
of insensibility can in no way be said to be a better condition than to
remain in this present world. The Greek phrase here - πολλῷ μᾶλλον
κρεῖσσον pollō mallon kreisson - is very emphatic, and the apostle seems
to labor for language which will fully convey his idea. It means, "by
much more, or rather better," and the sense is, "better beyond all
expression." Doddridge. See numerous examples illustrating the phrase in
Wetstein. Paul did not mean to say that he was merely willing to die, or
that he acquiesced in its necessity, but that the fact of being with
Christ was a condition greatly to be preferred to remaining on earth.
This is the true feeling of Christian piety; and having this feeling,
death to us will have no terrors.

[Philippians 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">phi 1:24</span></span>

Nevertheless to abide in the flesh - To live. All this is language
derived from the belief that the soul will be separate from the body at
death, and will occupy a separate state of existence.

Is more needful for you - Another object that was dear to the heart of
Paul. He never supposed that his life was useless; or that it was a
matter of no importance to the cause of religion whether he lived or
died. He knew that God works by means; and that the life of a minister
of the gospel is of real value to the church and the world. His
experience, his influence, his paternal counsels, he felt assured would
be of value to the church, and he had, therefore, a desire to live - and
it was no part of his religion affectedly to undervalue or despise
himself.

[Philippians 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">phi 1:25</span></span>

And having this confidence - "Being persuaded of this, that my
continuance on earth is desirable for your welfare, and that the Lord
has a work for me to do, I confidently expect that I shall be permitted
to live." The "confidence" here referred to was, that his life was
needful for them, and hence that God would spare him. A literal
translation would be, "And being persuaded as to this, or of this" -
τοῦτο πεποιθὼς touto pepoithōs - "I know," etc. The foundation of his
expectation that he should live does not appear to have been any
revelation to that effect, as Doddridge supposes; or any intimation
which he had from the palace of the intentions of the government, as
some others suppose, but the fact that he believed his life to be
necessary for them, and that therefore God would preserve it.

I know that I shall abide - The word "know," however, (οιδα oida) is not
to be pressed as denoting absolute necessity - for it appears from [Phi
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#027.md) and [Phi
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#017.md), that there was some ground for
doubt whether he would live - but is to be taken in a popular sense, as
denoting good courage, and an earnest hope that he would be permitted to
live and visit them. Heinrichs.

And continue with you all - That is, that he would be permitted not only
to live, but to enjoy their society.

For your furtherance and joy of faith - For the increase of your faith,
and the promotion of that joy which is the consequence of faith.
Wetstein has quoted a beautiful passage from Seneca (Epis. 104) which
strikingly resembles this sentiment of Paul. He says that when a man had
meditated death, and when on his own account he would be willing to die,
yet that he ought to be willing to live - to come back again to life -
for the sake of his friends. Pagan adds: "It pertains to a great mind to
be willing to come back to life for the sake of others; which
distinguished people often do."

[Philippians 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">phi 1:26</span></span>

That your rejoicing may be more abundant in Jesus Christ - Through the
mercy and grace of Christ, If he was spared, his deliverance would be
traced to Christ, and they would rejoice together in one who had so
mercifully delivered him.

For me by my coming to you again - Their joy would not only be that he
was delivered, but that he was permitted to see them again.

[Philippians 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">phi 1:27</span></span>

Only let your conversation - The word "conversation" we now apply almost
exclusively to oral discourse, or to talking. But it was not formerly
confined to that and is never so used in the Scriptures. It means
conduct in general - including, of course, our manner of speaking, but
not limited to that - and should be so understood in every place where
it occurs in the Bible. The original word used here - πολιτεύω politeuō
- means properly "to administer the state; to live as a citizen; to
conduct oneself according to the laws and customs of a state;" see [Act
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001.md); compare examples in Wetstein. It
would not be improperly rendered: "let your conduct as a citizen be as
becomes the gospel;" and might without impropriety, though not
exclusively, be referred to our deportment as members of a community, or
citizens of a state. It undoubtedly implies that, as citizens, we should
act, in all the duties which that relation involves - in maintaining the
laws, in submission to authority, in the choice of rulers, etc., as well
as in other relations - on the principles of the gospel; for the
believer is bound to perform every duty on Christian principles. But the
direction here should not be confined to that. It doubtless includes our
conduct in all relations in life, and refers to our deportment in
general; not merely as citizens of the state, but as members of the
church, and in all other relations. In our manner of speech, our plans
of living, our dealings with others, our conduct and walk in the church
and out of it - all should be done as becomes the gospel. The direction,
therefore, in this place, is to be understood of everything pertaining
to conduct.

As it becometh the gospel of Christ -

\(1\) The rules of the gospel are to be applied to all our conduct - to
our conversation, business transactions, modes of dress, style of
living, entertainments, etc. There is nothing which we do, or say, or
purpose, that is to be excepted from those rules.

\(2\) there is a way of living which is appropriate to the gospel, or
which is such as the gospel requires. There is something which the
gospel would secure as its proper fruits in all our conduct, and by
which our lives should be regulated. It would distinguish us from the
frivolous, and from those who seek honor and wealth as their supreme
object. If all Christians were under the influence of the gospel, there
would be something in their dress, temper, conversation, and aims, which
would distinguish them from others; The gospel is not a thing of
nothing; nor is it intended that it should exert no influence on its
friends.

\(3\) it is very important that Christians should frame their lives by
the rules of the gospel, and, to this end, should study them and know
what they are. This is important:

\(a\) because they are the best and wisest of all rules;

\(b\) because it is only in this way that Christians can do good;

\(c\) because they have solemnly covenanted with the Lord to take his
laws as their guide;

\(d\) because it is only in this way that they can enjoy religion; and,

\(e\) because it is only by this that they can have peace on a dying
bed.

If people live as "becometh the gospel," they live well. Their lives are
honest and honorable; they are people of truth and uprightness; they
will have no sources of regret when they die, and they will not give
occasion to their friends to hang their heads with shame in the
remembrance of them. No man on a dying bed ever yet regretted that he
had framed his life by the rules of the gospel, or felt that his conduct
had been conformed too much to it.

That whether I come and see you - Alluding to the possibility that he
might be released, and be permitted to visit them again.

Or else be absent - Either at Rome, still confined, or released, and
permitted to go abroad.

I may hear of your affairs ... - I may hear always respecting you that
you are united, and that you are vigorously striving to promote the
interests of the gospel.

[Philippians 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">phi 1:28</span></span>

And in nothing terrified by your adversaries - Adversaries, or
opponents, they had, like most of the other early Christians. There were
Jews there who would be likely to oppose them (compare [Act
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#005).md), and they were exposed to
persecution by the pagan. In that city, Paul had himself suffered much
Acts 16; and it would not be strange if the same scenes should be
repeated. It is evident from this passage, as well as from some other
parts of the Epistle, that the Philippians were at this time
experiencing some form of severe suffering. But in what way, or why, the
opposition to them was excited, is nowhere stated. The meaning here is,
"do not be alarmed at anything which they can do. Maintain your
Christian integrity, notwithstanding all the opposition which they can
make. They will, in the end, certainly be destroyed, and you will be
saved."

Which is to them an evident token of perdition - What, it may be asked,
would be the token of their perdition? What is the evidence to which
Paul refers that they will be destroyed? The relative "which" - ἥτις
hētis; - is probably used as referring to the persecution which had been
commenced, and to the constancy which the apostle supposed the
Philippians would evince. The sentence is elliptical; but it is manifest
that the apostle refers either to the circumstance then occurring, that
they were persecuted, and that they evinced constancy; or to the
constancy which he wished them to evince in their persecutions. He says
that this circumstance of persecution, if they evinced such a spirit as
he wished, would be to them an evidence of two things:

\(1\) Of the destruction of those who were engaged in the persecution.
This would be, because they knew that such persecutors could not
ultimately prevail. Persecution of the church would be a certain
indication that they who did it would be finally destroyed.

\(2\) it would be a proof of their own salvation, because it would show
that they were the friends of the Redeemer; and they had the assurance
that all those who were persecuted for his sake would be saved. The
gender of the Greek relative here is determined by the following noun
(ἔνδειξις endeixis), in a manner that is not uncommon in Greek; see
Wetstein, in loc., and Koppe.

And that of God - That is, their persecution is a proof that God will
interpose in due time and save you. The hostility of the wicked to us is
one evidence that we are the friends of God, and shall be saved.

[Philippians 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">phi 1:29</span></span>

For unto you - Unto you as Christians. This favor is granted unto you in
your present circumstances.

It is given - God concedes to you this privilege or advantage.

In the behalf of Christ - In the cause of Christ, or with a view to
honor Christ. Or, these things are brought on you in consequence of your
being Christians.

Not only to believe on him - It is represented here as a privilege to be
permitted to believe on Christ. It is so:

\(1\) It is an honor to a man to believe one who ought to be believed,
to trust one who ought to be trusted, to love one who ought to be loved.

\(2\) it is a privilege to believe on Christ, because it is by such
faith that out sins are forgiven; that we become reconciled to God, and
have the hope of heaven.

\(3\) it is a privilege, because it saves the mind from the tortures and
the deadly influence of unbelief - the agitation, and restlessness, and
darkness, and gloom of a skeptic.

\(4\) it is a privilege, because we have then a friend to whom we may go
in trial, and on whom we may roll all our burdens. If there is anything
for which a Christian ought to give unfeigned thanks, it is that he has
been permitted to believe on the Redeemer. Let a sincere Christian
compare his peace, and joy, and hope of heaven, and support in trials,
with the restlessness, uneasiness, and dread of death, in the mind of an
unbeliever; and he will see abundant occasion for gratitude.

But also to suffer for his sake - Here it is represented as a privilege
to suffer in the cause of the Redeemer - a declaration which may sound
strange to the world. Yet this sentiment frequently occurs in the New
Testament. Thus, it is said of the apostles [Act
5:41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041.md), that "they departed from the
presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to
suffer shame for his name;" [Col 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024.md).
"Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you;" [Pe1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#013.md). "But rejoice, inasmuch as ye are
partakers of Christ's sufferings;" compare [Jam
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#002.md); [Mar
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#030.md); see the notes at [Act
5:41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041.md). It is a privilege thus to suffer
in the cause of Christ:

\(1\) because we then resemble the Lord Jesus, and are united with him
in trials;

\(2\) because we have evidence that we are his, if trials come upon us
in his cause;

\(3\) because we are engaged in a good cause, and the privilege of
maintaining such a cause is worth much of suffering; and,

\(4\) because it will be connected with a brighter crown and more
exalted honor in heaven.

[Philippians 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">phi 1:30</span></span>

Having the same conflict - The same agony - ἀγῶνα agōna - the same
strife with bitter foes, and the same struggle in the warfare.

Which ye saw in me - When I was in Philippi, opposed by the multitude,
and thrown into prison; Acts 16.

And now hear to be in me - In Rome. He was a prisoner there, was
surrounded by enemies, and was about to be tried for his life. He says
that they ought to rejoice if they were called to pass through the same
trials.

In this chapter we have a beautiful illustration of the true spirit of a
Christian in circumstances exceedingly trying. The apostle was in a
situation where religion would show itself, if there were any in the
heart; and where, if there was none, the bad passions of our nature
would be developed. He was a prisoner. He had been unjustly accused. He
was about to be put on trial for his life, and it was wholly uncertain
what the result would be. He was surrounded with enemies, and there were
not a few false friends and rivals who took advantage of his
imprisonment to diminish his influence and to extend their own. He was,
perhaps, about to die; and at any rate, was in such circumstances as to
be under a necessity of looking death in the face.

In this situation he exhibited some of the tenderest and purest feelings
that ever exist in the heart of man - the genuine fruit of pure
religion. He remembered them with affectionate and constant interest in
his prayers. He gave thanks for all that God had done for them. Looking
upon his own condition, he said that the trials which had happened to
him, great as they were, had been overruled to the furtherance of the
gospel. The gospel had become known even in the imperial palace. And
though it had been preached by some with no good will toward him, and
with much error, yet he cherished no hard feeling; he sought for no
revenge; he rejoiced that in any way, and from any motives, the great
truth had been made known that a Saviour died. Looking forward to the
possibility that his trial before the emperor might terminate in his
death, he calmly anticipated such a result, and looked at it with
composure.

He says that in reference to the great purpose of his life, it would
make no difference whether he lived or died, for he was assured that
Christ would be honored, whatever was the result. To him personally it
would be gain to die; and, as an individual, he longed for the hour when
he might be with Christ. This feeling is religion, and this is produced
only by the hope of eternal life through the Redeemer. An impenitent
sinner never expressed such feelings as these; nor does any other form
of religion but Christianity enable a man to look upon death in this
manner. It is not often that a man is even willing to die - and then
this state of mind is produced, not by the hope of heaven, but by
disgust at the world; by disappointed ambition; by painful sickness,
when the sufferer feels that any change would be for the better. But
Paul had none of these feelings. His desire to depart was not produced
by a hatred of life; nor by the greatness of his sufferings; nor by
disgust at the world.

It was the noble, elevated, and pure wish to be with Christ - to see him
whom he supremely loved, whom he had so long and so faithfully served,
and with whom he was to dwell forever. To that world where Christ dwelt
be would gladly rise; and the only reason why he could be content to
remain here was, that he might be a little longer useful to his fellow
human beings. Such is the elevated nature of Christian feeling. But,
alas, how few attain to it; and even among Christians, how few are they
that can habitually feel and realize that it would be gain for them to
die! How few can say with sincerity that they desire to depart and to be
with Christ! How rarely does even the Christian reach that state of
mind, and gain that view of heaven, that, standing amidst his comforts
here, and looking on his family, and friends, and property, he can say
from the depths of his soul, that he feels it would be gain for him to
go to heaven! Yet such deadness to the world may be produced - as it was
in the case of Paul; such deadness to the world should exist in the
heart of every sincere Christian. Where it does exist, death loses its
terror, and the heir of life can look calmly on the bed where he will
lie down to die; can think calmly of the moment when he will give the
parting hand to wife and child, and press them to his bosom for the last
time, and imprint on them the last kiss; can look peacefully on the spot
where he will moulder back to dust, and in view of all can triumphantly
say, "Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians Chapter 2](phi002.md)

</div>
