<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa013)  [Next](psa015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 14:0</span></span>

This purports to be one of David's psalms, and there is no reason to
doubt the correctness of the superscription. Yet we are entirely
ignorant of the time and the circumstances of its composition. There is
nothing in the psalm that throws any light on this point, and conjecture
would be vain. It would seem to have been composed under the influence
of an affecting conviction of the depth and extent of human depravity,
and in view of prevalent impiety and neglect of God; but such a state of
things was not confined to any one period of the life of David, as it is
not to any one country or period of the world. Unhappily there has been
no country and no age in which, in view of existing facts, such a psalm
as this might not have been composed; or in which the entire proof on
which the psalmist relies to support his melancholy conclusions, might
not have been found.

The psalm embraces the following points:

I. A statement of prevalent depravity, particularly in denying the
existence of God, or in expressing the wish that there were no God, [Psa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001).

II\. The evidence of this, [Psa
14:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002). This is found in two things:

\(a\) first, in the representation that the Lord looked down from heaven
for the very purpose of ascertaining whether there were any that
"understood and sought after God," and that the result of this
investigation was that all had gone aside, and had become defiled with
sin, [Psa 14:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002).

\(b\) The second proof is a prevailing disposition on the part of the
wicked to judge severely of the conduct of God's people; to magnify
their errors and faults; to make use of their imperfections to sustain
themselves in their own course of life - represented by their "eating up
the sins of God's people as they eat bread," [Psa
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004).

There was all utter want of kindness and charity in regard to the
imperfections of others; and a desire to find the people of God so
offending that they could, by "their" imperfections and faults, sustain
and vindicate their own conduct in neglecting religion. The idea is
that, in their apprehension, the religion of such persons was not
desirable - that the God whom they professed to serve could not be God.

III\. Yet, the psalmist says, they were not wholly calm and satisfied
with the conclusion which they were endeavoring to reach, that there was
no God. Notwithstanding their expressed wish or desire [Psa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001), that there was, or that there
might be no God, their minds were not at ease in that conclusion or
desire.

They were, says the psalmist, "in great fear," for there was evidence
which they could not deny or resist that God was "in the generation of
the righteous," or that there was a God such as the righteous served,
[Psa 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#005). This evidence was found in
the manifestation of his favor toward them; in his interposition in
their behalf, in the proof which could not be resisted or denied that he
was their friend. These facts produced "fear" or apprehension in the
minds of the wicked, notwithstanding all their efforts to be calm.

IV\. The psalmist says that their course was designed to bring shame
upon the counsel or purposes of the "poor" (that is, the people of God,
who were mainly among the poor, or the humble and oppressed classes of
the community) - because they regarded God as their refuge, [Psa
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#006). As God was their only refuge, as
they had no human hope or reliance, as all their hope would fail if
their hope in God failed, so the attempt to show that there was no God
was adapted and designed to overwhelm them with shame and confusion -
still more to aggravate their sufferings by taking away their only hope,
and leaving them to die. Their religion was their only consolation and
the purpose of those who wished that there were no God was to take even
this last comfort away.

V. The psalm closes, in view of these thoughts, with an earnest prayer
that God would interpose to deliver his poor and oppressed people, and
with the statement that when this should occur, his people would
rejoice, [Psa 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007). Instead of their
low and oppressed condition - a condition wherein their enemies
triumphed over them, and endeavored still further to aggravate their
sorrows by taking away even their faith in God - they would rejoice in
him, and in the full proof of his existence and of his favor toward
them.

The psalm, therefore, is designed to describe a condition of things in
which wickedness abounds, and when it takes this form - an attempt to
show that there is no God; that is, when there is a prevalence of
atheism, and when the design of this is to aggravate the sufferings and
the trials of the professed friends by unsettling their faith in the
divine existence.

The title is the same as in [Psa
11:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001); [Psa
12:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001). Compare the note at the title
to [Psa 4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001).

[Psalms 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 14:1</span></span>

The fool - The word "fool" is often used in the Scriptures to denote a
wicked man - as sin is the essence of folly. Compare [Job
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#010); [Psa
74:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#018); [Gen
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#007); [Deu
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#021). The Hebrew word is rendered
"vile person" in [Isa 32:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#005).
Elsewhere it is rendered "fool, foolish," and "foolish man." It is
designed to convey the idea that wickedness or impiety is essential
folly, or to use a term in describing the wicked which will, perhaps,
more than any other, make the mind averse to the sin - for there is many
a man who would see more in the word "fool" to be hated than in the word
"wicked;" who would rather be called a "sinner" than a "fool."

Hath said - That is, has "thought," for the reference is to what is
passing in his mind.

In his heart - See the note at [Psa
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#011). He may not have said this to
others; he may not have taken the position openly before the world that
there is no God, but such a thought has passed through his mind, and he
has cherished it; and such a thought, either as a matter of belief or of
desire, is at the foundation of his conduct. He "acts" as if such were
his belief or his wish.

There is no God - The words "there is" are not in the original. The
literal rendering would be either "no God," "nothing of God," or "God is
not." The idea is that, in his apprehension, there is no such thing as
God, or no such being as God. The more correct idea in the passage is,
that this was the belief of him who is here called a "fool;" and it is
doubtful whether the language would convey the idea of desire - or of a
wish that this might be so; but still there can be no doubt that such is
the wish or desire of the wicked, and that they listen eagerly to any
suggestions or arguments which, in their apprehension, would go to
demonstrate that there is no such being as God. The exact state of mind,
however, indicated by the languaqe here, undoubtedly is that such was
the opinion or the belief of him who is here called a fool. If this is
the true interpretation, then the passage would prove that there have
been people who were atheists. The passage would prove, also, in its
connection, that such a belief was closely linked, either as a cause or
a consequent, with a corrupt life, for this statement immediately
follows in regard to the character of those who are represented as
saying that there is no God. As a matter of fact, the belief that there
is no God is commonly founded on the desire to lead a wicked life; or,
the opinion that there is no God is embraced by those who in fact lead
such a life, with a desire to sustain themselves in their depravity, and
to avoid the fear of future retribution. A man who wishes to lead an
upright life, desires to find evidence that there is a God, and to such
a man nothing would be more dark and distressing than anything which
would compel him to doubt the fact of God's existence. It is only a
wicked man who finds pleasure in an argument to prove that there is no
God, and the wish that there were no God springs up only in a bad heart.

They are corrupt - That is, they have done corruptly; or, their conduct
is corrupt. "They have done abominable works." They have done that which
is to be abominated or abhorred; that which is to be detested, and which
is fitted to fill the mind with horror.

There is none that doeth good - Depravity is universal. All have fallen
into sin; all fail to do good. None are found who are disposed to
worship their Maker, and to keep his laws. This was originally spoken,
undoubtedly, with reference to the age in which the psalmist lived; but
it is applied by the apostle Paul, [Rom
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#010) (see the note at that passage),
as an argument for the universal depravity of mankind.

[Psalms 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 14:2</span></span>

The Lord looked down from heaven - The original word here - שׁקף shâqaph
- conveys the idea of "bending forward," and hence, of an intense and
anxious looking, as we bend forward when we wish to examine anything
with attention, or when we look out for one who is expected to come. The
idea is that God looked intently, or so as to secure a close
examination, upon the children of men, for the express purpose of
ascertaining whether there were any that were good. He looked at all
men; he examined all their pretensions to goodness, and he saw none who
could be regarded as exempt from the charge of depravity. Nothing could
more clearly prove the doctrine of universal depravity than to say that
an Omniscient God made "an express examination" on this very point, that
he looked over all the world, and that in the multitudes which passed
under the notice of his eye not "one" could be found who could be
pronounced righteous. If God could not find such an one, assuredly man
cannot.

Upon the children of men - Upon mankind; upon the human race. They are
called "children," or "sons" (Hebrew), because they are all the
descendants of the man that God created - of Adam. Indeed the original
word here is "Adam" - אדם 'âdâm. And it may be questionable whether,
since this became in fact a proper name, designating the first man, it
would not have been proper to retain the idea in the translation - "the
sons of Adam;" that is, all his descendants. The phrase occurs
frequently to denote the human race, [Deu
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008); [Psa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004); [Psa
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#010); [Psa
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019); [Psa
36:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#007); [Psa
57:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004); et soepe.

To see if there were any that did understand - If there were one acting
wisely - to wit, in seeking God. "Acting wisely" here stands in contrast
with the folly referred to in the first verse. Religion is always
represented in the Scriptures as true wisdom.

And seek God - The knowledge of him; his favor and friendship. Wisdom is
shown by a "desire" to become acquainted with the being and perfections
of God, as well as in the actual possession of that knowledge; and in no
way can the true character of man be better determined than by the
actual interest which is felt in becoming acquainted with the character
of him who made and who governs the universe. It is one of the clearest
proofs of human depravity that there is no prevailing desire among
people thus to ascertain the character of God.

[Psalms 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 14:3</span></span>

They are all gone aside - This verse states the result of the divine
investigation referred to in the previous verse. The result, as seen by
God himself, was, that "all" were seen to have gone aside, and to have
become filthy. The word rendered "gone aside" means properly to go off,
to turn aside or away, to depart; as, for example, to turn out of the
right way or path, [Exo 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#008). Then it
means to turn away from God; to fall away from his worship; to
apostatize, [Sa1 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#020); [Kg2
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#006); [Ch2
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#027). This is the idea here - that
they had all apostatized from the living God. The word "all" in the
circumstances makes the statement as universal as it can be made; and no
term could be used more clearly affirming the doctrine of universal
depravity.

They are all together become filthy - The word "all" here is supplied by
the translators. It was not necessary, however, to introduce it in order
that the idea of universal depravity might be expressed, for that is
implied in the word rendered "together," יחדו yachedâv. That word
properly conveys the idea that the same character or conduct pervaded
all, or that the same thing might be expressed of all those referred to.
They were united in this thing - that they bad become defiled or filthy.
The word is used with reference to "persons," as meaning that they are
all "in one place," [Gen 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#006); [Gen
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#006); or to "events," as meaning that
they occurred at one time, [Psa 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#008).
They were all as one. Compare [Ch1
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#006). The idea is that, in respect to
the statement made, they were alike. What would describe one would
describe all. The word rendered "become filthy" is, in the margin,
rendered "stinking." In Arabic the word means to become "sharp," or
"sour" as milk; and hence, the idea of becoming corrupt in a moral
sense. Gesenius, Lexicon. The word is found only here, and in the
parallel [Psa 53:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#003), and in [Job
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#016), in each of which places it is
rendered "filthy." It relates here to character, and means that their
character was morally corrupt or defiled. The term is often used in that
sense now.

There is none that doeth good, no, not one - Nothing could more clearly
express the idea of universal depravity than this expression. It is not
merely that no one could be found who did good, but the expression is
repeated to give emphasis to the statement. This entire passage is
quoted in [Rom 3:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#010), in proof of
the doctrine of universal depravity. See the note at that passage.

[Psalms 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 14:4</span></span>

Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? - literally, "Do they not
know, all the workers of iniquity, eating my people, they eat bread;
Jehovah they call not." The several statements in this verse in
confirmation of the fact of their depravity are:

\(a\) that they have no knowledge of God;

\(b\) that they find pleasure in the errors and imperfections of the
people of God - sustaining themselves in their own wickedness by the
fact that the professed friends of God are inconsistent in their lives;
and

\(c\) that they do not call on the name of the Lord, or that they offer
no worship to him.

The whole verse might have been, and should have been put in the form of
a question. The first statement implied in the question is, that they
have "no knowledge." This can be regarded as a proof of guilt only

\(1\) as they have opportunities of obtaining knowledge;

\(2\) as they neglect to improve those opportunities, and remain in
voluntary ignorance; and

\(3\) as they do this from a design to practice wickedness.

See this argument stated at length by the apostle Paul in [Rom
1:19-28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#019). Compare the note at that
passage. This proof of human depravity is everywhere manifested still in
the world - in the fact that men have the opportunities of gaining the
knowledge of God if they chose to do it; in the fact that they
voluntarily neglect those opportunities; and in the fact that the reason
of this is that they love iniquity.

Who eat up my people as they eat bread - They sustain themselves in
their own course of life by the imperfections of the people of God. That
is, they make use of their inconsistencies to confirm themselves in the
belief that there is no God. They argue that a religion which produces
no better fruits than what is seen in the lives of its professed friends
can be of no value, or cannot be genuine; that if a professed belief in
God produces no happier results than are found in their lives, it could
be of no advantage to worship God; that they are themselves as good as
those are who profess to be religious, and that, therefore, there can be
no evidence from the lives of the professed friends of God that religion
is either true or of any value. No inconsiderable part of the evidence
in favor of religion, it is intended, shall be derived from the lives of
its friends; and when that evidence is not furnished, of course no small
part of the proof of its reality and value is lost. Hence, so much
importance is attached everywhere in the Bible to the necessity of a
consistent life on the part of the professed friends of religion.
Compare [Isa 43:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#010). The words "my
people" here are properly to be regarded as the words of the psalmist,
identifying himself with the people of God, and speaking of them thus as
"his own people." Thus one speaks of his own family or his own friends.
Compare [Rut 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#016). Or this may be
spoken by David, considered as the head or ruler of the nation, and he
may thus speak of the people of God as his people. The connection does
not allow of the construction which would refer the words to God.

And call not upon the Lord - They do not worship Yahweh. They give this
evidence of wickedness that they do not pray; that they do not invoke
the blessing of their Maker; that they do not publicly acknowledge him
as God. It is remarkable that this is placed as the last or the crowning
thing in the evidence of their depravity; and if rightly considered, it
is so. To one who should look at things as they are; to one who sees all
the claims and obligations which rest upon mankind; to one who
appreciates his own guilt, his dependance, and his exposure to death and
woe; to one who understands aright why man was made - there can be no
more striking proof of human depravity than in the fact that a man in no
way acknowledges his Maker - that he renders him no homage - that he
never supplicates his favor - never deprecates his wrath - that, amidst
the trials, the temptations, the perils of life, he endeavors to make
his way through the world "as if there were no God." The highest crime
that Gabriel could commit would be to renounce all allegiance to his
Maker, and henceforward to live as if there were no God. All other
iniquities that he might commit would spring out of that, and would be
secondary to that. The great sin of man consists in renouncing God, and
attempting to live as if there were no Supreme Being to whom he owes
allegiance. All other sins spring out of that, and are subordinate to
it.

[Psalms 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 14:5</span></span>

There were they in great fear - Margin, as in Hebrew, "they feared a
fear." The idea is, that they were in great terror or consternation.
They were not calm in their belief that there was no God. They
endeavored to be. They wished to satisfy themselves that there was no
God, and that they had nothing to dread. But they could not do this. In
spite of all their efforts, there was such proof of his existence, and
of his being the friend of the righteous, and consequently the enemy of
such as they themselves were, as to fill their minds with alarm. People
cannot, by an effort of will, get rid of the evidence that there is a
God. In the face of all their attempts to convince themselves of this,
the demonstration of his existence will press upon them, and will often
fill their minds with terror.

For God is in the generation of the righteous - The word "generation"
here, as applied to the righteous, seems to refer to them as a "race,"
or as a "class" of people. Compare [Psa
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#006); [Psa
73:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#015); [Psa
112:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#002). It commonly in the Scriptures
refers to a certain age or duration, as it is used by us, reckoning an
age or generation as about thirty or forty years (compare [Job
42:16](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#016)); but in the use of the term
before us the idea of an "age" is dropped, and the righteous are spoken
of merely as a "class" or "race" of persons. The idea here is, that
there were such manifest proofs that God was among the righteous, and
that he was their friend, that the wicked could not resist the force of
that evidence, however much they might desire it, and however much they
might wish to arrive at the conclusion that there was no God. The
evidence that he was among the righteous would, of course, alarm them,
because the very fact that he was the friend of the righteous
demonstrated that he must be the enemy of the wicked, and, of course,
that they were exposed to his wrath.

[Psalms 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 14:6</span></span>

Ye have shamed - The address here is made directly to the wicked
themselves, to show them the baseness of their own conduct, and,
perhaps, in connection with the previous verse, to show them what
occasion they had for fear. The idea in the verse seems to be, that as
God was the protector of the "poor" who had come to him for "refuge,"
and as they had "shamed the counsel of the poor" who had done this, they
had real occasion for alarm. The phrase "ye have shamed" seems to mean
that they had "despised" it, or had treated it with derision, that is,
they had laughed at, or had mocked the purpose of the poor in putting
their trust in Yahweh.

The counsel - The purpose, the plan, the act - of the poor; that is, in
putting their trust in the Lord. They had derided this as vain and
foolish, since they maintained that there was no God [Psa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001). They therefore regarded such an
act as mere illusion.

The poor - The righteous, considered as poor, or as afflicted. The word
here rendered "poor" - עני ‛ânı̂y - means more properly, afflicted,
distressed, needy. It is often rendered "afflicted," [Job
34:28](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#028); [Psa
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#027); [Psa
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#024); [Psa
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#016); [Psa
82:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#003); et al. in [Psa
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#012); [Psa
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#012) it is rendered "humble." The
common rendering, however, is "poor," but it refers properly to the
righteous, with the idea that they are afflicted, needy, and in humble
circumstances. This is the idea here. The wicked had derided those who,
in circumstances of poverty, depression, want, trial, had no other
resource, and who had sought their comfort in God. These reproaches
tended to take away their last consolation, and to cover them with
confusion; it was proper, therefore, that they who had done this should
be overwhelmed with fear. If there is anything which deserves punishment
it is the act which would take away from the world the last hope of the
wretched - "that there is a God."

Because the Lord is his refuge - He has made the Lord his refuge. In his
poverty, affliction, and trouble, he has come to God, and put his trust
in him. This source of comfort, the doctrine of the wicked - that there
"was no God" - tended to destroy. Atheism cuts off every hope of man,
and leaves the wretched to despair. It would put out the last light that
gleams on the earth, and cover the world with total and eternal night.

[Psalms 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 14:7</span></span>

Oh that the salvation of Israel - Margin, "Who will give," etc. The
Hebrew literally is, "Who will give out of Zion salvation to Israel?"
The word "Israel" refers primarily to the Hebrew people, and then it is
used generally to denote the people of God. The wish here expressed is
in view of the facts referred to in the previous verses - the general
prevalence of iniquity and of practical atheism, and the sufferings of
the people of God on that account. This state of things suggests the
earnest desire that from all such evils the people of God might be
delivered. The expression in the original, as in the margin, "Who will
give," is a common expression in Hebrew, and means the same as in our
translation, "Oh that." It is expressive of an earnest desire, as if the
thing were in the hand of another, that he would impart that blessing or
favor.

Out of Zion - On the word "Zion," see the note at [Isa
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008). It is referred to here, as it is
often, as the seat or dwelling-place of God; the place from where he
issued his commands, and from where he put forth his power. Thus in [Psa
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#004), "He heard me out of his holy
hill." [Psa 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#002), "the Lord ...
strengthen thee out of Zion." [Psa
128:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#005), "the Lord shall bless thee out
of Zion." Here the phrase expresses a wish that God, who had his
dwelling in Zion, would put forth his power in granting complete
deliverance to his people.

When the Lord bringeth back - literally, "In Yahweh's bringing back the
captivity of his people." That is, the particular salvation which the
psalmist prayed for was that Yahweh would return the captivity of his
people, or restore them from captivity.

The captivity of his people - This is "language" taken from a captivity
in a foreign land. It is not necessary, however, to suppose that any
such literal captivity is here referred to, nor would it be necessary to
infer from this that the psalm was written in the Babylonian captivity,
or in any other particular exile of the Hebrew people. The truth was,
that the Hebrews were often in this state (see the Book of Judges,
"passim"), and this language came to be the common method of expressing
any condition of oppression and trouble, or of a low state of religion
in the land. Compare [Job 42:10](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#010).

Jacob shall rejoice - Another name for the Hebrew people, as descended
from Jacob, [Isa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003); [Isa
41:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#021); [Isa
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#021); [Isa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#001); [Amo
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#002); et soepe. Prof. Alexander renders
this, "Let Jacob exult; let Israel joy." The idea seems to be, that such
a restoration would give great joy to the people of God, and the
language expresses a desire that this might soon occur - perhaps
expressing the idea also that in the certainty of such an ultimate
restoration, such a complete salvation, the people of God might now
rejoice. Thus, too, it will not only be true that the redeemed will be
happy in heaven, but they may exult even now in the prospect, the
certainty, that they will obtain complete salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 15](psa015)

</div>
