<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa076)  [Next](psa078) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 77](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 77:0</span></span>

For the meaning of the title to this psalm, see the notes at the title
to [Psa 39:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001). It purports, like the
preceding ones, to be a psalm of Asaph. See the notes in the title to
Ps. 73. Nothing is known, or can now be ascertained, of the occasion on
which the psalm was composed. It is not absolutely certain whether it
refers to some public calamity, and is designed to express the feelings
of a pious Hebrew, as of the psalmist himself (Rosenmuller), or some
other Jew (DeWette), in view of such a public calamity; or whether it is
designed to represent the "complaint of the church in view of her
calamity and desertion (Prof. Alexander); or whether it is the statement
of the private and personal experience of the author of the psalm. To me
it seems that the latter is the most probable supposition, and that, in
this respect, it accords with the purport and design of Ps. 73, which is
by the same author. It is an interesting statement of what passed
through the mind of the author, and of what may, therefore, pass through
the mind of any pious person, in regard to the divine dealings. The
psalm was evidently composed in a time of affliction, and the thoughts
which gave the author so much trouble, and which he endeavored to calm
down, were such as were suggested by affliction; by the fact that God
seemed to have forsaken him, and that he had forgotten to be gracious.

The contents of the psalm are as follows:

I. A general statement of the author that he had cried to God, and that
he had been heard, [Psa 77:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#001). This,
although it is in the beginning of the psalm, is clearly designed to be
a general expression of his experience in the case "as recorded in the
psalm," or as the result of the conflict through which he had passed.

II\. A statement of his affliction, and of the exercises of his mind in
his affliction, [Psa 77:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#002).

\(1\) the statement of the affliction, [Psa
77:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#002).

\(2\) in that affliction he was troubled in mind, or he had painful
ideas in regard to God. He could not reconcile his sufferings with such
views as he desired to cherish of God, [Psa
77:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#003).

\(3\) his meditations, and perhaps the pain of disease, kept him awake,
and he was unable to rest. The ordinary time of repose furnished no
relief, [Psa 77:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#004).

\(4\) he recalled the past; he looked over the dealings of God with
people in former times; he summoned up his own reflections in times
past, and especially the time when he could praise God in trouble,
recalling his "song in the night" - but in vain, [Psa
77:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#005).

\(5\) the result was that he had most painful thoughts in regard to God,
as if he had forgotten to be gracious, and had cast him off forever, and
would be favorable no more, [Psa
77:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#007).

III\. His self-reproach; his recalling himself to a proper state of
feeling; his purpose to think of the dealings of God with his people,
and to examine them more closely, [Psa
77:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#010). He saw that the course of
thought which he had indulged in was wrong, and was satisfied that it
was an "infirmity," that it was to be traced to his own weakness - and
that he ought to take different views of God.

IV\. The result of all; the things which comforted him in his troubles,
and which enabled him at last to put his calm trust in God, [Psa
77:13-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#013).

He refers

\(1\) To the fact that God is great, and that he could not hope to be
able to comprehend him, [Psa 77:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#013).

\(2\) to the fact that God had redeemed his people by surprising
manifestations of power, showing that he was faithful, and that he was
able to deliver front the deepest distresses, [Psa
77:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#015).

\(3\) to the fact that the way of God was in the sea, or in great
waters, and that we cannot expect to be able to comprehend him, [Psa
77:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#019).

\(4\) to the fact that God had led his flock in ancient times amid
scenes of danger and of trial, [Psa
77:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#020).

By all this his mind was comforted, and his soul was made calm. God
heard his prayer, and gave him peace.

[Psalms 77:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 77:1</span></span>

I cried unto God with my voice - That is, he cried or prayed audibly. It
was not mere mental prayer. See the notes at [Psa
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#004).

Even unto God with my voice - The repetition here is emphatic. The idea
is that it was an earnest or fervent cry. Compare the notes at [Co2
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#008).

And he gave ear unto me - See [Psa
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#001), note; [Psa
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#006), note.

[Psalms 77:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 77:2</span></span>

In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord - Compare the notes at [Psa
50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015). This trouble may have been
either mental or bodily; that is, it may have arisen from some form of
disease, or it may have been that which sprang from difficulties in
regard to the divine character, government, and dealings. That it
"assumed" the latter form, even if it had its beginning in the former,
is apparent from the following verses. Whether it was connected with any
form of bodily disease must be determined by the proper interpretation
of the next clause in this verse.

My sore ran in the night - Margin, "My hand." It is evident that our
translators sup. posed that there was some bodily disease - some running
sore - which was the cause of his trouble. Hence, they so rendered the
Hebrew word. But it is now generally agreed that this is without
authority. The Hebrew word is "hand" - יד yâd - a word which is never
used in the sense of sore or wound. The Septuagint renders it, "my hands
are before him." The Vulgate renders it in the same manner. Luther, "My
hand is stretched out at night." DeWette, "My hand is stretched out at
night unwearied." The word which is rendered in our version "ran" - נגר
nâgar - means to "flow;" and, in Niphil, to be poured out, and then, "to
be stretched out;" which is evidently its meaning here. The idea is,
that his hand was stretched out in earnest supplication, and that this
continued in the night when these troubles came most upon him. See [Psa
77:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#004), [Psa
77:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#006). In his painful meditations in
the night. watches - in thinking on God and his ways, as he lay upon his
bed, he stretched out his hand in fervent prayer to God.

And ceased not - The word used here - פוג pûg - means properly to be
cold; then, to be torpid, sluggish, slack. Here it means that the hand
did not become weary; it did not fall from exhaustion; or, in other
words, that he did not give over praying through weariness or
exhaustion.

My soul refused to be comforted - I resisted all the suggestions that
came to my own mind, that might have comforted me. My heart was so
melancholy and downcast; my spirits were so crushed; my mind was so
dark; I had become so morbid, that I loved to cherish these thoughts. I
chose to dwell on them. They had obtained possession of me, and I could
not let them go. There was nothing that my own mind could suggest, there
was nothing that occurred to me, that would relieve the difficulty or
restore peace to my soul. These sad and gloomy thoughts filled all my
soul, and left no room for thoughts of consolation and peace. A truly
pious man may, therefore, get into a state of mind - a sad, dispirited,
melancholy, morbid state - in which nothing that can be said to him,
nothing that will occur to himself, will give him comfort and peace.
Compare [Jer 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015).

[Psalms 77:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 77:3</span></span>

I remembered God - That is, I thought on God; I thought on his
character, his government, and his dealings; I thought on the mysteries
- the incomprehensible things - the apparently unequal, unjust, and
partial doings - of his administration. It is evident from the whole
tenor of the psalm that these were the things which occupied his
attention. He dwelt on them until his whole soul became sad; until his
spirit became so overwhelmed that he could not find words in which to
utter his thoughts.

And was troubled - The Septuagint renders this, εὐφράνθην euphranthēn -
I was rejoiced or delighted. So the Vulgate. Luther renders it, "When I
am troubled, then I think on God." Our translation, however, has
probably given the true idea; and in that has expressed

\(a\) what often occurs in the case of even a good man - that by
dwelling on the dark and incomprehensible things of the divine
administration, the soul becomes sad and troubled to an extent bordering
on murmuring, complaint, and rebellion; and may also serve to illustrate

\(b\) what often happens in the mind of a sinner - that he delights to
dwell on these things in the divine administration:

\(1\) as most in accordance with what he desires to think about God, or
with the views which he wishes to cherish of him; and

\(2\) as justifying himself in his rebellion against God, and his
refusal to submit to him - for if God is unjust, partial, and severe,
the sinner is right; such a Being would be unworthy of trust and
confidence; he ought to be opposed, and his claims ought to be resisted.

I complained - Or rather, I "mused" or "meditated." The word used here
does not necessarily mean to complain. It is sometimes used in that
sense, but its proper and common signification is to meditate. See [Psa
119:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#015), [Psa
119:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#023), [Psa
119:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#027), [Psa
119:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#048), [Psa
119:78](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#078),[Psa
119:148](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#148).

And my spirit was overwhelmed - With the result of my own reflections.
That is, I was amazed or confounded by the thoughts that came in upon
me.

[Psalms 77:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 77:4</span></span>

Thou holdest mine eyes waking - literally, "Thou holdest the watchings
of my eyes." Gesenius (Lexicon) translates the Hebrew word rendered
"waking," "eyelids." Probably that is the true idea. The eyelids are the
watchers or guardians of the eyes. In danger, and in sleep, they close.
Here the idea is, that God held them so that they did not close. He
overcame the natural tendency of the eye to shut. In other words, the
psalmist was kept awake; he could not sleep. This he traces to God. The
idea is, that God so kept himself before his mind - that such ideas
occurred to him in regard to God - that he could not sleep.

I am so troubled - With sad and dark views of God; so troubled in
endeavoring to understand his character and doings; in explaining his
acts; in painful ideas that suggest themselves in regard to his justice,
his goodness, his mercy.

That I cannot speak - I am struck dumb. I know not what to say. I cannot
find "anything" to say. He must have a heart singularly and happily free
by nature from scepticism, or must have reflected little on the divine
administration, who has not had thoughts pass through his mind like
these. As the psalmist was a good man, a pious man, it is of importance
to remark, in view of his experience, that such reflections occur not
only to the minds of bad people - of the profane - of sceptics - of
infidel philosophers, but they come unbidden into the minds of good
people, and often in a form which they cannot calm down. He who has
never had such thoughts, happy as he may and should deem himself that he
has not had them, has never known some of the deepest stirrings and
workings of the human soul on the subject of religion, and is little
qualified to sympathize with a spirit torn, crushed, agitated, as was
that of the psalmist on these questions, or as Augustine and thousands
of others have been in after-times. But let not a man conclude, because
he has these thoughts, that therefore he cannot be a friend of God - a
converted man. The wicked man invites them, cherishes them, and rejoices
that he can find what seem to him to be reasons for indulging in such
thoughts against God; the good man is pained; struggles against them:
endearours to banish them from his soul.

[Psalms 77:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 77:5</span></span>

I have considered the days of old - Rather, "I do consider;" that is, "I
think upon." This refers to his resolution in his perplexity and
trouble; the method to which he resorted in examining the subject, and
in endeavoring to allay his troubles. He resolved to look at the past.
He asked what was the evidence which was furnished on the subject by the
former dealings of God with himself and with mankind; what could be
learned from those dealings in regard to the great and difficult
questions which now so perplexed his mind.

The years of ancient times - The records and remembrances of past ages.
What is the testimony which the history of the world bears on this
subject? Does it prove that God is worthy of confidence or not? Does it
or does it not authorize and justify these painful thoughts which pass
through the mind?

[Psalms 77:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 77:6</span></span>

I call to remembrance my song in the night - Compare [Job
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#010), note; [Psa
42:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#008), note. The word here rendered
"song" - נגינה negı̂ynâh - means properly the music of stringed
instruments, [Lam 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#014); [Isa
38:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#020); then, a stringed instrument. It
is the word which we have so often in the titles to the psalms ([Psa
4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001); [Psa
6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001); [Psa
54:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#001); Ps. 55; [Psa
67:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001); [Psa
76:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001)); and it is used here in the
sense of song or psalm. The idea is, that there had been times in his
life when, even in darkness and sorrow, he could sing; when he could
find things for which to praise God; when he could find something that
would cheer him; when he could take some bright views of God adapted to
calm down his feelings, and to give peace to his soul. He recalls those
times and scenes to his remembrance, with a desire to have those
cheerful impressions renewed; and he asks himself what it was which then
comforted and sustained him. He endeavors to bring those things back
again, for if he found comfort then, he thinks that he might find
comfort from the same considerations now.

I commune with mine own heart - I think over the matter. See the notes
at [Psa 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#004).

And my spirit made diligent search - In reference

\(a\) to the grounds of my former support and comfort; and

\(b\) in reference to the whole matter as it lies before me now.

[Psalms 77:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 77:7</span></span>

Will the Lord cast off for ever? - This was the subject, and the
substance, of his inquiry: whether it was a fair and just conclusion
that God would show no mercy; would never be gracious again. Evidently
the thought passed through his mind that this seemed to be the character
of God; that things looked as if this were so; that it was difficult, if
not impossible, to understand the divine dealings otherwise; and he asks
whether this was a fair conclusion; whether he must be constrained to
believe that this was so.

And will he be favorable no more? - Will he no more show favor to
people? Will he pardon and save no more of the race of mankind?

[Psalms 77:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 77:8</span></span>

Is his mercy clean gone for ever? - The word rendered "clean gone" means
to fail; to fail utterly. The idea is, Can it be that the compassion of
God has become exhausted - that no more mercy is to be shown to mankind
- that henceforth all is to be left to stern and severe justice? What
would the world be if this were so! What must be the condition of
mankind if mercy were no more to be shown to the race!

Doth his promise fail for evermore? - Margin, as in Hebrew, "to
generation and generation." The original Hebrew rendered "promise" means
"word;" and the question is, whether it can be that what God has spoken
is to be found false. Can we no longer rely on what he has said? All the
hopes of mankind depend on that, and if that should fail, all prospect
of salvation in regard to our race must be at an end.

[Psalms 77:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 77:9</span></span>

Hath God forgotten to be gracious? - Has he passed over mercy in
administering his government? Has he ceased to remember that man needs
mercy? Has he forgotten that this is an attribute of his own nature?

Hath he in anger shut up his tender mercies? - The original word here
rendered "tender mercies" refers to the "bowels," as the seat of
compassion or mercy, in accordance with a usage common in Hebrew. See
[Psa 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#006), note; [Isa
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#011), note; [Isa
63:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#015), note. Compare [Luk
1:78](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#078) (in Greek); [Phi
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#008); [Phi
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#001); [Jo1
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#017). We speak of the "heart" as the
seat of affection and kindness. The Hebrews included the heart, but they
used a more general word. The word rendered "shut up" means "closed;"
and the question is whether his mercy was closed, or had ceased forever.
The psalmist concludes that if this were done, it must be as the result
of anger - anger in view of the sins of people.

[Psalms 77:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 77:10</span></span>

And I said, This is my infirmity - The meaning of this phrase is not, as
would appear from our translation, that his reflections on the subject
were to be traced to his weakness, or were a proof of weakness of mind,
but that the subject overpowered him. This verse has been very variously
rendered. The Septuagint and the Vulgate translate it, "And I said, now
I begin; this is a change of the right hand of the Most High," with what
meaning it is difficult to see. Luther renders it, "But yet I said, I
must suffer this; the right hand of the Most High can change all;" a
beautiful sentiment, but probably not the idea in the original. The
Hebrew means, "This makes me sick;" that is, "This distresses me; it
afflicts me; it overwhelms me. Such reflections prostrate me, and I
cannot bear up under them. I "must" seek relief. I "must" find it
somewhere. I "must" take some view of this matter which will save me
from these dreadful thoughts that overpower and crush the soul." Any
deep mental emotion may have this effect, and it is not strange that
such a result should be produced by the momentous thoughts suggested by
religion, as it sometimes attends even the manifestation of the divine
mercy to the soul. Compare the notes at [Dan
10:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#008). The course of thought which
the psalmist pursued, and in which he found relief, is stated in the
following verses. It consisted of an attempt to obtain, from the
remembrance of the divine administration in past times, views of God
which would lead to confidence in him. The views thus obtained, as will
be seen, were two-fold:

\(a\) That, as far as his dealings could be understood, God was worthy
of confidence; and

\(b\) That in the ways of God there are, and must be, many things which
man cannot comprehend.

But I will remember the years of the right hand of the Most High - That
is, the years when God displayed his power; when he reached out his
right hand; when he manifested his true character; when there was a
proper exhibition to the world of what he is, and of the true principles
of his administration. The words "But I will remember" are not in the
original, though, as they occur in the following verse, they are not
improperly supplied by the translators. The original, however, is more
striking and emphatic: "This makes me sick! The years of the right hand
of the Most High!" The history of those years occurred to his mind. They
rose to his view suddenly in his sorrow. They came before him in such a
form and manner that he felt they should be inquired into. Their history
should be examined. In that history - in those remembered years -
"relief" might be found. It was natural to look there for relief. He
instinctively turned, therefore, to examine the records of those years,
and to inquire what testimony they bore in regard to God; what there
might be in them that would give relief to a troubled heart.

[Psalms 77:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 77:11</span></span>

I will remember the works of the Lord - That is, I will call them to
remembrance, or I will reflect on them. I will look to what God has
"done," that I may learn his true character, or that I may see what is
the proper interpretation to be put on his doings in respect to the
question whether he is righteous or not; whether it is proper to put
confidence in him or not. Or, in other words, I will examine those
doings to see if I cannot find in them something to calm down my
feelings; to remove my despondency; and to give me cheerful views of
God.

Surely I will remember thy wonders of old - Thy wonderful dealings with
mankind; those acts which thou hast performed which are suited to excite
amazement and wonder.

[Psalms 77:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 77:12</span></span>

I will meditate also of all thy work - That is, with a view to learn thy
real character; to see whether I am to be constrained by painful facts
to cherish the thoughts which have given me such trouble, or whether I
may not find reasons for cherishing more cheerful views of God.

And talk of thy doings - Or rather, "I will muse on thy doings" - for so
the Hebrew word signifies. It is not conversation with others to which
he refers; it is meditation - musing - calm contemplation - thoughtful
meditation. He designed to reflect on the doings of God, and to ask what
was the proper interpretation to be put on them in regard to his
character. Thus we must, and may, judge of God, as we judge of our
fellow-men. We may, we must, inquire what is the proper interpretation
to be put on the events which occur under his administration, and form
our opinions accordingly. The result of the psalmist's reflections is
stated in the following verses.

[Psalms 77:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 77:13</span></span>

Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary - Luther renders this, "O God, thy
way is holy." Prof. Alexander, "O God, in holiness is thy way." DeWette,
"O God, holy is thy way." The word rendered "sanctuary" - קדשׁ qôdesh -
means properly "holiness." It is not the same word which in [Psa
73:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017) is rendered "sanctuary" - מקדשׁ
miqdâsh. The word here employed, however, may mean a holy place, a
sanctuary, as the tabernacle [Exo
28:43](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#043); [Exo
29:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#030), or the temple [Kg1
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#008); [Ch2
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#007). In this passage the word is
ambiguous. It means either that the way of God is holy, or in holiness;
or, that it is in the sanctuary, or holy place. If the former, it is a
statement of the result to which the psalmist came in regard to the
divine character, from a contemplation of his doings. If the latter, it
means that the way of God - the true principles of the divine
administration - are to be learned in the place where he is worshipped,
and from the principles which are there set forth. Compare the notes at
[Psa 73:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017). It seems to me that the
former is the correct interpretation, as it accords better with the
scope of the passage.

Who is so great a God as our God - In greatness no one can be compared
with him. He is supreme over all. This is the first reflection of the
psalmist in regard to God - that he is great; that he is superior to all
other beings; that no one can be compared with him. The evident
inference from this in the mind of the psalmist, as bearing on the
subject of his inquiry, is, that it is to be expected that there will be
things in his administration which man cannot hope to understand; that a
rash and sudden judgment should not be formed in regard to him from his
doings; that people should wait for the developments of his plans; that
he should not be condemned because there are things which we cannot
comprehend, or which seem to be inconsistent with goodness. This is a
consideration which ought always to influence us in our views of God and
his government.

[Psalms 77:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 77:14</span></span>

Thou art the God that doest wonders - It is, it must be, the
characteristic of God, the true God, to do wonderful things; things
which are suited to produce amazement, and which we can little hope to
be able to understand. Our judgment of God, therefore, should not be
hasty and rash, but calm and deliberate.

Thou hast declared thy strength among the people - Thou hast manifested
thy greatness in thy dealings with the people. The word "people" here
refers not especially to the Hebrew people, but to the nations - the
people of the world at large. On a wide scale, and among all nations,
God had done that which was suited to excite wonder, and which people
were little qualified as yet to comprehend. No one can judge aright of
what another has done unless he can take in the whole subject, and see
it as he does who performs the act - unless he understands all the
causes, the motives, the results near and remote - unless he sees the
necessity of the act - unless he sees what would have been the
consequences if it had not been done, for in that which is unknown to
us, and which lies beyond the range of our vision, there may be full and
sufficient reasons for what has been done, and an explanation may be
found there which would remove all the difficulty.

[Psalms 77:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 77:15</span></span>

Thou hast with thine arm - That is, with strength or power, the arm
being a symbol of strength. [Exo 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006);
[Exo 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#016); [Psa
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#015).

Redeemed thy people - Thou didst rescue or deliver them from Egyptian
bondage. See the notes at [Isa 43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003).

The sons of Jacob and Joseph - The descendants of Jacob and Joseph.
Jacob is mentioned because he was the ancestor of the twelve tribes;
Joseph, because he was conspicuous or eminent among the sons of Jacob,
and particularly because he acted so important a part in the affairs of
Egypt, from whose dominion they were redeemed.

[Psalms 77:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 77:16</span></span>

The waters saw thee ... - The waters of the Red Sea and the Jordan.
There is great sublimity in this expression; in representing the waters
as conscious of the presence of God, and as fleeing in consternation at
his presence. Compare [Rev 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#011); [Hab
3:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#010).

They were afraid - On the word used here - חול chûl - see [Psa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#005), note; [Psa
55:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#004), note. It may mean here to
tremble or quake, as in pain [Deu
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#025); [Joe
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#006). - Alarm, distress, anguish, came
over the waters at the presence of God; and they trembled, and fled.

The depths also were troubled - The deep waters, or the waters "in" the
depths. It was not a ripple on the surface; but the very depths - the
usually calm and undisturbed waters that lie below the surface - were
heaved into commotion at the divine presence.

[Psalms 77:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 77:17</span></span>

The clouds poured out water - Margin, "The clouds were poured forth with
water." The translation in the text is the more correct. This is a
description of a storm; but to what particular storm in history does not
appear. It was evidently some exhibition of the divine greatness and
power in delivering the children of Israel, and may have referred to the
extraordinary manifestation of God at Mount Sinai, amidst lightnings,
and thunders, and tempests. [Exo
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016). For a general description of a
storm, as illustrating this passage, see [Job
36:26-33](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#026), notes; [Job
37:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#001), notes; and [Psa
29:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001).

The skies sent out a sound - The voice of thunder, which seems to come
from the sky.

Thine arrows also - The lightnings - compared with burning or ignited
arrows. Such arrows were anciently used in war. They were bound round
with rags, and dipped in some combustible substance - as turpentine -
and shot into houses, grain-fields, haystacks, or towns, for the purpose
of setting them on fire. It was not unnatural to compare the rapid
lightnings with such blazing arrows.

Went abroad - They moved rapidly in all directions.

[Psalms 77:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 77:18</span></span>

The voice of thy thunder was in the heaven - Compare the notes at [Psa
29:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001). The word rendered "heaven"
here - גלגל galgal - means properly "a wheel," as of a chariot, [Isa
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#028); [Eze
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#002), [Eze
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#006); [Eze
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#024); [Eze
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#010). Then it means a "whirlwind," as
that which rolls along, [Eze 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#013).
Then it is used to denote chaff or stubble, as driven along before a
whirlwind, [Psa 83:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#013); [Isa
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#013). It is never used to denote
heaven. It means here, undoubtedly, the whirlwind; and the idea is, that
in the ragings of the storm, or of the whirlwind, the voice of God was
heard - the deep bellowing thunder - as if God spoke to people.

The lightnings lightened the world - The whole earth seemed to be in a
blaze.

The earth trembled and shook - See the notes at [Psa
29:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001).

[Psalms 77:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 77:19</span></span>

Thy way is in the sea - Probably the literal meaning here is, that God
had shown his power and faithfulness in the sea (that is, the Red Sea),
in delivering his people; it was there that his true character was seen,
as possessing almighty power, and as being able to deliver his people.
But this seems to have suggested, also, another idea - that the ways of
God, in his providential dealings, were like walking through the sea,
where no permanent track would be made, where the waves would close on
the path, and where it would be impossible by any footprints to
ascertain the way which he had taken. So in regard to his doings and his
plans. There is nothing by which man can determine in regard to them.
There are no traces by which he can follow out the divine designs - as
none can follow one whose path is through the trackless waters. The
subject is beyond man's reach, and there should be no rash or harsh
judgment of the Almighty.

And thy path in the great waters - The additional idea here may be, that
the ways or plans of God are vast - like the ocean. Even in shallow
waters, when one wades through them, the path closes at once, and the
way cannot be traced; but God's goings are like those of one who should
move through the great ocean - over a boundless sea - where none could
hope to follow him.

And thy footsteps are not known - The word rendered "footsteps" means
properly the print made by the "heel," and the print made by the foot.
The idea here is, that there are no traces in regard to many of the
dealings of God, which appear most incomprehensible to us, and which
trouble us most, as there can be no footprints left in the waters. We
should not venture, therefore, to sit in judgment on the doings of God,
or presume that we can understand them.

[Psalms 77:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 77:20</span></span>

Thou leddest thy people like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron -
This satisfied and comforted the mind of the psalmist. God had never
forsaken his people. He had shown himself faithful in his dealings with
them. He had acted the part of a good shepherd. In all the dangers of
their way; in their perilous journey through the wilderness; amidst
foes, privations, and troubles - rocks, sands, storms, tempests - when
surrounded by enemies, and when their camp was infested with poisonous
serpents - God had shown himself able to protect his people, and had
been faithful to all his promises and covenant-engagements. Looking back
to this period of their history, the psalmist saw that there was
abundant reason for confiding in God, and that the mind should repose on
him calmly amid all that was dark and mysterious in his dealings. In
view of the past, the mind ought to be calm; encouraged by the past,
however incomprehensible may be God's doings, people may come to him,
and entrust all their interests to him with the confident assurance that
their salvation will be secure, and that all which seems dark and
mysterious in the dealings of God will yet be made clear.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 78](psa078)

</div>
