<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa000)  [Next](psa002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

The first psalm has no title prefixed to it, which is the case, also,
with many others, Ps. 10; Ps. 116; [Psa
117:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001), and others. It is now in vain
to attempt to search for the cause of this omission. On the origin and
authority of the titles prefixed to the Psalms, see the introduction,
Section 4. Some have supposed that the reason why no title was affixed
to this psalm was that the general title, "The Psalms of David," was
prefixed to the whole book, and that that was a sufficient indication of
the author of this the first in the series. But this is mere conjecture,
and this reason would no more make proper the omission of the title to
the first psalm than of any other that came under that general title. In
some manuscripts (2 codices of Rossi) this psalm is not numbered; in
some others (4 codices of Kennicott, and 3 codices of Rossi) it is
united with the second psalm, and the two are reckoned as one.

It is, however, manifestly a distinct composition from the second psalm.
It has a unity of its own, as the second has also; and there are almost
no two psalms in the whole collection which might not be united with as
much propriety as these. It is impossible now to ascertain the
authorship of the psalm, though the common opinion is probably the
correct one, that it was composed by David. But on what occasion it was
written it is now equally impossible to discover. There are no
historical allusions in it which would enable us to determine the
occasion on which it was written, as there is nothing in it which
certainly determines its authorship. The terms employed are of the most
general character, and the sentiments are applicable to all times and
all lands. It has all the marks of being a general introduction to the
Book of Psalms, and of having been designed to express in a few
sentences the substance of the entire collection, or to state the great
principle which would be found to run through the whole of it - that a
righteous life will be attended with prosperity and happiness, and that
the life of the wicked will be followed by sorrow and ruin. This was the
great principle of the Jewish theocracy; and was of sufficient
importance to be stated clearly in the commencement of a book that was
designed to illustrate so fully the nature and the value of true
religion. Compare Deut. 27-28.

The psalm is designed to describe the blessedness or the happiness of
the righteous man. This is done "literally and figuratively, positively
and negatively, directly and by contrast, with respect both to his
character and his condition here and hereafter." - Prof. Alexander. It
is not, however, as Prof. Alexander supposes, a "picture of the truly
happy man;" it is a description of the blessedness of the righteous man,
in contrast with the condition of the unrighteous. The righteous man is
indeed prosperous and happy; and it is one design of the psalm to show
this. But it is not the happy man, as such, that is in the eye of the
psalmist; it is the righteous man, and the blessedness of being
righteous.

The psalm is properly made up of two parts - the blessedness of the
righteous man, and the unblessedness, or, the German word, "ungluck"
(DeWette), of the wicked or ungodly man.

I. The blessedness of the righteous man, [Psa
1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001). This consists also of two minor
parts:

\(1\) His character [Psa 1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001), and
this is described also in two forms - negatively and positively.

\(a\) Negatively. He does not walk in the counsel of the ungodly, nor
stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful, [Psa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001).

\(b\) Positively. He delights in the law of the Lord, and he has
pleasure in meditating continually on his truth, [Psa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002).

\(2\) his prosperity, as the result of being righteous, [Psa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003). His condition is compared with
that of a tree planted in a well-watered place, whose leaves are always
green, and whose fruit never fails; so whatever he does shall prosper.

II\. The condition of the unrighteous, or the strong contrast between
the unrighteous and the righteous, [Psa
1:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004). Their condition and destiny are
expressed in three forms:

\(1\) They are like chaff which the wind drives away, [Psa
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004).

\(2\) They shall not be acquitted in the judgment, nor have a place
among the righteous, [Psa 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005).

\(3\) They shall not be approved by God, but shall perish, [Psa
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006).

[Psalms 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 1:1</span></span>

Blessed is the man - That is, his condition is a happy or a desirable
one. The word used here, אשׁר 'esher means properly, "happiness" or
"blessedness." It is found, however, only in the plural form and in the
construct state, and takes the nature and force of an interjection - " O
the happiness of the man!" or "O happy man!" [Deu
33:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#029) : "happy art thou, O Israel!"
[Kg1 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#008) : "happy are thy men, happy
are these thy servants!" [Job 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#017) :
"happy is the man whom God correcteth!" [Psa
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012) : "blessed are all they that put
their trust in him!" See also [Psa
32:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001); [Psa
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#012); [Psa
34:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#008); [Psa
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#004); [Psa
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001); [Psa
65:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#004); [Psa
84:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#004), [Psa
84:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#012), et al., where it is rendered
"blessed." The word is of the most general character, and, in itself,
would embrace all that is supposed to constitute real happiness. The
particular kind of blessedness referred to here, as explained in the
subsequent part of the psalm, consists in the fact that he avoids the
companionship of the wicked; that he has pleasure in the law of the
Lord; that he will be prospered in this world; and that he will not
perish at lasts. The word "man" here, also, is of the most general
character, and is designed to include all people, of all times and of
all conditions, who possess the character referred to. The term is
applicable to the poor as well as to the rich; to the low as well as to
the exalted; to the servant as well as to the master; alike to the aged,
the middle-aged, and the young. All who have the character here
described come under the general description of the happy man - the man
whose condition is a happy and a desirable one.

That walketh not - Whose character is that he does not walk in the
manner specified. Prof. Alexander renders this, "Who has not walked."
But it implies more than this; it refers to more than the past. It is
the characteristic of the man, always and habitually, that he does not
thus walk; it has not only been true in the past, but it is true in the
present, and will be true in the future. It is that which distinguishes
the man. The word "walk" is often used in the Scriptures to denote a way
of life or conduct - since life is represented as a journey, and man as
a traveler. [Psa 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#002) : "who walketh
uprightly." Compare [Kg1 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#004); [Deu
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#009); [Deu
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#009); [Psa
81:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#012); [Isa
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#015).

In the counsel - After the manner, the principles, the plans of this
class of men. He does not take counsel of them as to the way in which he
should live, but from the law of the Lord, [Psa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002). This would include such things as
these: he does not follow the advice of sinners, [Sa2
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#020); [Kg1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#012); he does not execute the purposes
or plans of sinners, [Isa 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#003); he
does not frame his life according to their views and suggestions. In his
plans and purposes of life he is independent of them, and looks to some
other source for the rules to guide him.

Of the ungodly - The wicked. The word used here is general, and would
embrace all kinds and degrees of the unrighteous. It is not so specific,
and would, in itself, not indicate as definite, or as aggravated
depravity, as the terms which follow. The general sentiment here is,
that the man referred to is not the companion of wicked men.

Nor standeth - This indicates more deliberation; a character more fixed
and decided.

In the way - The path where they are found, or where they usually go.
His standing there would be as if he waited for them, or as if he
desired to be associated with them. Instead of passing along in his own
regular and proper employment, he stations himself in the path where
sinners usually go, and lingers and loiters there. Thus, he indicates a
desire to be with them. This is often, in fact, illustrated by men who
place themselves, as if they had nothing to do, in the usual situation
where the wicked pass along, or where they may be met with at the
corners of the streets in a great city.

Of sinners - חטאים chaṭṭâ'iym. This word means literally, those who miss
the mark; then, those who err from the path of duty or rectitude. It is
often used to denote any kind or degree of sin. It is more specific than
the former word rendered "ungodly," as denoting those who depart from
the path of duty; who fail in regard to the great end of life; who
violate positive and known obligations.

Nor sitteth - This implies still greater deliberation and determination
of character than either of the other words employed. The man referred
to here does not casually and accidentally walk along with them, nor put
himself in their way by standing where they are ordinarily to be found;
but he has become one of them by occupying a seat with them; thus
deliberately associating with them. He has an established residence
among the wicked; he is permanently one of their number.

In the seat - The seat which the scornful usually occupy; the place
where such men converse and sit together - as in a ball-room, or in a
"club," where wicked men hold their meetings, or where infidels and
scoffers are accustomed to assemble.

Of the scornful - לצים lētsiym. This word properly means those who mock,
deride, scoff; those who treat virtue and religion with contempt and
scorn. [Pro 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#022); [Pro
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#034); [Pro
9:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#007); [Pro
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#001); [Pro
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#012), et saepe. It denotes a higher
and more determined grade of wickedness than either of the other words
employed, and refers to the consummation of a depraved character, the
last stage of wickedness, when God and sacred things are treated with
contempt and derision. There is hope of a man as long as he will treat
virtue and religion with some degree of respect; there is little or none
when he has reached the point in his own character in which virtue and
piety are regarded only as fit subjects for ridicule and scorn. We have
here, then, a beautiful double gradation or climax, in the nouns and
verbs of this verse, indicating successive stages of character. There
is, first, casual walking with the wicked, or accidentally falling into
their company; there is then a more deliberate inclination for their
society, indicated by a voluntary putting of oneself in places where
they usually congregate, and standing to wait for them; and then there
is a deliberate and settled purpose of associating with them, or of
becoming permanently one of them, by regularly sitting among them.

So also it is in regard to the persons with whom they associate. They
are, first, irreligious men in general; then, those who have so far
advanced in depravity as to disregard known duty, and to violate known
obligations; and then, those who become confirmed in infidelity, and who
openly mock at virtue, and scoff at the claims of religion. It is
unnecessary to say that, in both these respects, this is an accurate
description of what actually occurs in the world. He who casually and
accidentally walks with the wicked, listening to their counsel, will
soon learn to place himself in their way, and to wait for them, desiring
their society, and will ultimately be likely to be feared identified
with open scoffers; and he who indulges in one form of depravity, or in
the neglect of religion in any way, will, unless restrained and
converted, be likely to run through every grade of wickedness, until he
becomes a confirmed scoffer at all religion. The sentiment in this verse
is, that the man who is truly blessed is a man who does none of these
things. His associations and preferences are found elsewhere, as is
stated in the next verse.

[Psalms 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 1:2</span></span>

But his delight - His pleasure; his happiness. Instead of finding his
happiness in the society and the occupations of the wicked, he finds it
in the truth of God. The law or truth of God is not distasteful to him,
but he so delights in it as to desire to become more and more acquainted
with it, and to have its truths impressed more and more on his heart.

In the law of the Lord - The law of Yahweh - the small capitals in the
translation indicating here as elsewhere that the original word is
Yahweh. The word law in the Scriptures is used in a considerable variety
of significations. The Hebrew word תורה tôrâh, properly means
instruction, precept; and then, an injunction, command, law, in the
usual sense of the word. It was applied particularly to the Pentateuch,
or law of Moses (compare the notes at [Luk
24:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044)), as containing the first
written and recorded laws of God; and then the word came, in a more
general sense, to be applied to all the books of the Old Testament, as
being an exposition and application of the law. Here the word
undoubtedly refers to the written revelation of the will of God as far
as it was then made known. On the same principle, however, the
declaration here made would apply to any part of a divine revelation;
and hence, the sentiment is, that a truly pious man finds his highest
delight in the revealed truths of God. This is often referred to as
characteristic of true piety. Compare [Psa
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#010); [Psa
119:97](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#097), [Psa
119:99](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#099).

And in his law - On his law, or his truth. "He doth meditate." The word
used here, הגה hâgâh, means properly to complain, to mutter; then, to
speak; then, to utter in a low complaining voice, as is often done by a
person in deep meditation; hence, in the usual sense, to meditate on
anything; to think of it. So [Jos 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#008)
: "Thou shalt meditate therein (the law) day and night." [Psa
77:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#012) : "I meditate on all thy work."
[Pro 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#028) : "the heart of the
righteous meditateth what to answer." The meaning here is, he thinks of
it; he endeavors to understand its meaning; he has pleasure in
reflecting on it. It is not a subject which he puts away from him, or in
respect to which he is indifferent, but he keeps it before his mind, and
has satisfaction in doing it.

Day and night - That is, continually - as day and night constitute the
whole of time. The meaning is:

\(a\) he does this habitually, or he intentionally forms the habit of
meditating on divine truth, by disciplining his mind in order that he
may do it;

\(b\) he takes time to do it - designedly setting apart suitable
portions of each day, that, withdrawn from the cares of life, he may
refresh his spirit by contemplating divine truth, or may become better
acquainted with God, and with his duty to him, and may bring to bear
upon his own soul more directly the truths pertaining to eternal
realities;

\(c\) he does this in the intervals of business, the moments of leisure
which he may have during the day - having thus an unfailing subject of
reflection to which his mind readily reverts, and in which, amid the
cares and toils of life, he finds relaxation and comfort; and

\(d\) he does it in the wakeful hours of night, when sick and tossed
upon his bed, or when, for any other reason, his "eyes are held waking."
[Psa 63:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#005) : "my soul shall be upon
my bed, and meditate on thee in the night-watches." [Psa
119:54](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#054) : "Thy statutes have been my
songs in the house of my pilgrimage." Compare [Psa
119:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#023), [Psa
119:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#043); [Psa
143:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#005). It is probable that the
psalmist had the injunction in his mind which is contained in [Jos
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#008).

[Psalms 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 1:3</span></span>

And he shall be like a tree - A description of the happiness or
prosperity of the man who thus avoids the way of sinners, and who
delights in the law of God, now follows. This is presented in the form
of a very beautiful image - a tree planted where its roots would have
abundance of water.

Planted by the rivers of water - It is not a tree that springs up
spontaneously, but one that is set out in a favorable place, and that is
cultivated with care. The word "rivers" does not here quite express the
sense of the original. The Hebrew word פלג peleg, from פלג pâlag, to
cleave, to split, to divide), properly means divisions; and then,
channels, canals, trenches, branching-cuts, brooks. The allusion is to
the Oriental method of irrigating their lands by making artificial
rivulets to convey the water from a larger stream, or from a lake. In
this way, the water was distributed in all directions. The whole land of
Egypt was anciently sluiced in this manner, and it was in this way that
its extraordinary fertility was secured. An illustration of the passage
may be derived from the account by Maundrell of the method of watering
the gardens and orchards in the vicinity of Damascus. "The gardens are
thick set with fruit trees of all kinds, kept fresh and verdant by the
waters of the Barady .... This river, as soon as it issues out of the
cleft of the mountain before mentioned, into the plain, is immediately
divided into three streams, of which the middlemost and largest runs
directly to Damascus, and is distributed to all the cisterns and
fountains of the ciy. The other two, which I take to be the work of art,
are drawn round, the one to the right, and the other to the left, on the
borders of the gardens, into which they are let out, as they pass, by
little rivulets, and so dispersed over all the vast wood, insomuch that
there is not a garden but has a fine, quick stream running through it."
Trav., p. 122.

A striking allusion to trees cultivated in this manner occurs in [Eze
31:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#003) : "Behold, the Assyrian was a
cedar in Lebanon, with fair branches, and with a shadowing shroud, and
of a high stature, and his top was among the thick boughs. The waters
made him great, the deep set him up on high, with his rivers running
round about his plants, and sent out his little rivers unto all the
trees of the field." So [Ecc 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#004) : "I
made me pools of water, to water therewith the wood that bringeth forth
trees." No particular kind of tree is referred to in the passage before
us, but there are abundant illustrations of the passage in the rows of
willow, oranges, etc., that stand on the banks of these artificial
streams in the East. The image is that of a tree abundantly watered, and
that was flourishing.

That bringeth forth his fruit in his season - Whose fruit does not fall
by the lack of nutriment. The idea is that of a tree which, at the
proper season of the year, is loaded with fruit. Compare [Psa
92:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#014). The image is one of great
beauty. The fruit is not untimely. It does not ripen and fall too soon,
or fall before it is mature; and the crop is abundant.

His leaf also shall not wither - By drought and heat. Compare [Job
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#016), note; [Job
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#032), note. It is green and
flourishing - a striking image of a happy and a prosperous man.

And whatsoever he doeth shall prosper - This is a literal statement of
what had just been put in a figurative or poetic form. It contains a
general truth, or contains an affirmation as to the natural and proper
effect of religion, or of a life of piety, and is similar to that which
occurs in [Ti1 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008) : "Godliness is
profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and
of that which is to come." This idea of the effect of a life of piety is
one that is common in the Scriptures, and is sustained by the regular
course of events. If a man desires permanent prosperity and happiness,
it is to be found only in the ways of virtue and religion. The word
"whatsoever" here is to be taken in a general sense, and the proper laws
of interpretation do not require that we should explain it as
universally true. It is conceivable that a righteous man - a man
profoundly and sincerely fearing God - may sometimes form plans that
will not be wise; it is conceivable that he may lose his wealth, or that
he may be involved in the calamities that come upon a people in times of
commercial distress, in seasons of war, of famine, and pestilence; it is
conceivable that he may be made to suffer loss by the fraud and
dishonesty of other men; but still as a general and as a most important
truth, a life of piety will be followed by prosperity, and will
constantly impart happiness. It is this great and important truth which
it is the main design of the Book of Psalms to illustrate.

[Psalms 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 1:4</span></span>

The ungodly are not so - literally, "Not thus the wicked." For the word
ungodly, see the notes at [Psa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001).
The statement that the "wicked are not so," is a general statement
applicable alike to their character and destiny, though the mind of the
author of the psalm is fixed immediately and particularly on the
difference in their destiny, without specifying anything particularly
respecting their character. It is as true, however, that the ungodly do
walk in the counsel of the wicked, and stand in the way of sinners, and
sit in the seat of the scornful, as it is that the righteous do not; as
true that they do not delight in the law of the Lord, as it is that the
righteous do; as true that the wicked are not like a tree planted by the
channels of water, as it is that the righteous are. This passage,
therefore, may be employed to show what is the character of the ungodly,
and in so applying it, what was before negative in regard to the
righteous, becomes positive in regard to the wicked; what was positive,
becomes negative. Thus it is true:

\(a\) that the wicked do walk in the counsel of the ungodly; do stand in
the way of sinners; do sit in the seat of the scornful;

\(b\) that they do not delight in the law of the Lord, or meditate on
his word; and

\(c\) that they are not like a tree planted by the waters, that is green
and beautiful and fruitful.

Both in character and in destiny the ungodly differ from the righteous.
The subsequent part of the verse shows that, while the general truth was
in the mind of the writer, the particular thing on which his attention
was fixed was, his condition in life - his destiny - as that which could
not be compared with a green and fruitful tree, but which suggested
quite another image.

But are like the chaff which the wind driveth away - When the wheat was
winnowed. This, in Oriental countries, was commonly performed in the
open field, and usually on an eminence, and where there was a strong
wind. The operation was performed, as it is now in our country, when a
fan or fanning-mill cannot he procured, by throwing up the grain as it
is threshed with a shovel, and the wind scatters the chaff, while the
grain falls to the ground. See the notes at [Mat
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012).

This very naturally and appropriately furnished an illustration of the
destiny of the wicked. Compared with the righteous, they were like the
worthless chaff driven away by the wind. The image is often found in the
Scriptures. See [Job 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#018), note; [Isa
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#013), note. Compare also [Psa
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#005); [Isa
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#005); [Isa
41:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#015); [Dan
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035); [Hos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#003). The idea here is, that the
wicked are in no respect like the green and fruitful tree referred to in
[Psa 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003). They are not like a tree in
any respect. They are not even like a decaying tree, a barren tree, a
dead tree, for either of these would suggest some idea of stability or
permanency. They are like dry and worthless chaff driven off by the
wind, as of no value to the farmer - a substance which he is anxious
only to separate wholly from his grain, and to get out of his way. The
idea thus suggested, therefore, is that of intrinsic worthlessness. It
will be among other things, on this account that the wicked will be
driven away - that they are worthless in the universe of God - worthless
to all the purposes for which man was made. At the same time, however,
there may be an implied contrast between that chaff and the useful grain
which it is the object of the farmer to secure.

[Psalms 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 1:5</span></span>

Therefore - Because they are thus worthless.

The ungodly - See the notes at [Psa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001). The wicked in general; the wicked
of any kind or degree.

Shall not stand - Compare the notes at [Psa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001). The idea is, that they will not
be found among those who are acquitted by the Judge, and approved by
him. The idea seems to be derived from the act of standing up to be
tried, or to receive a sentence.

In the judgment - The Aramaic Paraphrase renders this, "in the great
day" - understanding it of the day of judgment. The Septuagint and
Vulgate render it, "the wicked shall not rise - ἀναστήσονται
anastēsontai - resurgent - in judgment." Most of the Jewish
interpreters, following the Aramaic Paraphrase, understand this as
referring to the last judgment. Rosenmuller, in loc. The truth stated,
however, seems to be more general than that, though that is probably
included. The meaning is, that they would not share the lot of the
righteous: in all places, and at all times, where character is
determined, and where the divine estimate of human character is
manifested, it would be found that they could not stand the trial, or
abide the result, so as to have a place with the righteous. Their true
character would in all such cases be shown, and they would be treated
like the chaff that is driven away. This would be true alike in those
situations of trial in the present life when character is determined,
and at the last judgment, when the sentence will be pronounced which
will determine the final doom of mankind.

Nor sinners - See the notes at [Psa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001).

In the congregation of the righteous - Be reckoned or regarded as
belonging to the righteous. That is, in all the places where the
righteous, as such, are assembled, they will have no place: where they
assemble to worship God; where they meet as his friends; where they
unitedly participate in his favor; when, in the last day, they shall be
gathered together to receive their reward, and when they shall be
assembled together in heaven. The sinner has no place in the
congregations of the people of God.

[Psalms 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 1:6</span></span>

For the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous - This is given as a
reason why the wicked would not stand in the judgment with the
righteous. The reason is, that the Lord, the great Judge, fully
understands the character of those who are his friends, and can
discriminate between them and all others, whatever pretences others may
make to that character. Only those whom God approves, and loves, as his
friends, will be able to stand in the day when the great decision shall
be made. No one can impose on him by any mere pretensions to piety; no
one can force his way to his favor, or to the rewards of the just, by
power; no one can claim this in virtue of rank and station. No one can
be admitted to the favor of God, and to the rewards of heaven, whose
character is not such that it will bear the scrutiny of the Omniscient
eve. Compare the notes at [Ti2 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019).
Man may be deceived in judging character, but God is not. When it is
said that "the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous," the word "way"
seems to be used to denote the whole of life - the manner of living
(Notes, [Psa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)), and hence, the
whole character. Perhaps there is included also the idea that the Lord
knows the result of their manner of life - the issue to which it leads -
and that, therefore, he can properly judge the righteous and assign them
to that place in the future world, to wit, heaven, to which their
actions tend.

But the way of the ungodly shall perish - The way or manner in which the
ungodly live shall tend to ruin; their plans, and purposes, and hopes,
shall come to nought. Their course, in fact, tends to destruction. None
of their plans shall prosper in regard to religion: none of their hopes
shall be fulfilled. In this, as in all other respects, they stand in
strong contrast with the righteous, alike in this world and the world to
come.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 2](psa002)

</div>
