<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa068)  [Next](psa070.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 69](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 69:0</span></span>

This psalm is said in the title to be a psalm of David, but on what
occasion it was composed is not there intimated, nor can it be
determined from the psalm itself. There is nothing "in" the psalm which
is inconsistent with the supposition that it was composed by David; and,
in fact, it has, in many respects, a strong resemblance to not a few of
his undoubted compositions, as [Psa
6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001.md); Ps. 22; Ps. 25; Ps. 35; Ps.
38. Compare [Psa 42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001.md). On the
expression in the title "To the chief Musician," see Notes in the
Introduction to [Psa 4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001.md). On the
words "upon Shoshannim," see the notes on the Title to Ps. 45.

On what occasion in the life of David the psalm was written cannot now
be determined. There were many occasions in his life to which all that
is said in the psalm might be applicable, for his was a life of many
trials and perils; but the most natural interpretation would be that
which ascribes it to the time of the rebellion of Absalom. Some have
supposed that it was written at a later period than the time of David.
Thus De Wette maintains that the closing verses [Psa
69:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#034.md) demonstrate that it must have
been written in the time of the exile. Rosenmuller coincides with that
opinion in regard to those verses, but supposes that they were added to
the psalm (as originally composed) by some later author. It will be
found, however, on examination of these verses, that there is nothing in
them inconsistent with the supposition that the entire psalm was
composed by David. The psalm evidently pertains to an individual
sufferer; a man who regarded himself as suffering in the cause of
religion, or on account of his zeal for the service of God. It is this
fact which is laid at the foundation of the psalmist's prayer for the
divine intervention. The author is a sufferer in the cause of God and of
truth, and he beseeches God, in whose cause he suffers, on that account
to interpose in his behalf.

There are several passages in the psalm which are applied in the New
Testament to the Messiah and his times; [Psa
69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009.md), compare [Joh
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#017.md), and [Rom
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#003.md); [Psa
69:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#004.md), compare [Joh
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#025.md); [Psa
69:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#021.md), compare [Mat
27:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034.md), [Mat
27:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#048.md) ([Mar
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#023.md), and [Joh
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#029).md); [Psa
69:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#025.md), compare [Mat
23:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#038.md), and [Act
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020.md). These passages, however, are of
so "general" a character that they do not seem to have been designed to
refer exclusively to the Messiah, or even to have had "any" original
reference to him. The language is such that it "would accurately
describe" the events to which it is applied; and the fact that the
language is quoted in this manner in the New Testament history does not
prove that the psalm had any original reference to the Messiah.

In the psalm, the sufferer first [Psa
69:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001.md) describes his condition; he
then [Psa 69:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#007.md) represents himself
as suffering in the cause of God or of religion; then [Psa
69:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#014.md), prays to be delivered from
these troubles. In [Psa 69:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#019.md) he
again adverts to his sufferings with a more explicit reference to their
cause, the malice of his enemies; and then [Psa
69:22-28](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022.md) prays that his enemies may be
destroyed. He anticipates that his prayer will be heard, and that this
will have a favorable effect on others, leading them to praise God [Psa
69:29-33](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#029.md); and this leads him to look
forward to the general prosperity of Zion - to the fact that Zion will
be delivered out of all its troubles - as laying the foundation for
universal praise [Psa 69:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#034.md).

[Psalms 69:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 69:1</span></span>

Save me, O God - That is, Interpose and deliver me from the dangers
which have come upon me.

For the waters are come in unto my soul - So as to endanger my life.
Waters, deep, raging, overwhelming, are images of calamity or danger.
See the notes at [Psa 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#006.md). Compare
[Psa 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#007.md).

[Psalms 69:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 69:2</span></span>

I sink in deep mire - Margin, as in Hebrew, "the mire of the depth."
This would denote either mire which was itself so deep that one could
not extricate himself from it; or, mire found in a deep place, as at the
bottom of a pit. Compare the notes at [Psa
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#002.md). An illustration of this might be
drawn from the case of Joseph, cast by his brethren into a deep pit [Gen
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#024.md); or from the case of Jeremiah,
thrown into a deep dungeon: "And they let down Jeremiah with cords; and
in the dungeon there was no water, but mire: so Jeremiah sunk in the
mire," [Jer 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#006.md).

Where there is no standing - No solid ground; nothing for the foot to
rest on. "I am come into deep waters." Margin, as in Hebrew, "depth of
waters." That is, waters where he could not touch the bottom - an image
of some peril that threatened his life.

Where the floods overflow me - The waters. They break over my head. My
life is "in danger."

[Psalms 69:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 69:3</span></span>

I am weary of my crying - The word "crying" here does not mean weeping,
or shedding tears, but calling upon God for help. He had grown weary;
his strength had been exhausted in the act of calling upon God to assist
him. See the notes at [Psa 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#006.md). This
was an instance where one had called so long on God, and prayed so much
and so earnestly, that his strength was gone. Compare [Mat
26:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#041.md).

My throat is dried - Or, "is parched up." The Hebrew word denotes to
burn; to be enkindled; and then, to be inflamed. Here it means that by
the excessive exertion of his voice, his throat had become parched, so
that he could not speak.

Mine eyes fail - That is, become dim from exhaustion. I have looked so
long in that one direction that the power of vision begins to fail, and
I see nothing clearly. See the notes at [Psa
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#007.md). Compare [Job
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#007.md); [Psa
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#009.md); [Psa
38:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#010.md).

While I wait for my God - That is, by continued "looking" to God. The
word "wait" is not used here, nor is it generally in the Bible, as it is
now with us, in the sense of looking for "future" interposition, or of
doing nothing ourselves in expectation of what "may" occur; but it is
used in the sense of looking to God alone; of exercising dependence on
him; of seeking his aid. This is indeed connnected with the ordinary
idea of abiding his will, but it is also an "active" state of mind - a
state expressive of intense interest and desire. See the notes at [Psa
62:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#005.md).

[Psalms 69:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 69:4</span></span>

They that hate me without a cause - Without any just reason; without any
provocation on my part. There were many such in the case of David, for
to those who rose up against him in the time of Saul, and to Absalom
also, he had given no real occasion of offence. An expression similar to
the one used here occurs in [Psa
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#019.md). See the notes at that passage.
The "language" is applied to the Saviour [Joh
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#025.md), not as having had original
reference to him, but as language which received its most perfect
fulfillment in the treatment which he received from his enemies. See the
notes at [Joh 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#025.md).

Are more than the hairs of mine head - The number is so great that it
cannot be estimated.

They that would destroy me, being mine enemies wrongfully, are mighty -
literally, "More than the hairs of my head are my haters falsely (those
who hate me falsely); strong are those destroying me; my enemies." The
idea is, that those who were numbered among his foes without any just
provocation on his part were so numerous and strong that he could not
contend with them.

Then I restored that which I took not away - Prof. Alexander renders
this, "What I did not rob, then must I restore." This seems to have a
proverbial cast, and the idea is, that under this pressure of
circumstances - borne down by numbers - he was compelled to give up what
he had not taken away from others. They regarded and treated him as a
bad man - as if he had been a robber; and they compelled him to give up
what he possessed, "as if" he had no right to it, or "as if" he had
obtained it by robbery. This does not seem to refer to anything that was
"voluntary" on his part - as if, for the sake of peace, he had proposed
to give up that to which they had no claim, or to surrender his just
rights, but to the act of compulsion by which he was "forced" to
surrender what he had, "as if" he had been a public offender. How far it
is proper to yield to an unjust claim for the sake of peace, or to act
"as if" we had done wrong, rather than to have controversy or strife, is
a point which, if this interpretation is correct, is not settled by this
passage. It seems here to have been merely a question of "power."

[Psalms 69:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 69:5</span></span>

O God, thou knowest my foolishness - The errors and follies of my life.
Though conscious of innocence in this case - though he felt that his
enemies hated him "without cause," and that they took what belonged to
him and not to them, yet he was not insensible to the fact that he was a
sinner, and he was not unwilling to confess before God, that, however
conscious of uprightness he might be in his dealings toward people, yet
toward God, he was a sinful man. From him he deserved all that had come
upon him. Indeed the very calamities which had been permitted to come
upon him were proof to his own mind that he was a sinner, and served, as
they were doubtless designed, to turn his mind to that fact, and to
humble him. The effect of calamities coming upon us, as reminding us of
the fact that we are sinners, is often referred to in the Psalms. See
[Psa 38:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#002.md); [Psa
40:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#012.md).

And my sins are not hid from thee - Margin, "guiltiness." The word used
here has always attached to it the idea of "guilt." The meaning is, that
God knew all his life; and that however unjust the conduct of "men"
toward him might be when they treated him as if he had wronged them, yet
considered as a part of the dealings of God, or as having been suffered
to come upon him from God, all that had occurred was right, for it was a
proper expression of the divine displeasure against his sins. We may
feel that we have not wronged our fellow-men; yet even the treatment
which we receive from them, however unjust so far as they are concerned,
may be regarded as deserved by us at the hand of God, and as proper on
his part as an expression of his displeasure for our transgressions
against him, and as a proof that we are sinners. Trial never comes to us
from any quarter except as founded on the fact that we are sinners; and
even where there is entire innocence toward our fellow-men, God may make
use of their passions to rebuke and discipline us for our sins toward
himself.

[Psalms 69:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 69:6</span></span>

Let not them that wait on thee - Those who worship thee; those who are
thy true friends. True piety is often, in the Scriptures, represented as
waiting on the Lord. See [Psa 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#003.md),
[Psa 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#005.md); [Psa
37:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#009.md); [Isa
40:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#031.md).

Be ashamed for my sake - On account of me; or, in consequence of what I
do. Let me not be suffered to do anything that would make them ashamed
of me, or ashamed to have it known that I belong to their number. I know
that I am a sinner; I know that judgments come justly on me; I know that
if left to myself I shall fall into sin, and shall dishonor religion;
and I pray, therefore, that I may be kept from acting out the depravity
of my heart, and bringing dishonor on the cause that I profess to love.
No one who knows the evil of his own heart can fail to see the propriety
of this prayer; no one who remembers how often people high in the
church, and zealous in their professed piety, fall into sin, and
disgrace their profession, can help feeling that what has happened to
others "may" happen to him also, and that he has need of special prayer,
and special grace, that he may go down into the grave at last without
having brought dishonor upon religion.

Let not those that seek thee - Another phrase to denote people of true
piety - as those who are "seeking" after God; that is, who are desirous
of understanding his character, and obtaining his favor.

Be confounded for my sake - Let them not feel "disgraced" in me; let
them not feel it a dishonor to have it said that I am one of their
number, or that I profess to be united to them.

[Psalms 69:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 69:7</span></span>

Because for thy sake I have borne reproach - In thy cause; in defense of
thy truth; because I have professed to be a friend of God. The true
reason why these calamities have come upon me is that I have been thy
professed friend, and have endeavored to do my duty to thee. The
reproach connected with religion in a world of sin, or where true
religion is hated, has fallen on me.

Shame hath covered my face - The idea here is not that he had himself
been ashamed of religion or of the service of God, but that he had
suffered shame, derision, reproach among people for his professed
attachment to the truth. Compare [Psa
44:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#015.md).

[Psalms 69:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 69:8</span></span>

I am become a stranger unto my brethren - That is, They treat me as they
would a stranger; as one in whom they have no interest, and whom they
regard with no friendship. Compare the notes at [Psa
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#011.md).

And an alien unto my mother's children - A foreigner; one of another
tribe or nation; one to whom they were bound by no tie of relationship.
The allusion in the language "unto my mother's children" is intended to
denote the most intimate relationship. In families where a man had many
wives, as was common among the Hebrews, the nearest relationship would
be denoted by being of the same "mother" rather than of the same
"father." See the notes at [Psa 50:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#020.md).
The same thing occurs also where polygamy is not practiced, in cases
where a man has married more wives than one. The idea of the psalmist
here, therefore, is, that his nearest relatives treated him as if he
were a stranger and a foreigner. Compare [Job
19:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#013.md).

[Psalms 69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 69:9</span></span>

For the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up - My zeal - my ardor - in
the cause of religion (that is, of thy pure worship) has been so great
as to consume me. It has been like a devouring fire within me. Zeal is
represented under the idea of heat - as it is in the Greek language; and
the characteristics of heat or fire are here applied to it. This passage
is quoted in [Joh 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#017.md), and applied to
the Saviour, not as having had originally a reference to him, but as
language which would accurately describe his character. See the notes at
that passage.

And the reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me -
This, too, is applied, in the same way, to the Saviour, by the Apostle
Paul, in [Rom 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#003.md). See the notes at
that passage.

[Psalms 69:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 69:10</span></span>

When I wept, and chastened my soul with fasting - The words "and
chastened" are not in the original. The literal translation would be,
"And I wept (away) my soul with fasting;" that is, I gave myself so much
to fasting accompanied with weeping, that my strength was exhausted.
This refers to his acts of devotion; to his endeavors to discipline his
soul so as to lead a strictly religious life.

That was to my reproach - This may either mean that they accused him of
hypocrisy and insincerity; or, that they charged him with folly for
being so religious, so strict, so self-sacrificing, so serious - perhaps
they would say, so superstitious, so gloomy, so fanatical. The latter
best accords with the connection, since it was for his "religion" mainly
that they reproached him, [Psa 69:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#007.md).

[Psalms 69:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 69:11</span></span>

I made sackcloth also my garment - I put on sackcloth. This was often
done as expressive of grief and sorrow. See [Psa
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#011.md), note; [Psa
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#013.md), note. Compare [Isa
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#012.md); [Dan
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#003.md). In the case here referred to,
this was an act of religion; an expression of penitence and humiliation.

And I became a proverb to them - A jest; a subject of derision; a
by-word. They ridiculed me for it. Compare [Kg1
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#007.md).

[Psalms 69:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 69:12</span></span>

They that sit in the gate speak against me - The gates of cities were
places of concourse; places where business was transacted; places where
courts were frequently held. See the notes at [Job
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#007.md). Compare [Isa
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#031.md); [Isa
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#006.md); [Psa
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#014.md). Calvin supposes that as the
gates were the places where the judges sat to administer justice, the
meaning here is that magistrates, or those who were high in rank and
power, joined in the cry of reproach against him. The more probable
interpretation, however, is, that he was subject to the reproach of
those who were gathered around these places - the people of business,
and the idlers who were assembled there; or, as we should say, that he
was the subject of "towntalk."

And I was the song of the drunkards - Margin, as in the Hebrew,
"drinkers of strong drink." They made ballads or low songs about me.
They selected me for an example in their drunken songs. David was not
alone in this. It has not been uncommon that the songs of revellers and
drunkards have been designed to turn piety and the pious into derision.
Compare, alas! some of the songs of Burns. See [Job
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#009.md), note; [Psa
35:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#015.md), notes.

[Psalms 69:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 69:13</span></span>

But as for me - In respect to my conduct and my feelings in these
circumstances, and under this treatment.

My prayer is unto thee - I indulge in no reproaches of others, and no
recriminations. I do not permit myself to indulge in any revengeful
feelings. I give myself to prayer. I look to God alone. I keep up my
devotions, I maintain my habits of religion, notwithstanding their
reproaches, and revilings. I do not allow these things to alter my
course of life. Compare the notes at [Dan
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#010.md).

In an acceptable time - A time that is well-pleasing to thee; a time
when thou wilt hear me. See Isa. 49:83; [Isa
61:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#002.md); [Co2
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002.md). This implies

\(a\) that he had come to God when he was "disposed" to hear; and

\(b\) that he had heard him, and had answered his requests.

While others mocked, he continued to pray, and the Lord heard him. No
time for prayer can be more "acceptable" to God than when others are
reproaching us because we are his friends.

In the multitude of thy mercy hear me - In the abundance of thy mercy;
or, in thy abounding compassion. This was the substance of his prayer.

In the truth of thy salvation - In the exercise of that faithfulness on
which salvation depends; or which is manifested in the salvation of
people. He prayed that God would show himself faithful to the promises
which he had made to those who were seeking salvation.

[Psalms 69:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 69:14</span></span>

Deliver me out of the mire - Out of my troubles and calamities. See [Psa
69:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001.md).

And let me not sink - As in, mire. Let me not be overwhelmed by my
sorrows.

Let me be delivered from them that hate me - All my enemies. Let me be
saved from their machinations and devices.

And out of the deep waters - See [Psa
69:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001.md). From my troubles.

[Psalms 69:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 69:15</span></span>

Let not the waterflood overflow me - The stream; the volume of waters.
The idea is that of a flood or stream rolling along, that threatened to
drown him.

Neither let the deep swallow me up - The abyss; the deep waters.

And let not the pit shut her mouth upon me - In his anguish and distress
he passes here from the idea of running streams, and deep waters, to
that of a well, pit, or cavern - representing himself as "in" that pit,
and praying that it might not be closed upon him, leaving him in
darkness and in mire, from which he could not then escape. The general
idea in all these expressions is the same - that of overwhelming
calamities from which he prayed to be delivered.

[Psalms 69:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 69:16</span></span>

Hear me, O L RD, for thy lovingkindness is good - Thy mercy - thy favor
- is good; that is, it is ample, abundant, great: it delights in deeds
of mercy; in acts of benevolence. This was the only ground of his plea;
and this was enough. Compare [Psa
63:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#003.md).

Turn unto me - Incline thine ear unto me; turn not away, but be
favorable to me.

According to the multitude of thy tender mercies - See the notes at [Psa
51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001.md). He felt that he had occasion for
the exercise of "all" the mercy of God; that the case was one which
could be reached only by the exercise of the highest kindness and
compassion.

[Psalms 69:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 69:17</span></span>

And hide not thy face from thy servant - See the notes at [Psa
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#009.md).

For I am in trouble - In the midst of dangers and sorrows. Literally,
"there is trouble upon me."

Hear me speedily - Margin, as in Hebrew, "Make haste to hear me." That
is, Grant me without delay what I ask. The case is one of urgent
necessity. I "must" have relief or I shall perish. It is not wrong to
ask God to interpose at once in our behalf when we are in trouble,
though it is our duty to be patient and resigned if his interposition is
delayed, for he may have important ends to accomplish by our continuing
to suffer. In our distress on account of sin also, it is right to plead
with him to interpose "at once," and to relieve us by forgiveness. In
this respect we are not to be contented with delay; we are to cast
ourselves upon his mercy, and to plead for immediate pardon, for as it
is our only safety, so it is for the honor of God that we should be
forgiven, and that we should not continue in a state of guilt. An
afflicted child of God will be safe in the final issue, whether he is
relieved at once, or whether he is suddenly cut off by death, or whether
he continues to suffer for even many years; but an unpardoned sinner is
"not" safe for a moment, and if he should be cut off, unforgiven, even
when under the deepest conviction for sin, he would perish. Every
consideration, therefore, makes it proper that he should plead for
forgiveness at once, and ask that God would not "delay" to show him
mercy.

[Psalms 69:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 69:18</span></span>

Draw nigh unto my soul - To me - for my life is in danger.

And redeem it - Ransom it; save it from ruin. See the notes at [Isa
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003.md); notes at [Isa
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#022.md).

Deliver me, because of mine enemies - Because they are so numerous, so
powerful, and so determined on my destruction. Compare [Psa
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#004.md).

[Psalms 69:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 69:19</span></span>

Thou hast known my reproach - The reproach that has come upon me; the
shame and contempt which I am called to endure. God had seen all this;
and the psalmist appeals to him as having seen it, as a reason why he
should now interpose and save him.

And my shame, and my dishonor - These are different words to express the
same idea. They are accumulated here to denote the "greatness" of his
distress. In other words, shame and reproach bad come upon him in every
possible form.

Mine adversaries are all before thee - All who persecute and oppose me
are constantly in thine eye. Thou knowest who they are; thou seest all
that they do. Nothing in their conduct is concealed from thee. God,
therefore, could take an accurate view of his troubles, and could see
all the reasons which existed for interfering in his behalf.

[Psalms 69:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 69:20</span></span>

Reproach hath broken my heart - The reproaches, the calumnies, the
aspersions, the slanders of others, have crushed me. I am not able to
bear up under them; I fail under the burden. Distress may become so
great that life may sink under it, for many die of what is called "a
broken heart." Undeserved reproaches will be as likely to produce this
result on a sensitive heart as any form of suffering; and there are
thousands who are crushed to the earth by such reproaches.

And I am full of heaviness - Or, I am sick; I am weak; I am ill at ease.
My strength is gone.

And I looked for some to take pity - Margin, "to lament with me." The
meaning of the Hebrew word is to pity; to commiserate; to show
compassion. [Job 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#011.md); [Job
42:11](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#011.md); [Isa
51:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#019.md); [Jer
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#005.md).

But there was none - There was no one whose heart seemed to be touched
with compassion in the case; none who sympathized with me.

And for comforters - For those who would show sympathy for me; who would
evince a friendly feeling in my distress.

But I found none - He felt that he was utterly forsaken by mankind.
There is no feeling of desolation like that.

[Psalms 69:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 69:21</span></span>

They gave me also - My enemies; all persons around me. No one would show
me even so much kindness as to give me food when I was hungry, or drink
when I was thirsty. They utterly forsook me; they left me to die
unpitied. Nay, they did more than this. When I was perishing with
hunger, they not only refused to give me wholesome food, but they mocked
my sufferings by giving me a bitter and poisonous herb for food, and
vinegar for my drink.

Gall for my meat - For my food. Or, they gave me this "instead" of
wholesome food. The word here rendered "gall" - ראשׁ rô'sh - is the same
"in form" which is commonly rendered "head," and occurs in this sense
very often in the Scriptures. It is also used to denote a "poisonous
plant," perhaps from the idea that the plant referred to was
distinguished for, or remarkable for its "head" - as the poppy; and
"then" the name may have been given also to some other similar plants.
The word then comes to denote poison; venom; anything poisonous; and
then, anything very bad-tasted; "bitter." It is rendered "gall," as
here, in [Deu 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#018.md); [Jer
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#014.md); [Jer
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#015.md); [Jer
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#015.md); [Lam
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#005.md), [Lam
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#019.md); [Amo
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#012.md); "venom" in [Deu
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#033.md); "poison," in [Job
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#016.md); and "hemlock," in [Hos
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#004.md). In [Deu
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#018.md), it is rendered, in the margin,
"rosh," or "a poisonful herb." It does not occur elsewhere with any such
signification. It may not be possible to determine precisely what is
denoted here by the word, but it undoubtedly refers to some poisonous,
bitter, deadly, stupefying substance given to a sufferer, "instead" of
that which would be wholesome food, or suited to sustain life.

And in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink - Instead of giving me
pure water, they gave me sour wine - vinegar - that which would not
slake my thirst, or which would not answer the purpose of drink. The
form of trial here referred to is that where one is dying of thirst, and
where, instead of giving water to assuage the thirst, one should give,
in mockery, that which could not be drunk, or which would answer none of
the purposes required. The word translated "vinegar" - חמץ chômets - is
rendered in the ancient versions "sour grapes," but the proper
signification here seems to be vinegar - the usual meaning of the word.
What is here stated to have been done to David was also done to the
dying Saviour, though without any intimation that the passage here had
an original reference to him - or that what was done to him was intended
to be a fulfillment of what is here said. See [Mat
27:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034.md), [Mat
27:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#048.md); [Mar
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#023.md); [Joh
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#029.md). In the case of the Saviour,
they first gave him vinegar mingled with myrrh - a usual custom in
reference to those who were crucified - for the purpose of deadening the
pain, or stupefying the sufferer. [Mat
27:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034.md). At a subsequent part of the
crucifixion they gave him vinegar, extended to him in a sponge affixed
to a reed. [Mat 27:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#048.md); [Joh
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#029.md). This was for a different
purpose. It was to allay his thirst, and it seems (as the former may
have been) to have been an act of kindness or compassion on the part of
those who were appointed to crucify him. The former he refused to take,
because he came to suffer; the latter he just tasted as he died. [Joh
19:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#030.md). The "coincidence" in the cases
of David and the Saviour was remarkable; but in the case of the Saviour
no further use is made of what occurred to David than to employ the
"language" which he employed to describe his own sufferings. The one was
not, in any proper sense, a "type" of the other; nor does the language
in the psalm refer to the Saviour.

[Psalms 69:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 69:22</span></span>

Let their table become a snare before them - These verses are quoted by
Paul [Rom 11:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#009.md) as descriptive of
the character of persons in his time, or as "language" which would
express what he desired to say. See the passage explained at length in
the notes at [Rom 11:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#009.md). The whole
passage is a prayer that they might receive a proper recompense for what
they had done. The word "table" here means the table at which they were
accustomed to eat. As they refused food to a hungry man, the prayer is,
that they might find the recompense for their conduct "in that very
line;" or that, as they refused food to the hungry, they might find
"their" food a "snare" to them. That is, Let it be the means of
punishing them for their not giving wholesome food to the hungry, or for
their offering poisonous herbs to a starving man. The word "snare" here
means unexpected danger; danger sprung suddenly upon them - as a snare
is upon a wild beast.

And that which should have been for their welfare, let it become a trap
- Much of this is supplied by the translators. The literal rendering
would be, "And to those at peace (or secure) a trap." The word here
rendered "welfare" is the plural form of the word meaning "peace," and
may denote those who feel that they are at peace; that they are secure;
that they are in no danger. The ancient versions give it the sense of
"requitals," that is, a recompence for their transgressions; but the
other signification best accords with the connection. The word "trap" is
usually applied to the devices for capturing wild beasts, and the
meaning is, "Let the recompence come suddenly upon them, while they
think themselves at peace, or when they are surrounded by all the
comforts and luxuries of life." This prayer is such as occurs frequently
in the Psalms. It cannot be "proved" that it was uttered in a malignant
spirit, or that anything more is intended by it than that the psalmist
desired that justice might be done to all people - an object which all
magistrates, and all good citizens, should pray for.

[Psa 69:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#023.md)

Let their eyes be darkened ... - See the notes at [Rom
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#010.md).

And make their loins continually to shake - As under a heavy burden. The
apostle [Rom 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#010.md) varies the
language, but retains the idea: "and bow down their back alway."

[Psalms 69:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 69:24</span></span>

Pour out thine indignation upon them - That is, Punish them for their
sins; or, do justice to them.

And let thy wrathful anger - literally, "the burning of thy wrath;" glow
of anger; burning wrath. See [Num
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#004.md); [Num
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#014.md), [Sa1
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#018.md). This is undoubtedly a petition
that God would visit them with the severity of his indignation; or, it
expresses the belief of the psalmist that they "deserved" such tokens of
his displeasure.

Take hold of them - Seize upon them; overtake them when they expect to
escape.

[Psalms 69:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 69:25</span></span>

Let their habitation be desolate - Margin, "their palace." The Hebrew
word means properly a wall; then, a fortress or castle; and then it
means also a nomadic encampment, a rustic village, a farm-hamlet. The
word conveys the idea of an "enclosure," with special reference to an
encampment, or a collection of tents. The Septuagint renders it here
ἔπαυλις epaulis, meaning a place to pass the night in, especially for
flocks and herds. The Hebrew word - טירה ṭı̂yrâh - is rendered "castles"
in [Gen 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#016.md); [Num
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#010.md); [Ch1
6:54](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#054.md); "palaces" in [Sol
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#009.md); [Eze
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#004.md); "rows" in [Eze
46:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#023.md); and "habitation" in this place.
It does not occur elsewhere. Here it means their "home," - their place
of abode, - but with no particular reference to the "kind" of home,
whether a palace, a castle, or an encampment. The idea is, that the
place which they had occupied, or where they had dwelt, would be made
vacant. They would be removed, and the place would be solitary and
forsaken. It is equivalent to a prayer that they might be destroyed.

And let none dwell in their tents - Margin, as in Hebrew, "let there not
be a dweller." That is, Let their tents where they had dwelt be wholly
forsaken. This passage is quoted in [Act
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020.md), as applicable to Judas. See the
notes at that passage.

[Psalms 69:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 69:26</span></span>

For they persecute him whom thou hast smitten - That is, instead of
pitying one who is afflicted of God, or showing compassion for him, they
"add" to his sorrows by their own persecutions. The psalmist was
suffering as under the hand of God. He needed sympathy from others in
his trials. Instead of that, however, he found only reproaches,
opposition, persecution, calumny. There was an entire want of sympathy
and kindness. There was a disposition to take advantage of the fact that
he was suffering at the hand of God, to increase his sorrows in all ways
in which they could do it.

And they talk to the grief of those - What they say adds to their
sorrow. They speak of the character of those who are afflicted; they
allege that the affliction is the punishment of some crime which they
have committed; they take advantage of any expressions of impatience
which they may let fall in their affliction to charge them with being of
a rebellious spirit, or regard it as proof that they are destitute of
all true piety. See the notes at [Psa
41:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#005.md). It was this which added so
much to the affliction of Job. His professed friends, instead of
sympathizing with him, endeavored to prove that the fact that he
suffered so much at the hand of God demonstrated that he was a
hypocrite; and the expressions of impatience which he uttered in his
trial, instead of leading them to sympathize with him, only tended to
confirm them in this belief.

Whom thou hast wounded - literally, as in the margin, "thy wounded."
That is, of those whom "thou" hast afflicted. The reference is to the
psalmist himself as afflicted by God, while, at the same time, he makes
the remark general by saying that this was their character; this was
what they were accustomed to do.

[Psalms 69:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 69:27</span></span>

Add iniquity unto their iniquity - Margin, "punishment of iniquity." The
literal rendering is, "Give iniquity upon their iniquity." Luther
understands this as a prayer that "sin may be made a punishment for
sin;" that is, that they may, as a punishment for their former sins, be
left to commit still more aggravated crimes, and thus draw on themselves
severer punishment. So Rosenmuller renders it, "Suffer them to
accumulate sins by rushing from one sin to another, until their crimes
are matured, and their destined punishment comes upon them." An idea
similar to this occurs in [Rom 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028.md),
where God is represented as having "given the pagan over to a reprobate
mind, to do those things which are not convenient" fit, or proper -
"because they did not like to retain him in their knowledge." Perhaps
this is the most natural interpretation here, though another has been
suggested which the original will bear. According to that, there is an
allusion here to the double sense of the equivocal term rendered
"iniquity" - עון ‛âvôn - which properly denotes sin as such, or in
itself considered, but which sometimes seems to denote sin in its
consequences or effects. This latter is the interpretation adopted by
Prof. Alexander. Thus understood, it is a prayer that God would add, or
give, to their sin that which sin deserved; or, in other words, that he
would punish it "as" it deserved.

And let them not come into thy righteousness - Let them not be treated
"as" righteous; as those who are regarded by "thee" as righteous. Let
them be treated as they deserve. This is the same as praying that a
murderer may not be treated as an innocent man; a burglar, as if he were
a man of peace; or a dishonest man, as if he were honest. Let people be
regarded and treated as they "are in fact;" or, as they deserve to be
treated. It seems difficult to see why this prayer may not be offered
with propriety, and with a benevolent heart - for to bring this about is
what all officers of justice are endeavoring to accomplish.

[Psalms 69:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 69:28</span></span>

Let them be blotted out of the book of the living - That is, Let them
cease to live; let them not be numbered among living people; let them be
cut off. This language is taken from the custom of registering the names
of persons in a list, roll, or catalogue, [Exo
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032.md). See the notes at [Phi
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003.md). Compare [Rev
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#005.md). The language has no reference to
the future world; it is "not" a prayer that they should not be saved.

And not be written with the righteous - Let them not be registered or
numbered with the righteous. As they "are" wicked, so let them be
numbered; so regarded. Let them be reckoned and treated as they are.
They deserve to be punished; so let them be. All that this "necessarily"
means is, that they should not be treated as righteous, when they were
in fact "not" righteous. It cannot be shown that the author of the psalm
would not have desired that they should "become" righteous, and that
they should "then" be regarded and treated as such. All that the
language here implies is, a desire that they should be regarded and
treated as they were; that is, as they deserved. The language is
evidently derived from the idea so common in the Old Testament that
length of days would be the reward of a righteous life (see [Job
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#026.md); [Pro
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#002.md); [Pro
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#011.md); [Pro
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#027).md), and that the wicked would be
cut off in the midst of their days. See the notes at [Psa
55:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023.md).

[Psalms 69:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">psa 69:29</span></span>

But I am poor and sorrowful - I am afflicted and suffering. The word
here rendered "poor" often means "afflicted."

Let thy salvation, O God, set me up on high - Let thy help raise me up
from my low condition, and exalt me to a place of safety.

[Psalms 69:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">psa 69:30</span></span>

I will praise the name of God with a song - As the result of my
deliverance, I will "compose" a song or a psalm especially adapted to
the occasion, and suited to express and perpetuate my feelings. It was
in such circumstances that a large part of the psalms were composed; and
since others besides the psalmist are often in such circumstances, the
Book of Psalms becomes permanently useful in the church. It is not
always necessary now to "compose" a song or hymn to express our feelings
in the circumstances in which we are placed in life - for we may
commonly find such sacred songs ready at our hand; yet no one can doubt
the propriety of adding to the number of such by those who can do it, or
of increasing the compositions for praise in the church in view of the
ever-varied experience of the children of God.

And will magnify him - Will exalt his name; will endeavor to make it
"seem" greater; or, will spread it further abroad.

With thanksgiving - I will use expressions of thanks to make his name
more widely known.

[Psalms 69:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">psa 69:31</span></span>

This also shall please the Lord - This will be more acceptable to the
Lord.

Better than an ox or bullock that hath horns and hoofs - Better than a
burnt sacrifice - horns, and hoofs, and all. The original here is,
"horning and hoofing;" that is, an ox whose horns were fully grown, and
whose hoofs were compact and solid; a perfect animal in its kind,
offered whole on the altar. The psalmist does not say that such an
offering would "not" be acceptable to the Lord, but that the offering of
the heart - the sacrifice of praise - would be "more" acceptable than
any such offering in itself considered. This sentiment accords with the
common language of the Old Testament. See the notes at [Psa
40:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006.md). Compare [Psa
51:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#016.md); [Sa1
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022.md).

[Psalms 69:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">psa 69:32</span></span>

The humble shall see this, and be glad - Margin, "The meek." That is,
Others who are thus afflicted - the poor, the needy, the oppressed, the
sad - shall be made acquainted with what has been done in my behalf, and
shall take courage, or be strengthened. They will learn to trust that
God will also interpose in "their" troubles, and bring them out of
"their" distresses.

And your heart shall live that seek God - Shall be revived; shall be
encouraged, strengthened, animated.

[Psalms 69:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">psa 69:33</span></span>

For the Lord heareth the poor - The needy; the humble; the unprotected.
The reference is to those who are in circumstances of want and distress.
The truth stated here is in accordance with all that is said in the
Scriptures. Compare the notes at [Psa
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#006.md). See also [Job
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#015.md); [Psa
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#014.md); [Psa
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005.md); [Psa
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#010.md); [Psa
68:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#010.md).

And despiseth not his prisoners - He does not overlook them; he does not
treat them as if they were worthy of no attention or regard. The word
"prisoners" here may refer to those who are, as it were, bound by
affliction under his own providential dealings; or to those who are
oppressed, or are held as captives, or are thrown into prison, on his
account. The particular reference here seems to be to David, and to
those associated with him, who were straitened or deprived of their
freedom in the cause of God.

[Psalms 69:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">psa 69:34</span></span>

Let the heaven and earth praise him - All things; all above and all
below.

The seas - The waters - the oceans. This is in accordance with what
often occurs in the Scriptures, when all things, animate and inanimate,
are called on to praise God. Compare [Psa
148:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001.md).

And everything that moveth therein - Margin, as in Hebrew, "creepeth."
Compare the notes at [Psa 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#008.md). See
also the notes at [Isa 55:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#012.md).

[Psalms 69:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">psa 69:35</span></span>

For God will save Zion - See the notes at [Psa
51:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#018.md). That is, he will save his
people; he will protect and defend them. This expresses the confident
assurance of the psalmist that, whatever might be the existing troubles,
God would not forsake his people, but would interpose in their behalf.

And will build the cities of Judah - Though they may now lie waste, or
be desolate. See the notes at [Psa
51:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#018.md). The general idea here is, that
God would be favorable to his land; that he would give success and
prosperity to his people; that he would manifest his mercy to them.
There is no necessity from the language used here to suppose, as DeWette
and Rosenmuller do, that there is an allusion to the time of the exile,
and to the restoration of the Jews from Babylon, and that consequently
either the whole psalm must have been composed at that time - or (as
Rosenmuller supposes) that the last verses of the psalm were added by a
later hand, and that thus the whole psalm was adapted to the time of the
exile. From [Psa 69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009.md) it would seem
that, when the psalm was composed, the place of public worship was still
standing, and the language here, as in [Psa
51:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#018.md), is so general that it might
have been employed at any time.

That they may dwell there ... - That his people may dwell there
according to the ancient promise. The idea is, that he would be the
protector of his people, and that all his promises to them would be
fulfilled.

[Psalms 69:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">psa 69:36</span></span>

The seed also of his servants - The children or the descendants of his
people.

Shall inherit it - Shall continue to dwell in it.

And they that love his name - They that love him; they that are his true
friends.

Shall dwell therein - They shall be safe there; they shall find there a
home. This indicates the confident belief of the author of the psalm
that the favor of God would be shown to the land. Whatever might be the
present troubles, his faith was unwavering - his confidence unshaken -
in regard to the faithfulness of God. Palestine - the promised land -
would still be the inheritance of those who loved God, and the interests
of those who dwelt there would be secure. As applied to the church of
God now, the idea is, that it is safe; that it will always be under the
divine protection; and that it will be the loved and the secure abode of
all that "love the name" of their God and Saviour.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 70](psa070.md)

</div>
