<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa077)  [Next](psa079) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 78](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 78:0</span></span>

This is one of the psalms ascribed to Asaph. See Introduction to Ps. 73.
If, as is likely, it was composed at a later period than the time of
David, the word "Asaph" must be taken as a general term denoting the
successor in the family off Asaph, who presided over the music the
sanctuary. On the word "Maschil" in the title, see the notes at the
title to [Psa 32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001).

The time when the psalm was composed cannot now be ascertained with any
certainty. It was evidently written, however, after the revolt of the
ten tribes, and the establishment of the sovereignty in the tribe of
Judah; that is, after the time of David and Solomon. This is apparent
from [Psa 78:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009), [Psa
78:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#067), where "Ephraim," the chief of
the ten tribes, is referred to in distinction from "Judah."

The design of the psalm is, evidently, to vindicate the fact that
Ephraim had been rejected, and that Judah had been chosen to be the head
of the nation. The reason of this was found in the conduct of Ephraim,
or the ten tribes, in revolting from God, and in forgetting the divine
mercy and compassion shown to the Hebrew people in former days. See [Psa
78:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009), [Psa
78:67-68](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#067).

The argument in the psalm is the following:

I. A call on all the people, addressed to them by the king or the ruler,
to attend to the instructions of former times - the lessons which it was
of importance to transmit to future generations, [Psa
78:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001).

II\. God had established a general law which he had designed for all the
people, or which he intended should be the law of the nation as such -
that all the people might set their hope in God, or be worshippers of
Him as the only true God, and that they might all be one people, [Psa
78:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#005).

III\. Ephraim - the most powerful of the ten tribes, and their head and
representative - had been guilty of disregarding that law, and had
refused to come to the common defense of the nation, [Psa
78:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009).

IV\. The wickedness of this rebellion is shown by the great favors
which, in its former history, God had shown to the nation as such,
including these very tribes, Ps. 78:12-66.

V. The reason is stated, founded on their apostasy, why God had rejected
Ephraim, and why he had chosen Judah, and made Zion the capital of the
nation, instead of selecting a place within the limits of the tribe of
Ephraim for that purpose, [Psa
78:67-68](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#067).

VI\. The fact is declared that David had been chosen to rule over the
people; that he had been taken from humble life, and made the ruler of
the nation, and that the line of the sovereignty had been settled in
him, [Psa 78:69-72](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#069).

[Psalms 78:69](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#069)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_069">psa 78:69</span></span>

And he built his sanctuary - His holy place; that is, his tabernacle.
The temple was not then built; and, when reared, it was not on Mount
Zion, but on Mount Moriah. The name Zion, however, was often given to
the whole city.

Like high palaces - The word palaces is not in the original. The Hebrew
means simply high places, like hills or mountains. The meaning is, that
his sanctuary was exalted, as if it were placed on a high hill. It was a
conspicuous object; it could be seen from afar; it was the most
prominent thing in the land. See the notes at [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002).

Like the earth - Permanent and established.

Which he hath established for ever - Margin, as in Hebrew, founded. The
earth is often represented as founded or established on a solid basis,
and thus becomes an emblem of stability and perpetuity.

[Psalms 78:70](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#070)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_070">psa 78:70</span></span>

He chose David also his servant - He chose him that he might set him
over his people as their king. The idea is, that David was selected when
he had no natural pretensions to the office, as he did not pertain to a
royal family, and could have no claim to such a distinction. The account
of this choice is contained in 1 Sam. 15:1-30.

And took him from the sheep-folds - From the humble occupation of a
shepherd. [Sa1 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#011); [Sa2
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#008).

[Psalms 78:71](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#071)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_071">psa 78:71</span></span>

From following the ewes great with younq - Margin, as in Hebrew, From
after. The meaning is, that he followed after them; that is, he attended
them, or watched over them as a shepherd. The single word rendered "the
ewes great with young" - עול ‛ûl - is a participle from עלוה ‛âlâhô, to
ascend, to go up; and then, to bring up, to nourish. The exact idea here
is doubtless that of bringing up, or of sucking them, and the word
should have been so translated here. It is so rendered by Luther. The
idea in our translation has been derived from the Septuagint and the
Latin Vulgate. The meaning is, that he brought him from being a shepherd
to be the ruler of his people - expressed still in the language of a
shepherd life.

To feed Jacob his people - Rather, to be a shepherd to them; to perform
toward them the office of a shepherd, including the ideas of governing
them, providing for them, and defending them. See the notes at [Psa
23:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001).

[Psalms 78:72](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#072)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_072">psa 78:72</span></span>

So he fed them - He performed toward them the office of a shepherd.

According to the integrity of his heart - literally, "According to the
perfection of his heart." That is, he was upright and pure in the
administration of his government.

And guided them by the skillfulness of his hands - literally, "by the
understanding of his hands" - as if the hand had been endued with
intelligence. Compare [Psa 144:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#001) :
"Which teacheth my hands to war, and my fingers to fight." See also [Psa
137:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#005). The idea is, that he
administered the government with integrity and uprightness. This is a
beautiful tribute to the integrity and purity of the administration of
David. It is not the language of flattery; it is a simple statement,
flowing from the heart, in favor of a just and upright administration;
and it is a true statement of what the administration of David was. Save
in the matter of Uriah - over which he afterward wept so bitterly - his
administration was eminently just, pure, impartial, wise, and benignant;
probably none among people have been more so. The whole psalm is thus a
beautiful argument showing why the government had been transferred from
Ephraim to Judah, and why it had been placed in the hands of David.

[Psalms 78:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 78:1</span></span>

Give ear, O my people - This is not an address of God, but an address of
the king or ruler of the people, calling their attention to an important
subject; to wit, his right to rule over them, or showing why the power
had been vested in him.

To my law - The word law here seems to mean what he would say, as if
what he should choose to say would have the force and authority of law.
What follows is not exactly law in the sense that it was a rule to be
obeyed; but it is something that is authoritatively said, and should
have the force of law.

Incline your ears ... - Be attentive. What is to be said is worthy of
your particular regard. Compare the notes at [Psa
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#001).

[Psalms 78:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 78:2</span></span>

I will open my mouth in a parable - See the notes at [Psa
49:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#004). The word "parable" here means a
statement by analogy or comparison; that is, he would bring out what he
had to say by a course of reasoning founded on an analogy drawn from the
ancient history of the people.

I will utter dark sayings of old - Of ancient times; that is, maxims, or
sententious thoughts, which had come down from past times, and which
embodied the results of ancient observation and reflection. Compare [Psa
49:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#004), where the word rendered "dark
sayings" is explained. He would bring out, and apply, to the present
case, the maxims of ancient wisdom.

[Psalms 78:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 78:3</span></span>

Which we have heard and known - Which have been communicated to us as
certain truth.

And our fathers have told us - That is, we have heard and known them by
their telling us; or, this is the means by which we have known them.
They have come down to us by tradition from ancient times.

[Psalms 78:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 78:4</span></span>

We will not hide them from their children - From their descendants,
however remote. We of this generation will be faithful in handing down
these truths to future times. We stand between past generations and the
generations to come. We are entrusted by those who have gone before us
with great and important truths; truths to be preserved and transmitted
in their purity to future ages. That trust committed to us we will
faithfully discharge. These truths shall not suffer in passing from us
to them. They shall not be stayed in their progress; they shall not be
corrupted or impaired. This is the duty of each successive generation in
the world, receiving, as a trust, from past generations, the result of
their thoughts, their experience, their wisdom, their inventions, their
arts, their sciences, and the records of their doings, to hand these
down unimpaired to future ages, combined with all that they may
themselves invent or discover which may be of use or advantage to the
generations following.

Shewing to the generation to come the praises of the Lord - The
"reasons" why he should be praised, as resulting from his past doings -
and the wags in which it should be done. We will keep up, and transmit
to future times, the pure institutions of religion.

And his strength - The records of his power.

And his wonderful works that he hath done - In the history of his
people, and in his many and varied interpositions in their behalf.

[Psalms 78:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 78:5</span></span>

For he established a testimony in Jacob - He ordained or appointed that
which would be for a "witness" for him; that which would bear testimony
to his character and perfections; that which would serve to remind them
of what he was, and of his authority over them. Any law or ordinance of
God is thus a standing and permanent witness in regard to his character
as showing what he is.

And appointed a law in Israel - That is, He gave law to Israel, or to
the Hebrew people. Their laws were not human enactments, but were the
appointments of God.

Which he commanded our fathers ... - He made it a law of the land that
these testimonies should be preserved and faithfully transmitted to
future times. See [Deu 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#009); [Deu
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#007); [Deu
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#019). They were not given for
themselves only, but for the benefit of distant generations also.

[Psalms 78:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 78:6</span></span>

That the generation to come might know them ... - That people in future
times might enjoy the benefit of them as their fathers had done, and
that they should then send them forward to those who were to succeed
them.

Who should arise and declare them to their children - Who, as they
appeared on the stage of life, should receive the trust, and send it
onward to future ages. Thus the world makes progress; thus one age
starts where the previous one left off; thus it enters on its own career
with the advantage of all the toils, the sacrifices, the happy thoughts,
the inventions of all past times. It is designed that the world shall
thus grow wiser and better as it advances; and that future generations
shall be enriched with all that was worth preserving in the experience
of the past. See the notes at [Psa
71:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#018).

[Psalms 78:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 78:7</span></span>

That they might set their hope in God - That they might place confidence
in God; that they might maintain their allegiance to him. The object was
to give such exhibitions of his character and government as to inspire
just confidence in him, or to lead people to trust in him; and not to
trust in idols and false gods. All the laws which God has ordained are
such as are suited to inspire confidence in him as a just and righteous
ruler; and all his dealings with mankind, when they are properly - that
is, "really" - understood, will be found to be adapted to the same end.

And not forget the works of God - His doings. The word here does not
refer to his "works" considered as the works of creation, or the
material universe, but to his acts - to what he has done in
administering his government over mankind.

But keep his commandments - That by contemplating his doings, by
understanding the design of his administration, they might be led to
keep his commandments. The purpose was that they might see such wisdom,
justice, equity, and goodness in his administration, that they would be
led to keep laws so suited to promote the welfare of mankind. If people
saw all the reasons of the divine dealings, or fully understood them,
nothing more would be necessary to secure universal confidence in God
and in his government.

[Psalms 78:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 78:8</span></span>

And might not be as their fathers - Their ancestors, particularly in the
wilderness, as they passed through it to the promised land. See [Exo
32:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#007); [Exo
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#003); [Exo
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#009); [Act
7:51-53](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051).

A stubborn and rebellious generation - Stiff-necked, ungovernable;
inclined to revolt. Nothing was more remarkable in their early history
than this.

A generation that set not their heart aright - Margin, as in Hebrew,
"prepared not their heart." That is, they took no pains to keep their
heart aright, or to cherish right feelings toward God. They yielded to
any sudden impulse of passion, even when it led them to revolt against
God. This is as true of sinners now as it was of them, that they "take
no pains" to have their hearts right with God. If they did, there would
be no difficulty in doing it. It is not with them "an object of desire"
to have their hearts right with God, and hence, nothing is more easy or
natural than that they should rebel and go astray.

And whose spirit was not stedfast with God - That is, they themselves
did not maintain a firm trust in God. They yielded readily to every
impulse, and every passion, even when it tended to draw them away wholly
from him. There was no such "strength" of attachment to him as would
lead them to resist temptation, and they easily fell into the sin of
idolatry.

[Psalms 78:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 78:9</span></span>

The children of Ephraim - The sons of Ephraim; that is, the descendants
of Ephraim; the tribe of Ephraim. Ephraim was one of the "largest" of
the tribes of Israel, and was the "chief" tribe in the rebellion, and
hence, the term is often used to denote the "ten" tribes, or the kingdom
of Israel, in contradistinction from that of Judah. See [Isa
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#002), [Isa
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#005),[Isa
7:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#008), [Isa
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#017); [Isa
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#013); [Isa
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001). The word is evidently used in
this sense here, not as denoting that one tribe only, but that tribe as
the head of the revolted kingdom; or, in other words, the name is used
as representing the kingdom of that name after the revolt. See 1 Kings
12. This verse evidently contains the gist or the main idea of the psalm
- to wit, that Ephraim, or the ten tribes, had turned away from the
worship of the true God, and that, in consequence of that apostasy, the
government had been transferred to another tribe - the tribe of Judah.
See [Psa 78:67-68](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#067).

Being armed - The idea in this phrase is, that they had abundant means
for maintaining their independence in connection with the other tribes,
or as a part of the nation, but that they refused to cooperate with
their brethren.

And carrying bows - Margin, "throwing forth." Literally, "lifting up."
The idea is, that they were armed with bows; or, that they were fully
armed.

Turned back in the day of battle - That is, they did not stand by their
brethren, or assist them in defending their country. There is probably
no reference here to any particular battle, but the idea is, that in the
wars of the nation - in those wars which were waged for national
purposes - they refused to join with the tribes of Judah and Benjamin in
defense of the lawful government.

[Psalms 78:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 78:10</span></span>

They kept not the covenant of God - The covenant which God had made with
the entire Hebrew people. They did not maintain their allegiance to
Yahweh. Compare [Deu 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#013), [Deu
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#023); [Deu
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#002).

And refused to walk in his law - Refused to obey his law. They rebelled
against him.

[Psalms 78:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 78:11</span></span>

And forgat his works - The works which he had performed in behalf of the
nation. These works are referred to in the verses following.

And his wonders that he had shewed them - The wonderful works in Egypt,
at the Red Sea, and in the wilderness; the miracles which he had
performed on behalf of the nation.

[Psalms 78:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 78:12</span></span>

Marvellous things did he in the sight of their fathers - Things suited
to excite wonder and astonishment. Such were all the miracles that he
performed, in effecting the deliverance of his people.

In the land of Egypt - In delivering them from Pharaoh.

In the field of Zoan - The Septuagint renders this ἐν πεδίῳ Τάνεως en
pediō Taneōs" in the plain of Tanis." So the Latin Vulgate. Zoan or
Tanis was an ancient city of Lower Egypt, situated on the eastern side
of the Tanitie arm of the Nile. The name given to it in the Egyptian
language signified "low region." See the notes at [Isa
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#011). The Hebrews seem to have been
located in this region, and it was in this part of Egypt - that is, in
the country lying round about Zoan - that the wonders of God were
principally manifested in behalf of his people.

[Psalms 78:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 78:13</span></span>

He divided the sea ... - The Red Sea. [Exo
14:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021).

And he made the waters to stand as an heap - The word rendered "heap"
means anything piled up, or a mound; and the idea is, that the waters
were piled up on each side of them as a "mound." See the notes at [Psa
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#007). Compare [Jos
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#013), [Jos
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#016); [Exo
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#008).

[Psalms 78:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 78:14</span></span>

In the day-time also he led them with a cloud - That is, the cloud was
the visible symbol of his presence, and its movements determined the way
in which they were to go. It was "God" who led them, and who adopted
this manner of doing it, so that they had "always" with them, by day and
by night, a "visible" proof of his presence. There was that with them
which could not be ascribed to any natural causes, and which, therefore,
"demonstrated" that God was with them, and that as long as they followed
the cloud and the pillar of fire they could not err. See [Exo
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021); [Exo
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#024). They had the less excuse,
therefore, for rebelling against him.

And all the night with a light of fire - A column - a pillar - which
stood over the camp, and which was a symbol of the divine presence and
guidance. The cloud would not be visible by night, nor would the fire be
a good guide by day; and hence, the form of the symbol was changed. The
same thing, however, was intended by both, and together they were
standing proofs of the presence of God.

[Psalms 78:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 78:15</span></span>

He clave the rocks in the wilderness - There were two occasions on which
the rock was smitten for water; one [Exo
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#006) at Mount Horeb, shortly after
they came out of Egypt; and the other [Num
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#011), when they had nearly ceased
their wanderings in the wilderness. Hence, the plural term (rocks) is
used here.

And gave them drink as out of the great depths - As if he had formed a
lake or an ocean, furnishing an inexhaustible supply.

[Psalms 78:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 78:16</span></span>

He brought streams also out of the rock ... - literally, "flowings." The
waters were poured out in an over-flowing stream. Those streams
continued to flow, thus constituting a continued proof of the presence
of God. See this fully explained in the notes at [Co1
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004).

[Psalms 78:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 78:17</span></span>

And they sinned yet more against him - literally, "They added to sin
against him." The idea is, that his mercies, and the proofs of his
presence were only made the occasion of greater sin on their part. This
may have been in two ways;

\(1\) their sin was thus more aggravated, as being committed against
greater light; and

\(2\) they evinced more and more their depravity, in proportion as he
bestowed mercies on them - not an uncommon thing with people.

By provoking the Most High - literally, "embittering." They rebelled
against him. They refused to submit to him. They forgot his mercies.
Compare [Deu 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#022).

In the wilderness - literally, "in the dry place;" in the desert. In the
very place where they were most manifestly dependent on him - where
there were no natural streams of water - where their needs were met by a
miraculous supply - even there did they provoke him, and rebel against
him. If he had simply stopped that miraculous supply of water they must
have perished. But sinners forget how dependent they are on God, when
they sin against him. On what can they rely, if he withdraws from them,
and leaves them to themselves?

[Psalms 78:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 78:18</span></span>

And they tempted God in their heart - [Exo
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#002). The heart was the source of the
evil. They were not satisfied with what he gave them. They asked for
that which would be more agreeable to them, and they did it with a
complaining and a murmuring spirit. It is not wrong in itself to ask of
God that which will be better than what we now possess, for that is the
object of all our prayers; but this may be done from a wrong motive -
for mere self-gratification, as was the case here; or it may be with a
complaining and dissatisfied spirit, such as was evinced on this
occasion. In such a case we cannot expect the prayer to be answered
"except as a punishment."

By asking meat for their lust - Food. The word "meat" here does not
necessarily denote animal food, as it does with us. They asked another
kind of food than manna; and they did it, not because this was
"necessary" to sustain life, but in order to gratify their appetites.
The original word here, however, is not "lusts," but "souls;" that is,
"they asked food for themselves."

[Psalms 78:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 78:19</span></span>

Yea, they spake against God - That is, in the manner which is
immediately specified - by calling in question his power, or his ability
to provide for them in the wilderness. See [Num
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#004).

They said, Can God furnish a table in the wilderness? - In the desert.
The word rendered "furnish" is in the margin "order." It means to
arrange; to set in order; and here to arrange and provide for, as at a
feast. The precise words used by the complaining Hebrews are not quoted
here, but the substance of what they said is retained. The idea is, that
what they spake was "equivalent" to saying that God could not prepare a
table for them; that is, provide for them, in the desert.

[Psalms 78:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 78:20</span></span>

Behold, he smote the rock ... - See the notes at [Psa
78:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#015). The smiting of the rock the
first time occurred "before" the complaining about the food. The fact
that the rock had been smitten could not be doubted. They had thus had
abundant evidence that God was able to do that, and to furnish "water"
for them in the desert. It was unreasonable, therefore, to doubt whether
he could provide "food" for them - for this in itself was no more
difficult than to furnish water. Yet they are represented as affirming
that this was far more difficult, and that, although it was admitted
that God had provided "water," yet that to provide "food" was wholly
beyond his power. Their special sin, therefore, was, that they doubted
the power of God in one case, when, in another, equally difficult, they
had had abundant proof of it. The spirit of complaining had not been put
down by one surprising and undoubted miracle performed in their behalf -
a miracle which proved that God had all the power necessary to meet
their needs.

Can he give bread also? - Does the ability to cause water to flow from a
rock prove that there is also ability to produce bread when necessary?
They doubted it, and thus complained against God.

Can he provide flesh for his people? - They supposed that this required
greater power than the providing of water, or even of bread, and that if
it were admitted that God could furnish the two former, it would by no
means follow that he could provide the latter. It was this, as the next
verse shows, which was the immediate occasion of the special anger of
the Lord.

[Psalms 78:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 78:21</span></span>

Therefore the Lord heard this, and was wroth - See [Num
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001), [Num
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#010).

So a fire was kindled against Jacob ... - Fire may be used here, as in
[Num 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001), as an emblem of wrath; a
fire may have been literally sent down to consume them.

[Psalms 78:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 78:22</span></span>

Because they believed not in God - They did not believe in his power, or
in his promises.

And trusted not in his salvation - In his power and his willingness to
save. They had had abundant evidence of that power, but they still
doubted his ability to save them, notwithstanding all that he had done
for them.

[Psalms 78:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 78:23</span></span>

Though he had commanded the clouds from above - Though he had showed
that he had absolute control over the clouds, and had only to command
them and they would furnish rain in abundance. Compare the notes at [Isa
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#006).

And opened the doors of heaven - As he had done at the deluge, [Gen
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011). The idea is, that he had rained
down manna upon them in such abundance that it might be compared with
the waters that had been sent down at the deluge.

[Psalms 78:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 78:24</span></span>

And had rained down manna upon them to eat - [Exo
16:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#004), [Exo
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#014); [Num
11:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#007). Compare the notes at [Joh
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#031).

And had given them of the corn of heaven - Food that seemed to come down
from heaven. The reference here is to the manna, and it is called corn
in the sense that it was food, or that it supplied the place of grain.
It may also have been called corn from its resemblance to grain. See
[Exo 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#031).

[Psalms 78:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 78:25</span></span>

Man did eat angels' food - Food that came from heaven; food so directly
and manifestly from heaven that it might be supposed to be the same kind
that was eaten there, and that had now been sent down by a special
miracle for man; food so delicate and so free from the ordinary coarse
properties of food, that it might be supposed to be such as angels feed
on. The word rendered "angels" - אביר 'abbı̂yr - means properly "strong,
mighty," and may be applied to people in general, [Jdg
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#022); [Lam
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#015); [Jer
46:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#015); to animals, [Psa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#013) ("bulls of Bashan"); to princes,
[Psa 68:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#031); or to nobles, [Job
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#022). It might be rendered here food
of nobles, or princes; that is, food of richer quality, or of a more
delicate nature, than common food; such as nobles or princes have on
their tables. The immediate connection, however, would rather seem to
demand the rendering in our version, as the food is said to have come
down from heaven. It is rendered food of angels in the Septuagint, in
the Latin Vulgate, in the ancient versions generally, and also by
Luther. DeWette renders it, "Each one ate the food of princes;" that is,
they all lived like princes.

He sent them meat to the full - Food to satisfy; or, as much as they
wanted.

[Psalms 78:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 78:26</span></span>

He caused an east wind to blow in the heaven - See [Num
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#031). In the history, the quarter
from which the wind came is not mentioned, except as it might be
indicated by the statement that the "quails were brought from the sea;"
- that is, evidently, the Red Sea. This wind would have come from the
southeast. The phrase "in the heaven" means in the air, or from above.

And by his power ... - By his direct agency. It was a wind which he
caused to blow for the purpose; a miracle.

[Psalms 78:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 78:27</span></span>

He rained flesh also upon them as dust - The flesh of quails, [Num
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#031). The word "rained" means that
they seemed to come upon them like a copious shower. The word dust
denotes their great abundance.

And feathered fowls - Margin, as in Hebrew, "fowl of wing." This is a
poetic expression, designed to give beauty to the description by the
image of their fluttering wings.

Like as the sand of the sea - An expression also designed to denote
their great numbers, [Gen 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017); [Gen
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#012); [Gen
41:49](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#049); [Jos
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#004); [Sa1
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#005); [Rev
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008).

[Psalms 78:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 78:28</span></span>

And he let it fall in the midst of their camp ... - It was brought to
their very doors; they had not to go and seek it abroad.

[Psalms 78:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">psa 78:29</span></span>

So they did eat, and were well filled - The word rendered "well" here is
intensive. It means that they were abundantly satisfied; that there was
no lack; that they had the most ample supply.

For he gave them their own desire - He gave them exactly what they
asked. He gave them flesh to eat as they had demanded; and he gave it to
them in such quantities that no one could say that he had not enough.

[Psalms 78:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">psa 78:30</span></span>

They were not estranged from their lust - literally, "They were not made
strangers to;" that is, in regard to their lusts or desires they were
not in the condition of "foreigners" or aliens; they were not separated
from them. The word "lusts" here means "desires, wishes." It is not used
here in the restricted sense in which it is now with us. The reference
is to their desire for food different from manna - for flesh; and the
idea is, that they did not restrain their intense desire even when it
should have been fully satisfied. They indulged to excess, and the
consequence was that many of them perished.

But while their meat was yet in their mouths - Even while they were
eating, and were indulging in this unrestrained manner.

[Psalms 78:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">psa 78:31</span></span>

The wrath of God came upon them - See [Num
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#033).

And slew the fattest of them - literally, "slew among their fat ones."
That is, The most vigorous among them were cut down; the people most
eminent for rank, for influence, for strength, for valor. How far this
was the natural effect of indulgence in eating, and how far it was a
direct miracle, cannot now be ascertained. In either case it would
equally show the divine displeasure.

And smote down - Margin, as in Hebrew, "made to bow." That is, they were
made to bow in death.

The chosen men of Israel - Margin, "Young men." The idea is that of
select men; men that would be chosen from among the others; men
distinguished for vigor or influence. Not the aged or the feeble
particularly, not those who might be naturally expected to fall, but men
of strength who might be supposed to be capable of resisting the
ordinary attacks of disease. God showed in this way that the judgment
came directly from his hand.

[Psalms 78:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">psa 78:32</span></span>

For all this they sinned still - Even this did not reclaim them, and
prevent their sinning. Heavy judgments do not always restrain men from
sin. Not unfrequently they take occasion from such judgments to sin the
more.

And believed not for his wondrous works - They did not trust in His
wondrous works; or, those works did not have the effect of producing
faith. See [Psa 78:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#022). The same
thing occurred in the life of the Saviour. [Joh
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#037).

[Psalms 78:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">psa 78:33</span></span>

Therefore their days did he consume in vanity - He suffered them to
spend their days - the days of that entire generation - in vain and
fruitless wanderings in the desert. Instead of leading them at once to
the promised land, they were kept there to wear out their life in
tedious monotony, accomplishing nothing - wandering from place to place
- until all the generation that had come out of Egypt had died.

And their years in trouble - literally, "in terror." Amidst the
troubles, the alarms, the terrors of a vast and frightful desert. Sin -
rebellion against God - leads to a course of life, and a death, of which
these gloomy, sad, and cheerless wanderings in the desert were a
striking emblem.

[Psalms 78:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">psa 78:34</span></span>

When he slew them - When he came forth in his wrath and cut them down by
the plague, by fiery serpents, or by their enemies.

Then they sought him - Their calamities had the effect of producing
temporary reformation. They became professedly penitent; they manifested
a wish to know God, and expressed a purpose to serve him. It was,
however, a temporary and hollow, not a deep and real reformation. This
often occurs. In times of affliction, in sickness, in bereavement, in
the loss of property, people become serious, and express a purpose to
repent and turn to God. A deep impression seems to be produced on their
minds, to last, alas! only as long as the hand of God rests upon them.
Resolutions of repentance are formed only to be forgotten when the
affliction is removed, and when the days of prosperity again return.

And they returned and inquired early after God - The word rendered
"inquired early" has reference to the first rays of the morning - the
aurora - the dawn. Then it comes to denote the beginning of anything;
or, the first thing. Thus employed, it may refer to the act of seeking
God as the first thing; in youth; in the morning; at the commencement of
any enterprise or undertaking. See [Pro
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#017); [Pro
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#028). Here it means that, in their
affliction, they did not delay to seek God, but expressed an early
intention of serving him. They evinced a prompt purpose to break off
their sins, and to return to him.

[Psalms 78:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">psa 78:35</span></span>

And they remembered that God was their Rock - See [Deu
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004), [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015), [Deu
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#031). Compare the notes at [Psa
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002). That is, they were brought to
reflect that their only security and defense was God. They were made to
feel that they could not rely on themselves, or on any human power, and
that their only trust was in God.

And the high God their Redeemer - The God who is exalted over all; the
true and living God. The truth was brought to their recollection that it
was He who had delivered them from bondage in Egypt, and who had brought
them out into freedom. On the word "Redeemer," see the notes at [Isa
41:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#014). Compare [Isa
43:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#014); [Isa
44:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006), [Isa
44:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#024); [Isa
47:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#004); [Isa
59:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#020); [Psa
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#022); [Job
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#020).

[Psalms 78:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">psa 78:36</span></span>

Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth - The word rendered
"flatter" means properly "to open;" and hence, "to be open; to be
ingenious or frank;" and then, to be easily persuaded, to be deluded, to
be beguiled; and hence, also, in an active form, to persuade, to entice,
to seduce, to beguile, to delude. The meaning here is, that they
attempted to deceive by their professions, or that their professions
were false and hollow. Those professions were the mere result of
affliction. They were based on no principle; there was no true love or
confidence at the foundation. Such professions or promises are often
made in affliction. Under the pressure of heavy judgments, the loss of
property, the loss of friends, or the failure of health, people become
serious, and resolve to give attention to religion. It is rarely that
such purposes are founded in sincerity, and that the conversions
apparently resulting from them are true conversions. The Septuagint and
the Latin Vulgate render the phrase here, "They loved with their mouth."

And they lied unto him with their tongues - They made promises which
they did not keep.

[Psalms 78:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">psa 78:37</span></span>

For their heart was not right with him - Luther renders this, "Not fast
with him." The Hebrew word means "to fit, to prepare;" and the idea is,
that the heart was not "adjusted" to such a profession, or did not
"accord" with such a promise or pledge. It was a mere profession made by
the lips, while the heart remained unaffected. See the notes at [Psa
78:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#008).

Neither were they stedfast in his covenant - In maintaining his
covenant, or in adhering to it. Compare [Psa
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#014); [Psa
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#017). See also [Psa
78:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#008).

[Psalms 78:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">psa 78:38</span></span>

But he, being full of compassion - literally, "But he, merciful," That
is, he was ready to forgive them.

Forgave their iniquity - literally, Atoned for, expiated, covered over
their iniquity. There is connected with the word the idea of expiation
or atonement, as the ground of pardon.

And destroyed them not - Did not cut them off in their repeated acts of
rebellion. He bore with them, and spared them.

Yea, many a time turned he his anger away - literally, He multiplied to
turn his anger away. That is, he did it repeatedly. There were frequent
occasions on their journey for doing this, and he did it.

And did not stir up all his wrath - literally, Did not excite, or arouse
all his anger. His anger was stayed or mitigated, and they were suffered
still to live.

[Psalms 78:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">psa 78:39</span></span>

For he remembered that they were but flesh - That they were human; that
they were weak; that they were prone to err; that they were liable to
fall into temptation. In his dealings with them he took into view their
fallen nature; their training; their temptations; their trials; their
weaknesses; and he judged them accordingly. Compare [Psa
103:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#014). So it was with the Saviour in
his treatment of his disciples, "The spirit indeed is willing, but the
flesh is weak," [Mat 26:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#041). God will
judge people as they are; he will not in his judgments forget that they
are people, and that they are weak and feeble. People often judge their
fellow-men with much more harshness, with much less allowance for their
infirmities and weaknesses, than God shows in his dealings with mankind.
And yet such are the very people who are most ready to blame God for his
judgments. If God acted on the principle and in the manner according to
which they act, they could hope for no mercy at his hand. It is well for
them that there is not one like themselves on the throne of the
universe.

A wind that passeth away, and cometh not again - Which blows by us, and
is gone forever. What a striking description is this of man! How true of
an individual! How true of a generation! How true of the race at large!
God remembers this when he thinks of people, and he deals with them
accordingly. He is not harsh and severe, but kind and compassionate. To
man, a being so feeble - to the human race, so frail - to the
generations of that race, so transitory, so soon passing off the stage
of life - he is ever willing to show compassion. He does not make use of
his great power to crush them; he prefers to manifest his mercy in
saving them.

[Psalms 78:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">psa 78:40</span></span>

How oft did they provoke him in the wilderness - Margin, Or, rebel
against him. The Hebrew word may have the signification in the margin.
The idea is, that they were perverse and rebellious; that they excited
his displeasure, and gave occasion for his anger. See [Psa
78:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#017).

And grieve him in the desert - The word here rendered grieve means

\(1\) to work, to fashion;

\(2\) to suffer pain, to travail, to be afflicted; and then,

\(3\) to cause one to suffer pain, or to afflict.

The meaning here is that the conduct of the Hebrews was such as was
suited to cause pain - as the conduct of a disobedient and rebellious
child is.

[Psalms 78:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">psa 78:41</span></span>

Yea, they turned back, and tempted God - They turned away from his
service; they were disposed to return to Egypt, and to place themselves
in the condition in which they were before they were delivered from
bondage.

And limited the Holy One of Israel - The idea is, that they set a limit
to the power of God; they fancied or alleged - (and this is a thing
often done practically even by the professed people of God) - that there
was a boundary in respect to power which he could not pass, or that
there were things to be done which he had not the ability to perform.
The original word - תוה tâvâh - occurs but three times in the
Scriptures; in [Sa1 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#013), where it is
rendered scrabbled (in the margin, made marks); in [Eze
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#004), where it is rendered set, that
is, set a mark (margin, mark); and in the place before us. It is
rendered here by the Septuagint and the Latin Vulgate, to provoke to
anger. DeWette translates it troubled. Professor Alexander, "On the Holy
One of Israel (they) set a mark." The idea in the word would seem to be
that of making a mark for any purpose; and then it means to delineate;
to scrawl; or to set a mark for a limit or boundary. Thus it might be
applied to God - as if, in estimating his character or his power, they
set limits or bounds to it, as one does in marking out a farm or a
house-lot in a city or town. There was a limit, in their estimation, to
the power of God, beyond which he could not act; or, in other words, his
power was defined and bounded, so that beyond a certain point he could
not aid them.

[Psalms 78:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">psa 78:42</span></span>

They remembered not his hand - His gracious interpositions; the
manifestations of his power. They forgot that power had been exercised
which showed that he was omnipotent - that there was no limit to his
ability to aid them.

Nor the day when he delivered them from the enemy - The time when he
rescued them. The power then manifested was sufficient to defend and
deliver them in any new dangers that could befall them. The margin is,
from affliction. The Hebrew will admit of either interpretation. The
sense is not materially changed.

[Psalms 78:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">psa 78:43</span></span>

How he had wrought his signs in Egypt - Margin, set. The Hebrew word
means to set or place. The word signs here refers to miracles as signs
or indications of God's power and favor. The things which he did were of
such a nature as to show that he was almighty, and at the same time to
assure them of his disposition to protect them.

And his wonders in the field of Zoan - The wonderful things which he
did; the things suited to excite amazement, or astonishment. On the word
Zoan, see the notes at [Psa 78:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#012).

[Psalms 78:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">psa 78:44</span></span>

And had turned their rivers into blood - [Exo
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#020). There was properly but one river
in Egypt - the Nile. But there were several branches of that river at
the mouth; and there were numerous artificial streams or canals cut from
the river, to anyone of which the word river might be also given.
Compare the notes at [Isa 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015).

And their floods ... - Their streams; the canals and branches of the
Nile, where they usually obtained a supply of water.

[Psalms 78:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">psa 78:45</span></span>

He sent divers sorts of flies ... - The account of this plague is found
in [Exo 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#024). The word there used is
simply "swarm," without indicating what the swarm was composed of. The
rabbis explain the word as denoting a mixture, or a conflux of noxious
insects, as if the word were derived from ערב ‛ârab - "to mix." The
Septuagint renders it κυνόμνια kunomnia - "dog-fly" - which Philo
describes as so named from its impudence. The common explanation of the
word now is that it denotes a species of fly - the gad-fly - exceedingly
troublesome to man and beast, and that it derives its name - ערב ‛ârôb -
from the verb ערב ‛ârab, in one of its significations to suck, and
hence, the allusion to sucking the blood of animals. The word occurs
only in the following places, [Exo
8:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#021), [Exo
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#024), [Exo
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#029), [Exo
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#031), where it is rendered swarm, or
swarms, and [Psa 105:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#031), where (as
here) it is rendered divers sorts of flies.

And frogs which destroyed them - [Exo
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#006). The order in which the plagues
occurred is not preserved in the account in the psalm.

[Psalms 78:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">psa 78:46</span></span>

He gave also their increase unto the caterpillar - The increase or the
produce of their fields. [Exo
10:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#012). The word חסיל châsı̂yl - is
supposed to denote a species of locust rather than the caterpillar. It
literally means the devourer. In our version, however, it is uniformly
rendered caterpillar as here; [Kg1
8:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#037); [Ch2
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#028); [Isa
33:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#004); [Joe
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#004); [Joe
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025). It occurs nowhere else.

And their labor unto the locust - The fruit of their labor; the harvests
in their fields.

[Psalms 78:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">psa 78:47</span></span>

He destroyed their vines with hail - Margin, killed. See [Exo
9:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#022). In the account in Exodus the
hail is said to have smitten man and beast, the herb, and the tree of
the field. In the psalm only one thing is mentioned, perhaps denoting
the ruin by what would be particularly felt in Palestine, where the
culture of the grape was so common and so important.

And their sycamore trees with frost - The sycamore is mentioned
particularly as giving poetic beauty to the passage. Of the sycamore
tree, Dr. Thomson remarks ("land and the Book," vol. i. p. 25), "It is a
tender tree, flourishes immensely in sandy plains and warm vales, but
cannot bear the hard, cold mountain. A sharp frost will kill them; and
this agrees with the fact that they were killed by it in Egypt. Among
the wonders performed in the field of Zoan, David says, 'He destroyed
their vines with hail, and their sycamores with frost.' Certainly, a
frost keen enough to kill the sycamore would be one of the greatest
'wonders' that could happen at the present day in this same field of
Zoan." The word rendered "frost" - חנמל chănâmâl - occurs nowhere else.
It is parallel with the word hail in the other member of the sentence,
and denotes something that would be destructive to trees. The
Septuagint, the Vulgate, and the Arabic render it frost. Gesenius
renders it ants.

[Psalms 78:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">psa 78:48</span></span>

He gave up their cattle also to the hail - Margin, he shut up. [Exo
9:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#022).

And their flocks to hot thunderbolts - Margin, lightnings. The original
word means flame; then, lightning. There is no allusion in the word to
the idea of a bolt, or shaft, accompanying the lightning or the thunder,
by which destruction is produced. The destruction is caused by the
lightning, and not by the thunder, and it is hardly necessary to say
that there is no shaft or bolt that accompanies it. Probably this notion
was formerly entertained, and found its way into the common language
used. The same idea is retained by us in the word thunderbolt. But this
idea is not in the original; nor is there any foundation for it in fact.

[Psalms 78:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">psa 78:49</span></span>

He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger ... - This verse is
designed to describe the last, and the most dreadful of the plagues that
came upon the Egyptians, the slaying of their first-born; and hence,
there is such an accumulation of expressions: anger - fierce anger -
wrath - indignation - trouble. All these expressions are designed to be
emphatic; all these things were combined when the first-born were slain.
There was no form of affliction that could surpass this; and in this
trial all the expressions of the divine displeasure seemed to be
exhausted. It was meant that this should be the last of the plagues; it
was meant that the nation should be humbled, and should be made willing
that the people of Israel should go.

By sending evil angels among them - There is reference here undoubtedly
to the slaying of the first-born in Egypt. [Exo
11:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#004); [Exo
12:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029). This work is ascribed to the
agency of a destroyer ([Exo 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023);
compare [Heb 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#028)), and the allusion
seems to be to a destroying angel, or to an angel employed and
commissioned to accomplish such a work. Compare [Sa2
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#016); [Kg2
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035). The idea here is not that the
angel himself was evil or wicked, but that he was the messenger of evil
or calamity; he was the instrument by which these afflictions were
brought upon them.

[Psalms 78:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">psa 78:50</span></span>

He made a way to his anger - Margin, he weighed a path. He leveled a
path for it; he took away all hindrance to it; he allowed it to have
free scope. The idea of weighing is not in the original. The allusion is
to a preparation made by which one can march along freely, and without
any obstruction. See the notes at [Isa
40:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003).

He spared not their soul from death - He spared not their lives. That
is, he gave them over to death.

But gave their life over to the pestilence - Margin, their beasts to the
murrain. The original will admit of either interpretation, but the
connection seems rather to demand the interpretation which is in the
text. Both these things, however, occurred.

[Psalms 78:51](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">psa 78:51</span></span>

And smote all the firstborn in Egypt - See [Exo
11:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#004); [Exo
12:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029).

The chief of their strength - Those on whom they relied; their
firstborn; their pride; their glory; their heirs. Compare [Gen
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003).

In the tabernacles of Ham - The tents; the dwelling-places of Ham; that
is, of Egypt. Compare [Gen 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#006); [Psa
105:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#023), [Psa
105:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#027); [Psa
106:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#022),

[Psalms 78:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">psa 78:52</span></span>

But made his own people to go forth like sheep ... - That is, he was a
shepherd to them. He defended them; provided for them; led them - as a
shepherd does his flock. See the notes at [Psa
23:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001).

[Psalms 78:53](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">psa 78:53</span></span>

And he led them on safely, so that they feared not - In hope; in
confidence; so that they had no occasion for alarm. He showed himself
able and willing to defend them.

But the sea overwhelmed their enemies - Margin, as in Hebrew, covered.
See [Exo 14:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#027); [Exo
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#010).

[Psalms 78:54](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">psa 78:54</span></span>

And he brought them to the border of his sanctuary - The Septuagint and
the Latin Vulgate render this, "to the mountain of his holiness"; that
is, his holy mountain. But the reference is rather to the whole land of
Canaan. He brought them to the borders of that land - the land of
promise - the holy land. They who came out from Egypt did not indeed
enter that land, except Caleb and Joshua, but they were conveyed to its
borders before all of them fell. It was true also that the people - the
Hebrew people - came to the promised land, and secured its possession.

Even to this mountain - Mount Zion, for the object of the psalm was to
show that the worship of God was properly celebrated there. See [Psa
78:68](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#068). The meaning is not that the
people who came out of Egypt actually inherited that mountain, but that
their descendants - the people of God - had been put in possession of
it.

Which his right hand had purchased - Had procured, or obtained
possession of. That is, he had secured it by his power.

[Psalms 78:55](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">psa 78:55</span></span>

He cast out the heathen also before them - literally, the nations. The
idea of their being pagan, in the sense which is now attached to that
word, is not in the original. The word is one which would be applied to
any nation, without reference to its religion. These nations were,
indeed, pagans according to the present use of that term, but that idea
is not necessarily in the Hebrew word.

And divided them an inheritance by line - Divided to his people an
inheritance by a measurement of the land. That is, the land was
partitioned out among the tribes, by a survey, fixing their limits and
boundaries. See [Jos 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#007); 18; 19.

And made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents - To dwell
securely and quietly, no longer roaming from place to place, but having
a fixed habitation and a home.

[Psalms 78:56](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">psa 78:56</span></span>

Yet they tempted and provoked ... - They tried the patience of God, and
provoked him to anger after they were peaceably settled in the promised
land. See [Jdg 2:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#010). The object is
to show that it was the character of the people that they were prone to
depart from God. Compare [Psa
78:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#010), note; [Psa
78:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#017), note; [Psa
78:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#040), note.

[Psalms 78:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">psa 78:57</span></span>

But turned back ... - See the notes at [Psa
78:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#041).

They were turned aside like a deceitful bow - literally, a bow of
deceit. That is, a bow that could not be depended on; a bow, one of
whose arms was longer or more elastic than the other, so that the arrow
would turn aside from the mark. The marksman would attempt to hit an
object, and would fail. So it was with the people of Israel. They could
not be depended on. No reliance could be put on their promises, their
covenant-engagements, their attachment, their fidelity, for in these
things they failed, as the arrow from a deceitful bow would fail to
strike the mark. Their whole history shows how just was this charge;
alas! the history of many of the professed people of God has shown how
applicable the description has been to them also.

[Psalms 78:58](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#058)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">psa 78:58</span></span>

For they provoked him to anger with their high places - places where
idols were worshipped; usually on mountains or elevated places. [Lev
26:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#030); compare [Kg1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#002); [Kg1
12:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#031); [Kg2
17:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#032); [Ch2
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#017).

And moved him to jealousy - As one is when affections due to himself are
bestowed upon another - as in the married life. "With their graven
images." Their idols. Graven images are here put for idols in general.

[Psalms 78:59](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#059)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_059">psa 78:59</span></span>

When God heard this - literally, "God heard;" that is, he understood
this; he was acquainted with it. He heard their prayers addressed to
false gods; he heard their praises sung in honor of idols.

He was wroth - This is language taken from the common manner of speaking
among people, for language derived from human conceptions and usages
must be employed when we speak of God, though it may be difficult to say
what is its exact meaning. The general sense is that his conduct toward
them was as if he was angry; or was that which is used by a man who is
displeased.

And greatly abhorred Israel - The idea in the word rendered abhorred is
that of rejecting them with abhorrence; that is, the reference is not
merely to the internal feeling or emotion, but to the act which is the
proper accompaniment of such an internal feeling. He cast them off; he
treated them as not his own. The addition of the word "greatly" shows
how intense this feeling was; how decided was his aversion to their
conduct.

[Psalms 78:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">psa 78:60</span></span>

So that he forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh - The tabernacle or tent
which had been erected at Shiloh. He forsook that as a place where he
was to be worshipped; that is, he caused his tabernacle, or his place of
worship, to be erected in another place, to wit, on Mount Zion. See [Psa
78:68](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#068). The name Shiloh means properly
a place of rest, and seems to have been given to this place as such a
place, or as a place where the ark might abide after its migrations.
Shiloh was a city within the limits of the tribe of Ephraim, on a
mountain north of Bethel. Here the ark of God remained for many years
after it came into the promised land. [Jos
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001); [Jdg
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#031); [Jdg
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#012), [Jdg
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#019); [Sa1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#003), [Sa1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#024); [Sa1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#014); [Sa1
4:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#003). The ark, after it was taken by
the Philistines, was never returned to Shiloh, but was deposited
successively at Nob [Sa1 21:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#001), and
at Gibeon [Kg1 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#004), until David
pitched a tabernacle for it on Mount Zion [Ch1
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#001). The meaning here is, that in
consequence of the sins of the people, the place of worship was finally
and forever removed from the tribe of Ephraim, within whose limits
Shiloh was, to the tribe of Judah, and to Mount Zion.

The tent which he placed among men - It was the place which he selected
as his abode on earth.

[Psalms 78:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#061)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_061">psa 78:61</span></span>

And delivered his strength into captivity - That is, the ark, considered
as the symbol of his power. This constituted the defense of the people;
this was the emblem of the presence of God, which, when with them, was
their real protection. The allusion here is to the time when the ark was
taken by the Philistines in the days of Eli. See [Sa1
4:3-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#003).

And his glory - That which was emblematic of his glory, to wit, the ark.

Into the enemy's hand - The hand or power of the Philistines.

[Psalms 78:62](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#062)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_062">psa 78:62</span></span>

He gave his people over also unto the sword - When the ark was taken,
[Sa1 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#010). Thirty thousand of the
children of Israel fell on that occasion.

And was wroth with his inheritance - Was angry with his people,
considered as his inheritance; that is, considered as his own special
people, or his possession.

[Psalms 78:63](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#063)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">psa 78:63</span></span>

The fire consumed their young men - Fire here may be regarded as an
image of destructive war, as in [Num
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#028) : "For there is a fire gone out
of Heshbon, a flame from the city of Sihon: it hath consumed Ar of
Moab," etc. The idea here is, that the young people had been cut off in
war.

And their maidens were not given to marriage - As the young people who
would have entered into this relation were cut off in war. The margin
here is praised; "The maidens were not praised." This is in accordance
with the Hebrew. The idea is, "Their virgins were not praised in nuptial
songs;" that is, there were no marriage celebrations; no songs such as
were usually composed on such occasions in praise of those who were
brides. The Septuagint and the Latin Vulgate render this much less
accurately, and much less beautifully, were not lamented.

[Psalms 78:64](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#064)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_064">psa 78:64</span></span>

Their priests fell by the sword - Compare [Sa1
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#011). It was considered a special
calamity that the ministers of religion were cut down in war.

And their widows made no lamentation - That is, the public troubles were
so great, the danger was still so imminent, the calamities thickened so
fast, that there was no opportunity for public mourning by formal
processions of women, and loud lamentations, such as were usual on these
occasions. See the notes at [Job
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#015). The meaning is not that there
was a want of affection or attachment on the part of the friends of the
slain, or that there was no real grief, but that there was no
opportunity for displaying it in the customary manner.

[Psalms 78:65](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#065)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_065">psa 78:65</span></span>

Then the Lord awaked as one out of sleep - literally, as one sleeping;
that is, as one who is asleep suddenly arouses himself. The Lord seemed
to have slept, or to have been inattentive to what was occurring.
Suddenly he aroused himself to inflict vengeance on the enemies of his
people. Compare [Psa 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#006), note; [Psa
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#023), note.

And like a mighty man - The allusion is probably to a warrior.

That shouteth by reason of wine - The proper idea here is that of
singing, or lifting up the voice in exultation and rejoicing; the idea
of a man who sings and shouts as he is excited by wine, and as he
presses onward to conflict and to victory. It is not uncommon in the
Scriptures to compare God, as he goes forth to accomplish his purposes
on his enemies, with a warrior. See [Exo
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#003); [Psa
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#008).

[Psalms 78:66](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#066)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_066">psa 78:66</span></span>

And he smote his enemies in the hinder part - From behind; that is, as
they fled. There are two ideas here: one, that they fled at his
approach, or turned their backs; the other, that as they fled, he smote
and destroyed them.

He put them to a perpetual reproach - As discomfited; as defeated and
scattered; as unable to contend with him. The allusion is, probably, to
the victories of David, occurring after the events related in the
preceding verses.

[Psalms 78:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#067)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_067">psa 78:67</span></span>

Moreover, he refused the tabernacle of Joseph - As a place where his
worship should be celebrated. This is the completion of the statement in
[Psa 78:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#060). The design is to show that
there had been a transfer of the preeminence from the tribe of Ephraim
to the tribe of Judah, and from Shiloh to Zion. Joseph is mentioned here
as the father of Ephraim, from whom one of the tribes - (one of the most
influential and numerous) - was named. Jacob had twelve sons, from whom
the twelve tribes in general took their name. As the tribe of Levi,
however, being devoted to the sacerdotal work, was not reckoned as one
of the, twelve, the number was made up by giving to the descendants of
the two sons of Joseph - Ephraim and Manasseh [Gen
48:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#005) - a place among the tribes; and,
on this account, the name Joseph does not appear as one of the twelve
tribes. Yet Joseph is mentioned here, as the ancestor of one of them -
that of Ephraim, from whom the priority and supremacy were withdrawn in
favor of the tribe of Judah.

And chose not the tribe of Ephraim - To be the tribe within whose limits
the tabernacle should be permanently set up; or within whose limits the
place of public worship was finally to be established.

[Psalms 78:68](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#068)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_068">psa 78:68</span></span>

But chose the tribe of Judah - He chose David of the tribe of Judah as
ruler and king; he chose a place within the limits of Judah, to wit,
Mount Zion, or Jerusalem, as the place where his worship was to be
celebrated. Thus, the ancient prediction in regard to the supremacy of
Judah was accomplished. [Gen 49:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#008).

The Mount Zion, which he loved - Which he chose, for which he had an
affection. Compare [Psa 87:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#002).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 79](psa079)

</div>
