<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa019)  [Next](psa021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 20:0</span></span>

This psalm purports to be "A Psalm of David," nor is there any reason to
doubt that he wrote it. Of the precise occasion on which it was composed
nothing can be known with certainty, for there is no historical
statement on the point, and there is nothing in the psalm to indicate
it. It would seem, however, from the psalm, that it was composed on some
occasion when the king was about going to war, and that it was designed
to be used by the people of the nation, and by the king and his hosts
mustered for war, as expressing mutually their wishes in regard to the
result, and their confidence in each other and in God. Or if it was not
designed to be used by the people actually, it was intended to be a
poetic expression of the real feelings of the king and the people in
regard to the enterprise in which he was embarked.

According to this idea, and as seems to me to be manifest on the face of
the psalm, it is composed of alternate parts as if to be used by the
people, and by the king and his followers, in alternate responses,
closing with a chorus to be used by all. If it was intended to be
employed in public service, it was doubtless to be sung by alternate
choirs, representing the people and the king.

The whole may be divided into three strophes or parts:

I. The first strophe, [Psa 20:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#001).

\(a\) the people, [Psa 20:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#001). They
pray that the Lord would defend the king in the day of trouble; that the
name of the God of Jacob would defend him; that he would send him help
from the sanctuary, and strengthen him out of Zion; that he would
remember his offerings and accept his burnt sacrifice; that he would
grant him according to his own heart, and fulfill all his counsel.

\(b\) the king, [Psa 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#005), first part.
He says, as expressive of the feeling with which the expedition was
undertaken, "We will rejoice in thy salvation, and in the name of our
God we will set up our banners."

II\. The second strophe, [Psa 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#005)
(latter part), and [Psa 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#006).

\(a\) the people, [Psa 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#005), latter
clause; expressing a desire for his success and triumph, "The Lord
fulfil all thy petitions."

\(b\) the king, [Psa 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#006); expressing
confidence of success from the observed zeal and cooperation of the
people: "Now know I that the Lord sayeth his anointed; he will hear him
from his holy heaven with the saving strength of his right hand."

III\. general chorus of all, [Psa
20:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007). This is the language of
exultation and triumph in God; of joyful trust in him. "Some," is the
language of this chorus, "trust in chariots and some in horses, but we
will remember the name of the Lord our God," [Psa
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007). Then they see their enemies
fallen and subdued, while their armies stand upright and firm, [Psa
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#008). Then they call, in joyful
exultation and triumph, on God as the great King over all, and
supplicate his mercy and favor, [Psa
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#009).

This is, therefore, a patriotic and loyal psalm, full of confidence in
the king as he starts on his expedition, full of desire for his success,
and full of confidence in God; expressing union of heart between the
sovereign and the people, and the union of all their hearts in the great
God.

On the meaning of the phrase in the title, "To the chief Musician," see
the note at the title to [Psa 4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001).

[Psalms 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 20:1</span></span>

The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble - According to the view
expressed in the introduction to the psalm, this is the language of the
people praying for their king, or expressing the hope that he would be
delivered from trouble, and would be successful in what he had
undertaken, in the prosecution of a war apparently of defense. The word"
trouble" here used would seem to imply that he was beset with
difficulties and dangers; perhaps, that he was surrounded by foes. It
seems that he was going forth to war to deliver his country from
trouble, having offered sacrifices and prayers [Psa
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#003) for the purpose of securing the
divine favor on the expedition. The point or the moment of the psalm is
when those sacrifices had been offered, and when he was about to embark
on his enterprise. At that moment the people lift up the voice of
sympathy and of encouragement, and pray that those sacrifices might be
accepted, and that he might find the deliverance which he had desired.

The name of the God of Jacob - The word name is often put in the
Scriptures for the person himself; and hence, this is equivalent to
saying, "May the God of Jacob defend thee." See [Psa
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#011); [Psa
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#010); [Psa
44:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#005); [Psa
54:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#001); [Exo
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#021). Jacob was the one of the
patriarchs from whom, after his other name, the Hebrew people derived
their name Israel, and the word seems here to be used with reference to
the people rather than to the ancestor. Compare [Isa
44:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#002). The God of Jacob, or the God of
Israel, would be synonymous terms, and either would denote that he was
the Protector of the nation. As such he is invoked here; and the prayer
is, that the Great Protector of the Hebrew people would now defend the
king in the dangers which beset him, and in the enterprise which he had
undertaken.

Defend thee - Margin, as in Hebrew, set thee on a high place. The word
means the same as defend him, for the idea is that of being set on a
high place, a tower, a mountain, a lofty rock, where his enemies could
not reach or assail him.

[Psalms 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 20:2</span></span>

Send thee help - Margin, thy help. So the Hebrew. The idea is, such help
as he needed; such as would make him safe.

From the sanctuary - From the tabernacle, or the holy place where God
was worshipped, and where he was supposed to reside, [Exo
28:43](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#043); [Exo
29:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#030); [Exo
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#019); [Exo
39:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#001). This was his seat; his throne;
where he abode among the people. Here, too, it would seem that he had
been worshipped, and his aid implored, in view of this expedition; here
the royal psalmist had sought to secure the divine favor by the
presentation of appropriate sacrifices and offerings [Psa
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#003). The prayer here is, that God
would accept those offerings, and hear those supplications, and would
now send the desired help from the sanctuary where he resided; that is,
that he would grant his protection and aid.

And strengthen thee - Margin, as in Hebrew, support thee. The idea is,
that he would grant his upholding hand in the day of peril.

Out of Zion - The place where God was worshipped; the place where the
tabernacle was reared. See the note at [Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006).

[Psalms 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 20:3</span></span>

Remember all thy offerings - On the meaning of the word here used, see
the note at [Isa 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013), where it is
rendered oblations. The word occurs often in the Scriptures, and is
sometimes rendered offering, and sometimes oblation. The word means an
offering of any kind or anything that is presented to God, except a
bloody sacrifice - anything offered as an expression of thankfulness, or
with a view to obtain his favor. It is distinguished from bloody
sacrifices, which are expressed by the word in the following clause. The
word here employed occurs in the Psalms only in the following places:
[Psa 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#003); [Psa
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006); [Psa
96:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#008); where it is rendered offering
and offerings; [Psa 45:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012), rendered
gift; [Psa 72:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#010), rendered presents;
and [Psa 141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002), rendered sacrifice.
The use of the word in this place proves that such offerings had been
made to God by him who was about to go forth to the war; and the prayer
of the people here is that God would remember all those offerings; that
is, that he would grant the blessing which he who had offered them had
sought to obtain.

And accept - Margin, turn to ashes, or make fat. The Hebrew word - דשׁן
dâshên - means properly to make fat, or marrowy, [Pro
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#030); to pronounce or regard as fat;
to be fat or satiated, or abundantly satisfied, [Pro
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#004). It conveys also the notion of
reducing to ashes; perhaps from the fact that the victim which had been
fattened for sacrifice was reduced to ashes; or, as Gesenius supposes
(Lexicon, see דשׁן deshen), because "ashes were used by the ancients for
fattening, that is, manuring the soil." The prayer here seems to be that
God would "pronounce the burnt-offering fat;" that is, that he would
regard it favorably, or would accept it. This proves, also, that a
sacrifice had been made with a view to propitiate the divine favor in
regard to the expedition which had been undertaken; that is, a solemn
act of devotion, according to the manner of worship which then obtained,
had been performed with a view to secure the divine favor and
protection. The example is one which suggests the propriety of always
entering upon any enterprise by solemn acts of worship, or by
supplicating the divine blessing; that is, by acknowledging our
dependence on God, and asking his guidance and his protecting care.

Thy burnt sacrifice - The word used here denotes bloody offerings; see
the note at [Isa 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011). These offerings
were designed especially for the expiation of sin, and for thus securing
the divine favor. They were an acknowledgment of guilt, and they were
offered with a view to secure the pardon of sin, and, in connection with
that, the favor of God. In similar circumstances we approach God, not by
an offering which we make, whether bloody or bloodless, but through the
one great sacrifice made by the Redeemer on the cross for the sins of
the world.

[Psalms 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 20:4</span></span>

Grant thee according to thine own heart - According to thy wishes;
according to the desires of thy heart.

And fulfil all thy counsel - All that thou hast designed or undertaken
in the matter; that is, may he enable thee to execute thy purpose.

[Psalms 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 20:5</span></span>

We will rejoice in thy salvation - According to the idea of the psalm
suggested in the introduction, this is a response of the king and those
associated with him in going forth to battle. It expresses the joy which
they would have in the expected deliverance from danger, and their
conviction that through his strength they would be able to obtain it.
The word salvation here means deliverance; to wit, from the anticipated
danger. The phrase implies that God would interpose to save them; it
expresses alike their confidence in that, and the fact that such a
deliverance would fill their hearts with joy and rejoicing.

And in the name of our God - This indicates a sense of dependence on
God, and also that the enterprise undertaken was in order to promote his
honor and glory. It was not in their own strength, nor was it to promote
the purposes of conquest and the ends of ambition; it was that God might
be honored, and it was with confidence of success derived from his
anticipated aid.

We will set up our banners - We will erect our standards; or, as we
should say, we will unfurl our flag. All people, when they go to war,
have standards or banners, whether flags or some other ensigns, around
which they rally; which they follow; under which they fight; and which
they feel bound to defend. Each nation has its own standard; but it is
difficult to determine what precisely was the form of the standards used
among the ancient Hebrews. Military standards, however, were early used
(compare [Num 1:52](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#052); [Num
2:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#002), [Num
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#010), [Num
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#018), [Num
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#025); [Num
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#014), [Num
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#025)), and indeed were necessary
whenever armies were mustered for war, For the forms of ancient
standards, see the article in Kitto's Cyclopaedia of the Bible,
"Standards."

The Lord fulfil all thy petitions - The prayers offered in connection
with the sacrifice referred to in [Psa
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#003) (compare [Psa
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#004)). This, according to the view
suggested in the introduction, is the response of the people, expressing
their desire that the king might be successful in what he had
undertaken, and that the prayers which had been offered for success
might be answered.

[Psalms 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 20:6</span></span>

Now know I that the Lord saveth his anointed - Saveth, or will save, the
king, who had been anointed, or consecrated by anointing to that office.
Compare the note at [Psa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002). This,
according to the view given in the introduction, is the response of the
king. It expresses his confident assurance of success from the interest
which the people had expressed in the enterprise, as referred to in the
previous verses, and from the earnestness of their prayers in his behalf
and in behalf of the enterprise. They had manifested such zeal in the
cause, and they had offered so earnest petitions, that he could not
doubt that God would smile favorably on the undertaking, and would grant
success.

He will hear him from his holy heaven - Margin, "from the heaven of his
holiness." So the Hebrew. Compare [Ch1
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#026); [Ch2
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#014); [Neh
9:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#027); [Psa
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002); [Psa
102:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#019). heaven is represented as the
dwelling-place of God, and it is there that he hears and answers our
prayers. The meaning of the word "hear" in this passage is, that he will
"favorably hear," or regard; that is, that he will "answer" the
petition, or grant the request.

With the saving strength - That is, he will interpose with that saving
strength. Literally, "with the strengths of salvation." The answer to
the prayer will be manifest in the strength or power put forth by him to
save.

Of his right hand - The right hand is the instrument by which mainly we
execute our purposes; and by constant use it becomes in fact more fully
developed, and is stronger than the left band. Hence, it is used to
denote "strength." See [Exo 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#006); [Jdg
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#026); see [Psa
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#007), note; [Psa
18:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#035), note.

[Psalms 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 20:7</span></span>

Some trust in chariots - This (see the introduction to the psalm) seems
to be a "general chorus" of the king and the people, expressing the
fullest confidence in God, and showing the true ground of their
reliance. The general meaning is, that their entire trust was in God.
This is put in strong contrast with others, who relied, some on their
chariots, and some on their horses, while "they" relied alone on God.
They who trusted in horses and in chariots would be overcome; they who
trusted in God alone would triumph. The word rendered chariots - רכב
rekeb - means properly riding, and then a vehicle for "riding," a wagon,
a chariot. Here it refers to the war-chariot, or the vehicle for
carrying armed men into battle. These furnished great advantages in war,
by the speed with which they could be driven against an enemy, and by
the facilities in fighting from them. They were usually very simple.
They consisted of "a light pole suspended between and on the withers of
a pair of horses, the after end resting on a light axle tree, with two
low wheels. Upon the axle stood a light frame, open behind, and floored
for the warrior and his charioteer, who both stood within. On the sides
of the frame hung the war-bow, in its case; a large quiver with arrows
and darts had commonly a particular sheath. In Persia, the chariots,
elevated upon wheels of considerable diameter, had four horses abreast;
and in early ages, there were occasionally hooks or scythes attached to
the axles." - Kitto, "Cyclo." In early ages these constituted a main
reliance in determining the result of a battle.

And some in horses - Some in cavalry, commonly a very material reliance
in war. The use of horses in war was early known in the world, for we
find mention of them in the earliest periods of history.

But we will remember the name of the Lord our God - That is, we will
remember God - the name, as before remarked, often being used to denote
the person. The meaning is, We will not forget that our reliance is not
on armies, but on God, the living God. Whatever instrumentality we may
employ, we will remember always that our hope is in God, and that he
only can give success to our arms.

[Psalms 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 20:8</span></span>

They are brought down and fallen - That is, those who trust in chariots
and horses. The reference here is undoubtedly to the enemies against
whom the king was about to wage war, and the language here is indicative
of his certain conviction that they would be vanquished. So certain was
he now of this that he could speak of it as if it were already done.
"They "are" brought down." He sees them in anticipation prostrate and
subdued; he goes forth to war with the certainty on his mind that this
would occur. The word rendered "brought down" - כרע kâra‛ - means "to
bend," "to bow" (as the knees); and then it refers to one who bows down
before an enemy, that is, one who is subdued, [Isa
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#004); [Isa
65:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#012); [Psa
72:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#009); [Psa
78:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#031).

But we are risen, and stand upright - That is, he sees this in
anticipation. He is certain of success and triumph. Depressed though we
may now be, yet we are certain of victory.

[Psalms 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 20:9</span></span>

Save, Lord - "Yahweh, save." This is still an earnest prayer. Confident
as they are of success and triumph, yet they do not forget their
dependence on God; they do not forget that victory must come from his
hand. There was, indeed, exultation, but it was exultation in the belief
that God would grant success - an exultation connected with, and
springing from prayer. Prayer is not inconsistent with the most
confident anticipation of success in any undertaking; and confidence of
success can only spring from prayer.

Let the King - That is, let "God," spoken of here as the Great King. The
connection and the parallelism demand this interpretation, for to God
only is this prayer addressed. He is here invoked as the supreme
monarch. A king going forth to war implores the protection of a greater
king than himself - the King of all nations; and who, therefore, had the
disposal of the whole result of the conflict in which he was about to
engage.

Hear us when we call - As we now call on him; its we shall call on him
in the day of battle. Thus the close of the psalm corresponds with the
beginning. In the beginning [Psa
20:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#001) there is an earnest "desire"
that God would hear the suppliant in the day of trouble; in the close
there is an earnest "prayer" to him from all the people that he "would"
thus bear. The desire of the blessing goes forth in the form of prayer,
for God only can grant the objects of our desire. The whole psalm,
therefore, is an expression of a strong confidence in God; of a sense of
the most complete dependence on him; and of that assurance of success
which often comes into the soul, in an important and difficult
undertaking, when we have committed the whole cause to God. The psalm,
too, is a model for us to imitate when we embark in any great and
arduous enterprise. The desire for success should be accompanied with
earnest prayer and supplication on our part; and when our friends
express the desire that we may be successful, there should have been on
our part such acts of devotion - such manifest reliance on God - such
religious trust - that they can simply pray for our success to be in
accordance with our own prayer. Never should we look for success unless
our undertaking has been preceded by prayer; and when our best
preparations have been made, our hope of success is not primarily and
mainly in them, but only in God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 21](psa021)

</div>
