<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa063)  [Next](psa065) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 64](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 64:0</span></span>

This psalm is described as a "psalm of David," and it bears internal
evidence that it was composed by him, as it contains first, a prayer for
deliverance from enemies [Psa 64:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#001);
and second, a confident expectation of deliverance, [Psa
64:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#007); a form of structure found in
many of the psalms written by David. It is addressed, or dedicated, as
many others are, "To the chief Musician." This fact shows that it was
not designed as an expression of mere private feeling, but was intended
to be employed in the worship of God. See the notes at the Introduction
to [Psa 4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001).

The occasion on which this psalm was composed is unknown. In its general
structure and character, it bears a strong resemblance to [Psa
58:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#001). Indeed, many of the
expressions in the two psalms are the same, and it would seem probable
that it was composed with reference to the same occasion, or that the
circumstances in the two cases were so similar as to make the same
expressions in the main appropriate. The occasion may have been, either
the times of persecution under Saul, or the rebellion of Absalom.
Perhaps we may suppose, without impropriety, that the former psalm [Psa
58:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#001) was composed in the time of
Saul, and this in the time of Absalom, and that the circumstances in the
two eases were so similar, that the author found the same phraseology
which he had used on the former occasion to be appropriate to his
present position, or that his feelings were so identical now with what
they were then, that he naturally expressed himself in substantially the
same language.

The psalm, as observed above, is composed of two parts:

I. A prayer for deliverance from his enemies, with a description of
their character, [Psa 64:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#001).

II\. An expression of confident expectation that his prayer would be
answered, and that God would interpose in his behalf, [Psa
64:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#007).

[Psalms 64:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 64:1</span></span>

Hear my voice, O God, in my prayer - The use of the word voice here
would seem to imply that this was audible prayer, or that, though alone,
he gave utterance to his petitions aloud. We have this same use of the
word often in the Psalms, making it probable that even private prayers
were uttered in an audible manner. In most cases, when there is no
danger of being overheard, or of its being construed as ostentation or
Pharisaism, this is favorable to the spirit of secret devotion. Compare
the notes at [Dan 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#010). The word here
rendered prayer means properly speech, discourse; then, complaint; then,
meditation. It is most commonly rendered complaint. See [Job
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#013); [Job
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#027); [Job
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#001); [Job
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#004); [Psa
55:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#002) (notes); Ps. 102 (Title); [Psa
142:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#002). It refers here to a state of
mind caused by trouble and danger, when the deep meditation on his
troubles and dangers found expression in audible words - whether those
words were complaint or petition. As there are no indications in the
psalm that David was disposed to complain in the sense of blaming God,
the proper interpretation here is that his deep meditations took the
form of prayer.

Preserve my life from fear of the enemy - Either Saul or Absalom. He
prayed that his life might be made so secure that he would not have
occasion to be afraid of his enemy.

[Psalms 64:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 64:2</span></span>

Hide me - Or, more literally, thou wilt hide me. There is both an
implied prayer that this might be done, and a confident belief that it
would be done. The idea is, Protect me; guard me; make me safe - as one
is who is hidden or concealed so that his enemies cannot find him.

From the secret counsel - The word used here - סוד sôd - means properly
couch, cushion; and then, a divan, a circle of friends sitting together
on couches for familiar conversation, or for counsel. See [Psa
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#014), note; [Psa
55:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#014), note; compare [Job
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#008); [Job
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#004). Here the reference is to the
consultations of his enemies for the purpose of doing him wrong. Of
course, as they took this counsel together, he could not know it, and
the word secret is not improperly applied to it. The idea here is, that
although he did not know what that counsel or purpose was, or what was
the result of their consultations, yet God knew, and he could guard him
against it.

Of the wicked - Not the wicked in general, but his particular foes who
were endeavoring to destroy him. Luther renders this, "from the
assembling of the wicked."

From the insurrection - The word used here - רגשׁה rigshâh - means
properly a "noisy crowd, a multitude." The allusion is to such a crowd,
such a disorderly and violent rabble, as constituted a mob. He was in
danger not only from the secret purposes of the more calm and thoughtful
of his enemies who were plotting against him, but from the excited
passions of the multitude, and thus his life was in double danger. If he
escaped the one, he had no security that he would escape the other. So
the Redeemer was exposed to a double danger. There was the danger
arising from the secret plottings of the Scribes and Pharisees assembled
in council, and there was also the danger arising from the infuriated
passions of the multitude. The former calmly laid the plan for putting
him to death by a judicial trial; the others took up stones to stone
him, or cried, "Crucify him, crucify him!" The word insurrection here
does not well express the idea. The word tumult would better represent
the meaning of the original.

Of the workers of iniquity - That is, of those who were arrayed against
him.

[Psalms 64:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 64:3</span></span>

Who whet their tongue like a sword - Who sharpen their tongue; that is,
they utter words that will cut deep, or penetrate the soul. The idea is
that of slander or reproach - the same idea which we have in Shakespeare
(Cymbeline):

"'Tis slander;

Whose edge is sharper than the sword."

This comparison is a favorite one with David. Compare [Psa
52:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#002); [Psa
57:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004); [Psa
59:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#007).

And bend their bows ... - That is, they prepare for this - as they make
ready to shoot who bend their bows, and fix their arrows on the string.
The idea here is, that this was deliberate, or was the result of counsel
and purpose. It was not an outbreak of mere passion and excitement; it
was by fixed design and careful preparation. See [Psa
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#002), note; [Psa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#007), note.

Even bitter words - We apply the same term bitter now to words of malice
and reproach.

[Psalms 64:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 64:4</span></span>

That they may shoot in secret - From an unobserved quarter; from a place
where they are so concealed that it cannot be known where the arrows
come from. There was a purpose to ruin him, and at the same time to
conceal themselves, or not to let him know from what source the ruin
came. It was not an open and manly fight, where he could see his enemy,
but it was a warfare with a concealed foe.

At the perfect - At the upright; at one who is perfect so far as his
treatment of them is concerned. Compare [Psa
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#020), note; [Psa
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#023), note.

Suddenly do they shoot at him - At an unexpected time, and from an
unlooked-for quarter. They accomplish what they intended; they carry out
their design.

And fear not - They feel confident that they are not known, and that
they will not be detected. They have no fear of God or man. Compare [Psa
55:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#019).

[Psalms 64:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 64:5</span></span>

They encourage themselves - literally, they strengthen themselves, or
make themselves strong. That is, they take counsel; they encourage each
other; they urge one another forward; they suggest to each other methods
by which what they purpose may be done, and by which difficulties may be
overcome. This was a part of their "secret counsel" or their
consultation, [Psa 64:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#002).

In an evil matter - Margin, as in Hebrew, speech. The reference is to
their purpose or plan. They strengthen themselves for doing what they
know to be a wrong or wicked thing.

They commune - literally, they tell or speak. That is, they tell each
other how it may be done, or suggest different methods by which it may
be successfully accomplishled. They compare views, that they may select
that which will be most likely to be successful. All this indicates
plan, consultation, design.

Of laying snares privily - Margin, as in Hebrew, to hide snares. This is
a figure derived from the method of taking wild beasts. See [Psa
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015), note; [Psa
38:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#012), note. The reference here is to
some secret plan by which they intended that the author of the psalm
should be entrapped and ruined. It was not a plan of open and manly
warfare, but a purpose to destroy him when he would have no opportunity
of defense.

They say, Who shall see them? - That is, who will see the snares or
pit-falls? Who will be aware of their existence? They sought to make the
plan so secret that no one could discover it, or even suspect it; to
keep it so concealed that he for whom it was intended could not be put
on his guard. Compare [Psa 10:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#008).

[Psalms 64:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 64:6</span></span>

They search out iniquities - They search deep; they examine plans; they
rack their invention to accomplish it. The original word - חפשׂ châphaś
- is a word which is used to denote the act of exploring - as when one
searches for treasure, or for anything that is hidden or lost - implying
a deep and close attention of the mind to the subject. So here they
examined every plan, or every way which was suggested to them, by which
they could hope to accomplish their purpose.

They accomplish - This would be better translated by rendering it, "We
have perfected it!" That is, We have found it out; it is complete;
meaning that they had found a plan to their liking. It is the language
of self-congratulatlon.

A diligent search - Or rather, "The search is a deep search." In other
words, "The plan is a consummate plan; it is just to our mind; it is
exactly what we have sought to find." This, too, is language of
self-congratulation and satisfaction at the plan which they had thought
of, and which was so exactly to their mind.

Both the inward thought - literally, the inside; that is, the hidden
design.

And the heart - The plan formed in the heart; the secret purpose.

Is deep - A deep-laid scheme; a plan that indicates profound thought; a
purpose that is the result of consummate sagacity. This is the language
of the author of the psalm. He admitted that there had been great talent
and skill in the formation of the plan. Hence, it was that he cried so
earnestly to God.

[Psalms 64:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 64:7</span></span>

But God shall shoot at them with an arrow - That is, Instead of their
being able to carry out their purposes of shooting the arrows which they
had prepared against others, God will shoot his arrows against them. The
tables will be turned. They themselves will experience what they had
intended to inflict on others. God will deal with them as they intended
to deal with others. The sentiment here is substantially the same as in
[Psa 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015); see the notes at that
passage. It is also in accordance with what we often find in the
writings of David, when in the close of a psalm he expresses a confident
expectation that the prayer which he had offered in the beginning would
be heard, or rejoices in the assurance that he had been heard. The idea,
also, is involved in this part of the psalm that God will deal with men
as they purpose to deal with others; that is, according to their true
character. Compare the notes at [Psa
18:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#025).

Suddenly shall they be wounded - Margin, their wound shall be. The
Hebrew is, "Suddenly shall be their wounds." The idea is, that the
wounds in the case would be theirs; and would be inflicted suddenly. The
blows which they thought to give to others would come on themselves, and
this would occur at an unexpected moment.

[Psalms 64:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 64:8</span></span>

So they shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves - In [Psa
64:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#003), their tongue is represented as a
sword; and here, keeping up the figure, the tongue, as a sword, is
represented as falling on them, or as inflicting the wound on themselves
which they had intended to inflict on others. This might be rendered,
"And they have cast him down; upon them is their own tongue;" or, "Upon
them their own tongue has come." That is, someone would cast them down,
and they would fall as if smitten by their own tongue like a sword. It
is not said who would do this, but the most natural interpretation is
that it would be done by God. The idea is, that the instrument which
they had employed to injure others would be the means of their own ruin.

All that see them shall flee away - Compare [Psa
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#011). That is, they shall flee in
consternation from those who are so fearfully overthrown. They shall see
that God is just, and that He will punish the wicked; and they will
desire to escape from a ruin so dreadful as that which comes upon the
ungodly. The idea is, that when God punishes sinners, the effect on
others is, and should be, to lead them to wish not to be associated with
such people, but to escape from a doom so fearful.

[Psalms 64:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 64:9</span></span>

And all men shall fear - That is, a deep impression would be made, not
only on the associates and companions of the wicked, but on all that
should hear of what was done. People, in view of the just punishment of
the wicked, would learn to reverence God, and to stand in awe of One so
powerful and so just. Judgments, punishment, wrath, are adapted and
designed to make a deep impression on mankind. On this principle, the
final punishment of the wicked will make a deep and salutary impression
on the universe forever.

And shall declare the work of God - Shall make it known to others. It
will become a subject of conversation, or they will talk about it, as
illustrating the divine perfections and character. Such should always be
the effect of the judgments of God, for they illustrate his true
character; they make known his attributes; they convey to the world
lessons of the utmost importance. Nothing is more proper than to talk
about the judgments of God, and to endeavor to derive from them the
instructions which they are adapted to convey about the divine nature,
and the principles of the administration under which the universe is
placed. Wars, pestilences, famines, earthquakes, conflagrations,
inundations, diseases, all teach important lessons about God; and each
one bears its own special message to mankind.

For they shall wisely consider of his doing - They shall attentively and
carefully consider it; they shall endeavor to derive such lessons from
his dealings as they are suited to convey. In other words, an attentive
consideration of his doings will contribute to maintain a just knowledge
of world in subjection to him. God is thus always speaking to human
beings; and nothing is more proper for human beings than to give their
minds to a careful consideration of what is really intended to be taught
us by the events which are occurring in his providential dealings.

[Psalms 64:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 64:10</span></span>

The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him - That
is, As the result of his gracious intervention, or as the effect of his
judgments on the wicked, the righteous will rejoice on account of their
own security, and put their trust in One who has thus shown himself to
be the friend of holiness, and the enemy of sin. Whatever tends to
reveal the divine character, or to make a proper exhibition of that
character, will also lead good people to confide in God, and to feel
that they are safe.

And all the upright in heart shall glory - Shall rejoice; shall feel
that they have cause for trust and triumph. The good - the pure - the
righteous - the godly - will always rejoice in everything which tends to
show that God is just, and true, and holy; - for all their own hope of
security and salvation rests upon the fact that the God in whom they
trust is a righteous God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 65](psa065)

</div>
