<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa062)  [Next](psa064) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 63](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 63:0</span></span>

This psalm purports to be a "psalm of David," and there can be no just
ground of doubt in regard to the correctness of the title in this
respect. DeWette indeed supposes that the way in which mention is made
of the "king" in [Psa 63:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#011), seems to
indicate that the psalm was not composed by David himself, but that it
was written by some friend of his, who was his companion in the troubles
which he experienced; but it is not necessary to resort to this
supposition, for it is not very uncommon for an author to refer to
himself in the third person, as Caesar does everywhere. The psalm
further purports to have been composed by David "when he was in the
wilderness of Judah." The "wilderness of Judah" was that wild and
uncultivated tract of country lying on the east side of the territory of
the tribe of Judah, commonly called "the wilderness of Judea" ([Mat
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001); compare the notes at [Mat
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001)), lying along the Jordan. David
was repeatedly driven into that wilderness in the time of Saul; and the
general structure of the psalm would accord well with any one of those
occasions; but the mention of the "king" in [Psa
63:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#011), as undoubtedly meaning David,
makes it necessary to refer the composition of the psalm to a later
period in his life, since the title "king" was not given to him in the
time of Saul. The psalm, therefore, was doubtless composed in the time
of Absalom - the period when David was driven away by the rebellion, and
compelled to seek a refuge in that wilderness. It belongs, if this view
is correct, to the same period in the life of David as [Psa
42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001); [Psa
43:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#001); [Psa
61:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#001); and probably some others.

The psalm consists of the following parts:

I. An expression of earnest desire to see the power and glory of God
again, as he had formerly done in the sanctuary, [Psa
63:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001).

II\. His sense of the goodness of God, and of the value of the divine
favor, as being greater than that of life; and his purpose to find his
happiness in God, and to praise and bless him in all situations,
especially in those moments of solemn meditation when he was alone upon
his bed, [Psa 63:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#003).

III\. His remembrance of former mercies, and his conviction that God
still upheld him by his right hand, [Psa
63:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#007).

IV\. His firm belief that all his enemies would be destroyed, [Psa
63:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#009).

[Psalms 63:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 63:1</span></span>

O God, thou art my God - The words here rendered God are not the same in
the original. The first one - אלהים 'Elohiym - is in the plural number,
and is the word which is usually employed to designate God [Gen
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001); the second - אל 'Êl - is a word
which is very often applied to God with the idea of strength - a strong,
a mighty One; and there is probably this underlying idea here, that God
was the source of his strength, or that in speaking of God as his God,
he was conscious of referring to him as Almighty. It was the divine
attribute of power on which his mind mainly rested when he spoke of him
as his God. He did not appeal to him merely as God, with no reference to
a particular attribute; but he had particularly in his eye his power or
his ability to deliver and save him. In [Psa
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001), where, in our version, we have
the same expression, "My God, my God," the two words in the original are
identical, and are the same which is used here - אל 'Êl - as expressive
of strength or power. The idea suggested here is, that in appealing to
God, while we address him as our God, and refer to his general character
as God, it is not improper to have in our minds some particular
attribute of his character - power, mercy, love, truth, faithfulness,
etc. - as the special ground of our appeal.

Early will I seek thee - The word used here has reference to the early
dawn, or the morning; and the noun which is derived from the verb, means
the aurora, the dawn, the morning. The proper idea, therefore, would be
that of seeking God in the morning, or the early dawn; that is, as the
first thing in the day. Compare the notes at [Isa
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#009). The meaning here is, that he
would seek God as the first thing in the day; first in his plans and
purposes; first in all things. He would seek God before other things
came in to distract and divert his attention; he would seek God when he
formed his plans for the day, and before other influences came in, to
control and direct him. The favor of God was the supreme desire of his
heart, and that desire would be indicated by his making him the earliest
- the first - object of his search. His first thoughts - his best
thoughts - therefore, he resolved should be given to God. A desire to
seek God as the first object in life - in youth - in each returning day
- at the beginning of each year, season, month, week - in all our plans
and enterprises - is one of the most certain evidences of true piety;
and religion flourishes most in the soul, and flourishes only in the
soul, when we make God the first object of our affections and desires.

My soul thirsteth for thee - See the notes at [Psa
42:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#002).

My flesh longeth for thee - All my passions and desires - my whole
nature. The two words - "soul" and "flesh," are designed to embrace the
entire man, and to express the idea that he longed supremely for God;
that all his desires, whether springing directly from the soul, or the
needs of the body, rose to God as the only source from which they could
be gratified.

In a dry and thirsty land - That is, As one longs for water in a parched
desert, so my soul longs for God. The word thirsty is in the margin, as
in Hebrew, weary. The idea is that of a land where, from its parched
nature - its barrenness - its rocks - its heat - its desolation - one
would be faint and weary on a journey.

Where no water is - No running streams; no gushing fountains; nothing to
allay the thirst.

[Psalms 63:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 63:2</span></span>

To see thy power and thy glory - The reference here is to what was
manifested of the presence and the power of God in the services of
public worship; the praises, the prayers, the rejoicings, the evidences
of the divine presence.

So as I have seen thee in the sanctuary - At the tabernacle, amidst the
solenm services of divine worship. There seems to be no reason for
supposing that he here refers to the mere external pomp and splendor of
public worship, but he doubtless includes the power of the divine
presence which he had felt in such services on his own soul. As applied
now to a place of Christian worship, it may be observed that there are
nowhere more striking exhibitions of the Tower of God on earth than
those which occur in such a place, especially in a revival of religion.
The scene on the day of Pentecost was as striking an exhibition of the
power of God as that which goes forth in the fury of the storm, in the
raging of the ocean, or in the guidance of the heavenly bodies. Nothing
can so well express what occurs in such a scene as the words "power" and
"glory;" nothing shows more certainly the power of God than that
influence which bows down haughty sinners, and makes them humble; which
produces a deep stillness and awe in the assembled multitudes; which
extorts the cry, "Men and brethren, what must we do to be saved?" which
makes hardened men weep, and men long addicted to habits of sin willing
to abandon their iniquities, and turn to God: and nothing shows more
clearly the "glory" of God than that power, that grace, that mercy,
which thus turns multitudes from the ways of sin and death, and directs
their feet into the path of peace and salvation. They who have ever
witnessed the power of God in a revival of religion, will ever afterward
long to see again "the power and glory" of God, as they "have seen" it
"in the sanctuary."

[Psalms 63:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 63:3</span></span>

Because thy loving-kindness is better than life - Thy favor; thy mercy.
This is of more value than life; more to be desired than life. Life is
the most valued and valuable thing pertaining to this world which we can
possess. See the notes at [Job 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#004).
But, above this, David valued the favor and friendship of God. If one or
the other was to be sacrificed, he preferred that it should be his life;
he would be willing to exchange that for the favor of God. Life was not
desirable, life furnished no comforts - no joys - without the divine
favor.

"My life itself, without Thy love,

No taste of pleasure could afford;

'Twould but a tiresome burden prove,

If I were banished from the Lord."

My lips shall praise thee - That is either

\(a\) because of this loving-kindness; because I have this trust in thy
character; or

\(b\) because thou wilt restore me to the place of public worship, and I
shall be permitted again to praise thee.

Probably the latter is the true idea.

[Psalms 63:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 63:4</span></span>

Thus will I bless thee while I live - In my life; or, as long as life
lasts, will I praise thee. The word "thus" refers to the sentiment in
the previous verse, meaning that as the result of his deep sense of the
value of the loving kindness of God, he would praise him through all the
remainder of his life, or would never cease to praise him. A true
purpose of serving God embraces the whole of this life, and the whole of
eternity. He who loves God, and who has any proper sense of his mercy,
does not anticipate a time when he will cease to praise and bless him,
or when he will have any desire or wish not to be engaged in his
service.

I will lift up my hands in thy name - In solemn prayer and praise. See
the notes at [Psa 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#002).

[Psalms 63:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 63:5</span></span>

My soul shall be satisfied - See the notes at [Psa
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#008). The idea is, that his soul now
longed for the service of God as one who is hungry longs for food, or as
one who is thirsty longs for drink; and that the time would come when
this longing desire would be satisfied. He would engage in the service
of God as he desired to do; he would be permitted to enjoy that service
without interruption.

As with marrow and fatness - See the notes at [Psa
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#008). The words here employed denote
rich food; and the comparison is between the pleasure of serving God,
and the satisfaction derived from food when one is hungry. It is not
uncommon to compare the pleasures of religion with a feast or banquet.
Compare [Isa 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#006).

And my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips - Lips full of joy; or,
which give utterance to the joy of the heart.

[Psalms 63:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 63:6</span></span>

When I remember thee upon my bed - See the notes at [Psa
42:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#008). That is, when I lie down at
night; when I compose myself to sleep. Nothing can be more proper than
that our last thoughts, as we sink into quiet slumber, should be of God;
of his being, his character, his mercy, his loving-kindness; of the
dealings of his providence, and the manifestations of his grace toward
us, during the day; and nothing is better suited to compose the mind to
rest, and to induce quiet and gentle slumber, than the calmness of soul
which arises from the idea of an Infinite God, and from confidence in
him. Often when restless on our beds - when nothing else will lull the
body to rest, the thought of God - the contemplation of his greatness,
his mercy, and his love - the sweet sense of an assurance of his favor
will soothe us, and cause us to sink into gentle repose. So it may be -
so it will be - when we are about to sleep the long sleep of death, for
then the most appropriate thoughts - the thoughts that will best prepare
us for that long sleep - will be thoughts of God.

And meditate on thee in the night-watches - See the notes at [Psa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002). The word watches here refers to
the ancient divisions of the night for municipal or military purposes -
periods of the night assigned to different persons to keep watch around
a camp or city. The most common division of the night was into three
parts, though the arrangement varied at different times. See [Mat
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025); [Luk
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#038).

[Psalms 63:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 63:7</span></span>

Because thou hast been my help - Because thou hast interposed to defend
me in danger. The idea is, that he had experienced the divine
interposition in times of danger, and that this was a reason why he
should still confide in God. The argument is, that God's mercy and favor
in the past is a reason why we should confide in him in time to come.

Therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice - Under the shadow
or protection of thy wings will I feel safe. See the notes at [Psa
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008). Compare [Psa
36:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#007); [Psa
57:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001); [Psa
61:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#004).

[Psalms 63:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 63:8</span></span>

My soul followeth hard after thee - The word used here - דבק dâbaq -
means properly to cleave to; to adhere; to be glued to; to stick fast.
Then it means to attach oneself to anything; and then, to pursue or
follow after. The idea here is that of adhering to, or cleaving to; and
the meaning is, that the psalmist adhered firmly to God, as pieces of
wood glued together adhere to each other; that he, as it were, stuck
fast to him; that he would not leave him or be separated from him. The
language represents the feelings of true piety in adhering firmly and
constantly to God, whatever there may be that tends to separate us from
him. The adhesion of bodies by glue is a striking but not an adequate
representation of the firmness with which the soul adheres to God.
Portions of matter held together by glue may be separated; the soul of
the true believer never can be separated from God.

Thy right hand upholdeth me - The right hand is that by which we
accomplish anything; and, by constant use, is stronger than the left
hand. Hence, the expression is equivalent to saying that God upheld him
with all his strength. The meaning is, that God sustained him in life;
defended him in danger; kept him from the power of his enemies.

[Psalms 63:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 63:9</span></span>

But those that seek my soul to destroy it - Who seek my life; who
endeavor to kill me. This language would well describe the purposes of
Absalom and his followers.

Shall go into the lower parts of the earth - Shall descend into the
earth; into the deepest graves. He would live; but they would perish.

[Psalms 63:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 63:10</span></span>

They shall fall by the sword - Margin, They shall make him run out like
water by the hands of the sword. The word rendered in the text "they
shall fall," and in the margin "they shall make him run out" - נגר nâgar
- means properly, to flow, to pour out, as water; and then, to pour out;
then, to give up or deliver. The idea here is that of delivering over,
as one pours out water from a basin or pitcher: they shall be delivered
over to the sword. The original rendered "sword" is, as in the margin,
"by the hands of the sword;" that is, the sword is represented as
accomplishing its purpose as if it had hands. The sword shall slay them.

They shall be a portion for foxes - The original word - שׁועל shû‛âl -
means properly and commonly a fox. But under this general name fox, the
Orientals seem to have comprehended other animals also, having some
resemblance to a fox, and particularly jackals. Thus jackals seem to be
meant in [Jdg 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#004); since foxes are
with great difficulty taken alive; and in this place also it has the
same meaning, inasmuch as foxes do not feast on dead bodies, though a
favorite repast of the jackal. Gesenius, Lexicon. Compare Bochart
Hieroz. T. ii. p. 190, ed. Lips. Jackals are wild, fierce, savage; they
howl around dwellings at night - producing most hideous music, beginning
"in a sort of solo, a low, long-drawn wail, rising and swelling higher
and higher until it quite overtops the wind," (Thomson's "Land and the
Book," i. 133) - and ready to gather at any moment when there is prey to
be devoured. "These sinister, guilty, wo-begone brutes, when pressed
with hunger, gather in gangs among the graves, and yell in rage, and
fight like fiends over their midnight orgies; but on the battlefield is
their great carnival. Oh! let me never even dream that anyone dear to me
has fallen by the sword, and lies there to be torn, and gnawed at, and
dragged about by these hideous howlers."

[Psalms 63:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 63:11</span></span>

But the king shall rejoice in God - This passage, as was remarked in the
Introduction to the psalm, shows that this psalm could not have been
composed in the time of Saul, since the title king was not then given to
David. The use of the term here in the third person does not prove that
the psalm could not have been written by David himself, for he may have
spoken of himself simply as "the king," and all the more forcibly and
properly as he was driven unjustly from his throne, and was now an
exile, yet was still a king - the king. The title was his; the throne
belonged to him, and not to Absalom who had driven him from it. It was
not improper to allude to this fact in the manner in which it is
referred to here, and to say that "the king" - the true, the real king -
himself - should and would rejoice in God. He would find God to be his
helper; and by God he would yet be restored to his throne.

Every one that sweareth by him shall glory - Everyone that sweareth to
him, or maintains his oath of allegiance to him, shall be honored.

But the mouth of them that speak lies - All who have sworn falsely; all
who have professed allegiance and have proved unfaithful; all those who,
contrary to their oaths and their obligations, have been found in the
rebellion. They shall not be permitted to exult or rejoice, but they
shall be confounded and silenced. This expresses, therefore, the fullest
confidence in God; the absolute belief of David that he would be again
placed on his throne, and again permitted "to see the power and glory of
God as" he had "seen it in the sanctuary" [Psa
63:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#002); the belief that he would be
restored to prosperity, and that his enemies would be humbled and
destroyed - So it will be with all who put their trust in God. There is
certain joy and triumph for them, if not in this world, at least in the
world to come.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 64](psa064)

</div>
