<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa073)  [Next](psa075.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 74](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 74:0</span></span>

This psalm is entitled "Maschil of Asaph." On the word Maschil - meaning
"didactic," or adapted "to give instruction" - see the notes at the
title to [Psa 32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001.md). On the phrase
"of Asaph," see the notes at the title to Ps. 73. It may mean either
"for" Asaph, or ""of" Asaph; that is, it may either mean that it was
composed "by" him, or that it was composed "for" him, to be used by him
as the leader of music in public worship. The former is the most common,
and the most probable opinion. The title, however, "may" mean that the
psalm was dedicated or composed for one of the descendants of this
Musician, among whom the office of their ancestor Asaph was hereditary.
Thus understood, it might denote simply that the psalm belonged to that
class of psalms which were composed for the one who, at the time,
presided over the music.

If this is the meaning, there would be no impropriety in supposing that
this psalm was composed near the time of the captivity, and had
reference to the struction of the temple by the Chaldeans, to which the
language seems "naturally" to refer. Yet the occasion on which it was
composed is not certainly known, and cannot be ascertained from the
psalm. All that is manifest is, that it was at a time when the land was
invaded; when great ravages were committed; and when a work of
desolation was perpetrated on the edifices upon Mount Zion, and
particularly on the temple. The "language" could be applied either to
the destruction of the temple in the time of the Babylonian invasion; or
to the times of the Maccabees, and to the desolations brought upon the
land Antiochus Epiphanes; or to some desolation before the temple was
built. Rosenmuller, Venema, DeWette, some others, suppose that the
reference is to the time of the Maccabees. The reason alleged for this
opinion is founded on what is said in [Psa
74:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#004.md), [Psa
74:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009.md), particularly [Psa
74:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009.md), where it is asserted that "there
is no more any prophet;" that is, no one to instruct the people, or to
declare what the result or the issue will be.

It is alleged by them that at the time of the invasion by the Chaldeans
there were prophets in the land, and particularly that Jeremiah was then
living, who distinctly predicted what the result of it would be. But
this is not a conclusive objection to the idea that the reference is to
the destruction of the city and the temple by the Chaldees. The meaning
of [Psa 74:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009.md) may be that there was no
divine teacher who could "save" the people, or who could "prevent" those
desolations; the matter had gone so far that all divine interference and
protection appeared to be withdrawn, and the nation seemed to be
abandoned to its fate. Still there can now be no certainty as to the
time or the occasion when the psalm was composed; though the most
probable reference of the psalm is to the destruction of Jerusalem by
the Babylonians.

The psalm consists essentially of two parts: a prayer; and the reasons
why the prayer is urged, and should be answered.

I. The prayer, [Psa 74:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#001.md). It is a
prayer that God would remember Mount Zion, now made desolate, or in
ruins.

II\. The reasons why the prayer is urged, Ps. 74:4-23.

\(1\) the desolations which had come upon the city and upon the edifices
devoted to religion, [Psa 74:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#004.md).

\(2\) the fact that there was among the people, in those times of
calamity, no prophet - no messenger of God - no one to show them how
long this would continue, or to give them assurance that these
desolations would cease, [Psa 74:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009.md).

\(3\) a reference to what God had done for his people in former times
when he interposed to save them from their enemies, [Psa
74:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#012.md).

\(4\) the fact that God rules over the earth, and has control of all
things; that day and night, light and darkness, summer and winter, are
all under him, and are directed and controlled by him, [Psa
74:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#016.md).

\(5\) a prayer that God would not forget his own cause; that he would
remember that these reproaches were reproaches of his own name; that he
would call to mind his own solemn covenant; and that he would pity and
relieve the people that loved him, now poor and oppressed - the people
that desired to serve and praise him, [Psa
74:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#018.md).

[Psalms 74:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 74:1</span></span>

O God, why hast thou cast us off for ever? - Thou seemest to have cast
us off forever, or finally. Compare [Psa
44:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#009.md), note; [Psa
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md), note. "Why doth thine anger
smoke." See [Deu 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#020.md). The presence
of smoke indicates fire, and the language here is such as often occurs
in the Scriptures, when anger or wrath is compared with fire. See [Deu
32:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#022.md); [Jer
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#014.md).

Against the sheep of thy pasture - Thy people, represented as a flock.
See [Psa 79:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#013.md); [Psa
95:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#007.md). This increases the tenderness of
the appeal. The wrath of God seemed to be enkindled against his own
people, helpless and defenseless, who needed his care, and who might
naturally look for it - as a flock needs the care of a shepherd, and as
the care of the shepherd might be expected. He seemed to be angry with
his people, and to have cast them off, when they had every reason to
anticipate his protection.

[Psalms 74:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 74:2</span></span>

Remember thy congregation - The word rendered "congregation" means
properly an "assembly," a "community," and it is frequently applied to
the Israelites, or the Jewish people, considered as a body or a
community associated for the service of God. [Exo
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#003.md); [Exo
16:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001.md), [Exo
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#009.md); [Lev
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#015.md); [Num
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#017.md). The word used by the Septuagint
is συναγωγή sunagōgē - synagogue - but refers here to the whole Jewish
people, not to a particular synagogue or congregation.

Which thou hast purchased of old - In ancient times; in a former age.
That is, Thou hast "purchased" them to thyself, or as thine own, by
redeeming them from bondage, thus securing to thyself the right to them,
as one does who redeems or purchases a thing. See the notes at [Isa
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003.md).

The rod of thine inheritance - Margin, as in Hebrew, "tribe." The Hebrew
word - שׁבט shêbet - means properly "a staff," stick, rod; then, a
shepherd's staff, a crook; then, a scepter; and then it is used to
denote a "tribe," so called from the staff or scepter which the chief of
the tribe carried as the symbol of authority. [Exo
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#021.md); [Jdg
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#002.md). The word "inheritance" is
frequently applied to the children of Israel considered as belonging to
God, as property inherited belongs to him who owns it - perhaps
suggesting the idea that the right to them had come down, as inherited
property does, from age to age. It was a right over them acquired long
before, in the days of the patriarchs.

Which thou hast redeemed - By delivering them out of Egyptian bondage.
So the church is now redeemed, and, as such, it belongs to God.

This mount Zion - Jerusalem - the seat of government, and of public
worship - the capital of the nation.

Wherein thou last dwelt - By the visible symbol of thy presence and
power. - On all these considerations the psalmist prays that God would
not forget Jerusalem in the present time of desolation and trouble.

[Psalms 74:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 74:3</span></span>

Lift up thy feet - That is, Advance, or draw near. Come and look
directly and personally on the desolations which now exist in the holy
city.

Unto the perpetual desolations - Hebrew, "the ruins of perpetuity," or
eternity; that is, such as have been long continued, and threaten to
continue forever. The ruin had not suddenly come, and it did not seem
likely soon to pass away, but appeared to be entire and permanent. The
destruction of the city seemed to be complete and final.

Even all that the enemy hath done wickedly - That is, with wicked intent
and purpose. The reference seems to be to the Chaldeans, and to the ruin
which they had brought upon the temple and city.

In the sanctuary - That is, either Jerusalem, considered as a holy
place; or the temple, the place of the public worship of God.

[Psalms 74:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 74:4</span></span>

Thine enemies roar - This refers to the shout and tumult of war. They
raised up the war-cry even in the very place where the congregations had
been assembled; where God had been worshipped. The word rendered "roar"
properly has reference to wild beasts; and the meaning is, that their
war-cry resembled the howling of beasts of prey.

In the midst of thy congregations - literally, "in the midst of thine
assembly." This is a different word from that which is rendered
"congregation" in [Psa 74:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#002.md). This word
- מועד mô‛êd - means a meeting together by mutual appointment, and is
often applied to the meeting of God with his people at the tabernacle,
which was therefore called "the tent of the congregation," or, more
properly, "the tent of meeting," as the place where God met with his
people, [Exo 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#010.md), [Exo
29:44](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#044.md); [Exo
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#007.md); [Lev
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#008.md), [Lev
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#013.md); [Lev
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#007.md), [Lev
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#009.md); "et saepe." The meaning here is,
that they roared like wild beasts in the very place which God had
appointed as the place where he would meet with his people.

They set up their ensigns for signs - That is, they set up "their"
banners or standards, as "the" standards of the place; as that which
indicated sovereignty over the place. They proclaimed thus that it was a
conquered place, and they set up their own standards as denoting their
title to it, or as declaring that they ruled there. It was no longer a
place sacred to God; it was publicly seen to belong to a foreign power.

[Psalms 74:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 74:5</span></span>

A man was famous - literally, "He is known;" or, shall be known. That
is, he was or shall be celebrated.

According as he had lifted up axes - literally, "As one raising on high
axes;" that is, as one lifts up his axe high in the air in order to
strike an effectual stroke.

Upon the thick trees - The clumps of trees; the trees standing thick
together. That is, As he showed skill and ability in cutting these down,
and laying them low. His celebrity was founded on the rapidity with
which the strokes of the axe fell on the trees, and his success in
laying low the pride of the forest. According to our common translation
the meaning is, that "formerly" a man derived his fame from his skill
and success in wielding his axe so as to lay the forest low, but that
"now" his fame was to be derived from another source, namely, the skill
and power with which he cut down the elaborately-carved work of the
sanctuary, despoiled the columns of their ornaments, and demolished the
columns themselves. But another interpretation may be given to this, as
has been suggested by Prof. Alexander. It is, that "the ruthless enemy
is known or recognized as dealing with the sanctuary no more tenderly
than a woodman with the forest which he fells." The former, however, is
the more natural, as well as the more common interpretation. Luther
renders it, "One sees the axe glitter on high, as one cuts wood in the
forest." The Vulgate, and the Septuagint, "The signs pointing to the
entrance above that they did not know." What idea was attached to this
rendering, it is impossible to determine.

[Psalms 74:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 74:6</span></span>

But now they break down the carved work thereof ... - literally, "But
now the carvings of it together, at once, with sledge and hammers they
beat down." The carved work refers evidently to the ornaments of the
temple. The word used here - פתוח pittûach - is rendered engraving,
carved work, or carving; [Exo 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#011.md),
[Exo 28:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#021.md), [Exo
28:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#036.md); [Exo
39:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#006.md), [Exo
39:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#014.md), [Exo
39:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#030.md); [Zac
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#009.md); [Ch2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#014.md). It is the very word which in
[Kg1 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#029.md) is applied to the ornaments
around the walls of the temple - the "carved figures of cherubim, and
palm trees, and open flowers," and there can be no doubt that the
allusion here is to those ornaments. These were rudely cut down, or
knocked off, with axes and hammers, as a man lays low the trees of the
wood. The phrase "at once" means that they drove forward the work with
all despatch. They spared none of them. They treated them all alike as
an axeman does the trees of a forest when his object is to clear the
land.

[Psalms 74:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 74:7</span></span>

They have cast fire into thy sanctuary - Into the temple to destroy it.
Literally, "They have cast thy sanctuary into the fire." The meaning is,
that they had burned it down. This was actually done by the Chaldeans,
[Kg2 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#009.md); [Ch2
36:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#019.md).

They have defiled by casting down the dwelling-place of thy name to the
ground - The place where thy name dwelt or was recorded [Exo
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024.md); that is, the place where God's
name was known, or where he was worshipped. The literal meaning is, "To
the earth they have defiled the dwelling of thy name?" The idea is, that
they had defiled or polluted the temple by throwing it to the ground; by
making it a heap of ruins; by making it undistinguishable from common
earth.

[Psalms 74:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 74:8</span></span>

They said in their hearts - They purposed; they designed it.

Let us destroy them together - Let us destroy all these buildings,
temples, towers, and walls at the same time; let us make an entire
destruction of them all.

They have burned up all the synagogues of God in the land - The phrase
"they have burned up" must refer to the places or edifices where
assemblies for public worship were held, since it cannot be supposed
that the idea is that they had burned up the assemblies of worshippers
themselves. The word rendered "synagogues" is the same in the Hebrew
that is used in [Psa 74:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#004.md), and is
there rendered "congregations." It means "assemblies," persons collected
together for public worship. See the notes at that verse. It is not used
in the Bible to denote "places" for the meetings of such assemblies, nor
is it elsewhere rendered "synagogues." It is translated by the word
"seasons," [Gen 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014.md); [Exo
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#010.md), "et al.; set time," [Gen
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#021.md); [Exo
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#005.md), "et al.; time appointed," [Exo
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#015.md); [Sa2
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#015.md), "et al.; congregation," [Lev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001.md), [Lev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003.md),[Lev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#005.md); [Lev
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#002.md), [Lev
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#008.md),[Lev
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#013.md), "and very often; feasts," [Lev
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#002.md), [Lev
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#004.md),[Lev
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#037.md), "et al.; - solemnity," [Deu
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#010.md); [Isa
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#020.md); - and so also, set feasts,
solemn feasts, appointed feasts, etc.

But in no instance does it necessarily refer to an edifice, unless it is
in the place before us. There is no reason, however, for doubting that,
from the necessity of the case, in the course of events, there would be
other places for assembling for the worship of God than the temple, and
that in different cities, villages, towns, and neighborhoods, persons
would be collected together for some form of social religious service.
Buildings or tents would be necessary for the accommodation of such
assemblages; and this, in time, might be developed into a system, until
in this way the whole arrangement for "synagogues" might have grown up
in the land. The exact origin of synagogues is not indeed known. Jahn
('Biblical Archaeology,' Section 344) supposes that they sprang up
during the Babylonian captivity, and that they had their origin in the
fact that the people, when deprived of their customary religious
privileges, would collect around some prophet, or other pious man, who
would teach them and their children the duties of religion, exhort them
to good conduct, and read to them out of the sacred books.

Compare [Eze 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#001.md); [Eze
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#001.md); [Dan
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#011.md); [Neh
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#018.md). There seems, however, no good
reason for doubting that synagogues may have existed before the time of
the captivity, and may have sprung up in the manner suggested above from
the necessities of the people, probably at first without any fixed rule
or law on the subject, but as convenience suggested, and that they may
at last, by custom and law, have grown into the regular form which they
assumed as a part of the national worship. Compare Kitto's Encyc. Art.
'synagogue.' I see no improbability, therefore, in supposing that the
word here may refer to such edifices at the time when this psalm was
composed. These, if they existed, would naturally be destroyed by the
Chaldeans, as well as the temple itself.

[Psalms 74:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 74:9</span></span>

We see not our signs - The emblems of worship, or the national emblems
or banners, which we have been accustomed to see. There are no signals
or tokens of our nationality in the land. All have been removed by the
invaders, and we see everywhere evidences of the presence of a foreign
power. The marks of our own independency are gone. The nation is subdued
and conquered.

There is no more any prophet - No one is raised up as the special
messenger of God to assure us of his favor, or to take the lead in the
national troubles. In times of danger God had been accustomed to send to
them some special teacher who would declare his will, direct the nation
what to do, and give encouraging assurances that the national troubles
would cease, and that deliverance would come. They saw no such
messengers of God now. This is not inconsistent with the supposition
that this psalm was written before the captivity, and in the time of the
Chaldean invasion, or with the supposition that Jeremiah was then alive,
for the meaning may be, not that literally there was no prophet in the
land, but that there was no one who had come from God as a special
messenger of comfort and deliverance. Ruin had come upon them, and there
were no indications of divine interposition in their behalf.

Neither is there among us any that knoweth how long - How long these
calamities are to continue. No one can tell when they are to end. The
prophetic office seemed to have ceased among them. It was renewed,
however, after the captivity, in the case of Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah,
Haggai, and Malachi.

[Psalms 74:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 74:10</span></span>

O God, how long shall the adversary reproach?... - How long shall this
state of things be allowed to continue? Is there to be no end to it? Are
these desolations never to be repaired - these ruins never to be
rebuilt? It "seemed" so; and hence, this earnest appeal. So to us it
often appears as if our trials were never to come to an end. One
calamity succeeds another; and there comes no relief. Yet there is
relief. Deliverance may come, and soon come, in the present life; or if
not in the present life, yet to all those who are the children of God it
will soon come by their removal to a world where trial will be forever
unknown.

[Psalms 74:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 74:11</span></span>

Why withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right hand? - Why dost thou not
stretch forth thy hand for our deliverance? The hand, especially the
right hand, is the instrument by which we wield a sword, or strike a
blow; and the expression here is equivalent to asking why God did not
interfere and save them.

Pluck it out of thy bosom - As if God had hidden his hand beneath the
folds of his garment, or had wrapped his robe tightly around him. It
"seemed" as if he had done this, as if he looked calmly on, and saw the
temple fired, the synagogues burned up, the land laid waste, and the
people slaughtered, without an attempt to interpose. How often are we
constrained to use similar language - to ask a similar question - when
iniquity abounds, when crime prevails, when sinners are perishing, when
the church mourns - for God seems to have withdrawn his hand, and to be
looking on with unconcern! No one can tell why this is so; and, without
irreverence, or a spirit of complaining, but deeply affected with the
mystery of the fact, we may ask "Why" this is so.

[Psalms 74:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 74:12</span></span>

For God is my King of old - That is, the king, or ruler of his people.
The people had acknowledged him as their king and ruler, and he had
showed himself to be such. This is given as a reason why he should now
interpose in their behalf. It is an argument, proper always to be urged,
drawn from the faithfulness and unchangeableness of God.

Working salvation in the midst of the earth - Salvation for his people.
The reference here particularly is to what he had done for his people in
delivering them from bondage in Egypt, and conducting them to the
promised land, as is stated in the following verses.

[Psalms 74:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 74:13</span></span>

Thou didst divide the sea by thy strength - Margin, as in Hebrew,
"break." That is, he had by his power "broken up" the strength of the
sea so that it offered no resistance to their passing through it. The
allusion is evidently to the passage through the Red Sea, [Exo
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021.md).

Thou brakest the heads of the dragons - Margin, "whales." On the meaning
of the word used here - תנין tannı̂yn - see the notes at [Isa
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#022.md); notes at [Job
30:29](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#029.md). It refers here, undoubtedly, to
crocodiles or sea monsters. The language here is used to denote the
absolute power of God as manifested over the sea when the people of
Israel passed through it. It was as if by slaying all the mighty
monsters of the deep that would have resisted their passage, he had made
their transit entirely safe.

In the waters - That reside in the waters of the sea.

[Psalms 74:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 74:14</span></span>

Thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces - On the meaning of the
word "leviathan," see the notes at [Job
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#001.md). The word is used here as
descriptive of sea monsters.

And gavest him to be meat - Gavest him for "food."

To the people inhabiting the wilderness - That is, the sea monsters were
killed, and, being thrown on shore, were gathered for food. The
"inhabitants of the wilderness" or the desert, may refer either to the
wild and savage tribes of men that lived on the shores of the sea, and
that subsisted mainly on fish, or it may refer to the wild animals of
the desert that consumed such sea monsters as they were cast up on the
shore. There is no allusion to the Israelites considered as passing
through the desert, as if they had fed on these sea monsters. The
essential idea is, that these monsters were put to death, or were so
removed but of the way as to offer no obstruction to the passage of the
Israelites through the sea. It was as if they had been killed. The image
is entirely poetic, and there is no necessity for supposing that such a
thing literally occurred.

[Psalms 74:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 74:15</span></span>

Thou didst cleave the fountain and the flood - That is, the source of
the streams and the streams themselves. The main allusion is probably to
the Jordan, and the idea is, that God had, as it were, divided all the
waters, or prevented any obstruction to his people from the river in any
respect; as if the waters in the very springs and fountains, and the
waters in the channel of the river flowing from those springs and
fountains, had been so restrained and divided that there was a safe
passage through them. [Jos 3:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#014.md).

Thou driedst up mighty rivers - Margin, "rivers of strength." The Hebrew
- איתן 'êythân - (compare [Deu 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#004.md);
[Amo 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#024.md); [Kg1
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#002).md) - means rather perennial,
constant, ever-flowing. The allusion is to rivers or streams that flow
constantly, or that do not dry up. It was this which made the miracle so
apparent. It could not be pretended that they had gone over the bed of a
stream which was accustomed to be dry at certain seasons of the year.
They passed over rivers that never dried up; and, therefore, it could
have been only by miracle. The main allusion is undoubtedly to the
passage of the Jordan.

[Psalms 74:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 74:16</span></span>

The day is thine, the night also is thine - Thou hast universal
dominion. All things are under thy control. Thou hast power, therefore,
to grant what we desire of thee.

Thou hast prepared the light and the sun - He who has made the sun -
that greatest and noblest object of creation to the view of man - must
have almighty power, and must be able to give what we need.

[Psalms 74:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 74:17</span></span>

Thou hast set all the borders of the earth - Thou hast established all
the boundaries of the world; that is, the boundaries of the earth
itself; or the natural bonndaries of nations and people, made by seas,
mountains, rivers, and deserts. The language in regard to the first of
these - the earth itself - would be derived from the prevalent mode of
speaking, as if the earth were a plane, and had limits - a common mode
of expression in the Scriptures, as it is in all ancient writings, and
in the common language of men, even of philosophers. In regard to the
latter idea, the language would imply that God had fixed, by his own
power and will, all the natural boundaries of nations, or that his
dominion is over all the earth. There are natural boundaries, or
arrangements in nature, which tend to break up the one great family of
man into separate nations, and which seem to have been designed for
that. Compare [Act 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026.md). Over all
these God presides, and he has his own great plans to accomplish by the
arrangement.

Thou hast made summer and winter - literally, as in the margin, "Summer
and winter, thou hast made them." That is, he has so made the earth that
these various seasons will occur. The fact that there are different
seasons of the year, or that the year is divided into seasons, is to be
traced to the agency of God. He has so made the world that these changes
will take place. Nothing is the result of chance; all things in the
arrangements of nature are by his design.

[Psalms 74:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 74:18</span></span>

Remember this, that the enemy hath reproached - Has used opprobrious and
abusive words in regard to thee, and to thy people. The idea is, that
religion - the true religion - had been reproached by the foe. They had
treated that religion as if it were false; they had reproached God as if
he were a false God, and as if he were unable to defend his people.
Compare [Isa 36:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#004.md), [Isa
36:13-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#013.md); [Isa
37:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#010.md), [Isa
37:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#023.md). The prayer here is, that God
would remember that these words of reproach were against himself, and
that he would regard them as such.

And that the foolish people have blasphemed thy name - Have blasphemed
thee - the name often being put for the person himself. The word
"foolish" here may refer to them as "wicked" as well as foolish.
Wickedness and folly are so connected - they are so commonly combined,
that the word may be used to describe the enemies of God in either sense
- characterising their conduct as either the one or the other. Compare
the notes at [Psa 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001.md).

[Psalms 74:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 74:19</span></span>

O deliver not the soul of thy turtle-dove - The "life" of thy
turtle-dove; or, thy turtle-dove itself. The turtle-dove is a name of
endearment for one beloved, in [Sol
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#012.md), and is thus applied here to the
people of Israel. The leading idea in such an application of the word is
that of innocence, harmlessness, timidity, gentleness. The thought here
is that of a people dear to God, now timid and alarmed. It is the prayer
of a people beloved by God that he would not deliver them to their
enemies. The prayer may be regarded as one which was used on the
occasion referred to in the psalm; or, as a general prayer for the
people of God, considered as exposed to ravening enemies.

Unto the multitude of the wicked - The words "of the wicked" are not in
the original. The word rendered "multitude" - חיה chayâh - (compare the
notes at [Psa 68:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#010).md) - is the same
which in the other member of the sentence is rendered "congregation." It
may be applied to a herd of cattle, tame or wild; and then to a "people"
- a band, a troop, a host - whether of orderly and civilized, or of wild
and savage people. It seems to be used in this double sense in the verse
before us; in the first member of the verse, "deliver not thy
turtle-dove "to the multitude" - to the wild beast, or to the savage
hosts; in the latter, "forget not the congregation of thy poor" - thy
flock - thy people - considered as timid or alarmed. Save the timid and
trembling flock from beasts of prey.

[Psalms 74:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 74:20</span></span>

Have respect unto the covenant - The covenant which thou hast made with
thy people, promising, on thy part, to protect them, and to be their
God. Compare [Deu 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#013.md); [Deu
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#002.md); [Deu
26:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#018.md). The prayer here is, that God
would remember, in the day of national calamity, the solemn promise
implied in that covenant, and that he would interpose to save his
people. Compare [Gen 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#015.md); [Lev
26:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#042.md); [Eze
16:60](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#060.md); [Luk
1:72](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#072.md). This may be regarded as the
language which the people did use when these calamities were about to
come upon them.

For the dark places of the earth - The allusion here is to the lands
from whence came the armies that had invaded Judea, and that threatened
desolation. They were dark regions of paganism and idolatry.

Are full of the habitations of cruelty - The abodes of violence, or of
violent and cruel men. They had sent forth their armies from such places
for purposes of conquest and rapine, and no compassion could be expected
from them. Their numbers were so great, and their character was so
fierce and warlike, that the people of Israel could find defense and
security only in God; and they, therefore, plead with him that he would
interpose in their behalf. The prayer in this passage may with propriety
be used by the people of God now. It is still true that "the dark parts
of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty;" and in view of
this fact, and of the utter hopelessness of the renovation of the world
by any human means, or by any progress which society can make of itself,
it is proper to seek God's interposition. And it is proper in such
prayers to him now, as in ancient times, to make the ground of our
appeal to him his own gracious covenant; his promises made to his
church; his solemn assurances that this state of things shall not always
continue, but that the time will arrive when the earth shall be filled
with the knowledge of the Lord.

[Psalms 74:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 74:21</span></span>

O let not the oppressed return ashamed - Ashamed by being disappointed,
as if they had trusted in that which had no claims to confidence.
Compare the notes at [Job 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#020.md). The
word rendered "oppressed," means "trodden down, crushed, broken,
afflicted." It refers to the people as attacked by foreign armies, or as
crushed by those who had gained power over them. The word "return"
refers to their coining back from God - from the throne of mercy. Let
them not come back from thee with no assurance of thy favor; with no
evidence that their prayers have been heard; let them not come back,
subject to the reproach that they had made their appeal to thee in vain.

Let the poor and needy praise thy name - The people who are oppressed
and helpless. Let them have occasion to praise thee because their prayer
has been heard, and because thou dost save them.

[Psalms 74:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 74:22</span></span>

Arise, O God - As if God were now insensible to the wrongs and
sufferings of his people; as if he were inattentive and indisposed to
come to their help. See the notes at [Psa
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#007.md).

Plead thine own cause - literally, "Contend thine own contention." That
is, Maintain a cause which is really thine own. Thine own honor is
concerned; thine own law and authority are assailed; the war is really
made on "thee." This is always the true idea in the prayers which are
offered for the conversion of sinners, for the establishment of truth,
and for the spread of the Gospel in the world. It is not originally the
cause of the church; it is the cause of God. Everything in regard to
truth, to justice, to humanity, to temperance, to liberty, to religion,
is the cause of God. All the assaults made on these, are assaults made
on God.

Remember how the foolish man reproacheth thee daily - Constantly. He
does not cease. The word "foolish" refers to the wicked. The idea is,
that the wicked constantly reproach God - either by their language or
their conduct; and this is a reason for calling on him to interpose. No
better reason for asking his interposition can be given, than that such
conduct is a real reproach to God, and reflects on his honor in the
world.

[Psalms 74:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 74:23</span></span>

Forget not the voice of thine enemies - The voice of thine enemies
clamoring for the destruction of thy people. Compare [Psa
137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007.md). The prayer is, that God would
bring deserved chastisement upon them for their purposes and their aims
against his people. It is not necessarily a prayer for vengeance; it is
a prayer for just retribution.

The tumult of those that rise up against thee - Of those that make war
on thee, and on thy people. The word ""tumult" here means clamor or
shout - as the shout of battle. The reference is to the movement of a
host pressing on to conquest, encouraging and exciting each other, and
endeavoring to intimidate their enemies by the loud clamor of the
war-cry. It is a description of what had occurred among the main events
referred to in the psalm, when the enemy came in to lay waste the
capital, and to spread desolation throughout the land.

Increaseth continually - Margin, as in Hebrew, "Ascendeth." That is, it
seems to go up; it is the swelling clamor of a great multitude of
warriors intent on conquest. A cry or clamor thus seems to swell or rise
on the air, and (as it were) to ascend to God. The prayer here is, that
God would regard that cry, not in the sense that he would grant them the
fulfillment of their wishes, but in the sense that he would recompense
them as they deserved. It is in this sense that the clamors of the
wicked ascend to heaven - in this sense that God will regard them, as if
they were a prayer for just retribution.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 75](psa075.md)

</div>
