<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa091)  [Next](psa093) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 92](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 92:0</span></span>

The author of this psalm is not indicated in the title, and it is
impossible now to ascertain who he was. Nor can the occasion be
determined "when" it was composed. It is of so general a character that
it might have been written at any period of the Jewish history; and, so
far as the style and the contents are concerned, it may have been
written by either of those whose names are attached to the other psalms.
That it may have been composed by David, is certainly possible, but of
that there is no evidence.

In the title it is called "A Psalm or Song for the sabbath-day;" that
is, to be used on the sabbath. The Chaldee Paraphrase has in the title,
"Praise and a song which the first man spoke for the sabbath-day." This
may indicate that there was an carly tradition on this subject; but we
have no proof of what would be so interesting a fact, that we have a
genuine poetic composition of Adam. The contents are all such as might
be properly used on the sabbath, though there is nothing in the psalm
that has any "special" reference to the sabbath, or that is derived from
the appointment of such a day. It is not improbable, however, that
special psalms and hymns were composed with a view to be used on festal
occasions; and this, as a psalm of praise, is well adapted still to the
services of the sabbath.

The psalmist refers:

I. To the blessedness of praise, or to the propriety of celebrating the
praise of God, [Psa 92:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#001).

II\. He refers to the works of God as laying the foundation of praise,
[Psa 92:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#005).

III\. He refers to the justice of God, or the fact that the wicked,
however they may seem to be prospered, will be cut off, [Psa
92:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#007).

IV\. He refers to the prosperity and the security of the righteous; to
the influence of religion and the favor of God on life, as making it
prosperous and happy, and as preparing people to be useful and cheerful
in old age, [Psa 92:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#010).

[Psalms 92:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 92:1</span></span>

It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord - literally, "Good is it
to give thanks unto Jehovah." That is, the act is appropriate; the
effect is good.

\(1\) The thing itself is appropriate, for there is much, under all
circumstances, to be thankful for: life, health, food, raiment, air,
water, friends, recollections, hopes - and, above all, the blessings of
redemption, and the assurance that we may be happy forever. Many of
these things may be found in the condition of all; but if all else fail,
the hope of heaven - the assurance that the Redeemer died - the offer of
salvation - cannot fail. That is ours, and cannot be taken away.

\(2\) The effect is good. It is a desirable state of mind. It tends to
happiness, contentment, peace. A gloomy mind makes all things around
more gloomy; an unthankful mind is an unhappy mind; a murmuring,
complaining, dissatisfied mind makes its possessor wretched, and all
around him miserable.

\(3\) it is good as it is due to God. For all his favor we should be
thankful - and all that we enjoy is his gift.

\(4\) it tends much to lessen the real troubles and afflictions of life
to dwell on those things for which we should be thankful.

And to sing praises unto thy name - Unto thee. As this psalm was
designed for the "Sabbath day," this proves that one of the appropriate
services of the Sabbath is "praise." It is a day when it is fit to
recall the mercies of God to our recollection; and the remembrance of
those mercies, and their celebration by appropriate songs, tend to
diffuse joy over all the coming days of the week.

O Most High - God exalted over all. The fact that "he" is exalted over
all - over us - over our friends - over all worlds - is an appropriate
thought when we come before him to praise him; appropriate at all times,
and in all circumstances of life.

[Psalms 92:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 92:2</span></span>

To show forth thy loving-kindness - To celebrate thy mercy; thy
goodness; thy love.

In the morning - That is, there is a fitness in doing this in the
morning; or, there are special reasons why we should do this at that
time.

\(a\) We have been preserved through the dangers of the night; dangers
when we were asleep, unconscious, and defenseless.

\(b\) Life is then, as it were, a new gift - for we are raised from "the
image of death" - sleep - and we should regard life then "as if" we had
been raised from the dead.

\(c\) To praise God in the morning will have a good influence on us, in
promoting cheerfulness; in making us benignant and kind; in preparing us
for the toils and trials of the day.

There is no better preparation for a day, in view of its burdens, cares,
toils, and trials, than a thankful, cheerful mind in the morning. He who
begins a day with a sour, a morose, a complaining, an irritable spirit -
who has been preserved through the night, and sees nothing to be
thankful for in the morning - will be a miserable man through the day,
and will make all miserable around him. He who sees nothing to be
thankful for in the morning will see nothing to hope for in the day; he
who has no gratitude for the past, will have no bright anticipations of
the future.

And thy faithfulness - Faithfulness in the laws of nature; in thy
promises; in thy character: in thy providential dealings with people.

Every night - Margin, in the nights." The reference is to the return of
evening; and the meaning is, that it is a good thing, or that it is
appropriate to contemplate the faithfulness of God at the close of every
day.

\(a\) The mind is then calm, after the toils of the day are over.

\(b\) The time - evening - its stillness - its twilight - its
approaching darkness - all is favorable for reflection.

\(c\) There is much in every day to be thankful for, and it is well to
recall it at night.

\(d\) It has a happy effect on the mind when we are about to lie down to
rest, to recall the mercies of God; to reflect on what he has done for
us; to gather, from his kindness in the past, lessons of confidence and
hope for the times to come.

We lie down at night more calmly in proportion as we are disposed at the
close of a day to think of the mercies which we have received at the
hand of God; and the recalling of those mercies to remembrance with the
voice, and with instruments of praise, is always an appropriate mode of
closing a day.

[Psalms 92:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 92:3</span></span>

Upon an instrument of ten strings - The general idea in this verse is,
that instruments "of all kinds" are to be employed in celebrating the
praises of God. On the instrument here referred to, see the notes at
[Psa 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#002).

And upon the psaltery - Or "lyre." See the notes at [Isa
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012). The word is there translated
viol.

Upon the harp with a solemn sound - Margin, upon the solemn sound with
the harp." Prof. Alexander renders this, "On meditation with a harp." On
the word rendered "harp," see the notes at [Isa
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012). The Hebrew word rendered "solemn
sound" is הגיון higgâyôn which means properly "murmur;" then, the sound
of a harp; and then, meditation. See the notes at [Psa
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#016). Here the meaning seems to be,
"with murmurs upon the harp;" that is, with the sound of the harp - its
murmuring tones. It does not denote here a distinct instrument of music,
but it refers to the tones of the harp: not to the meditations of the
mind - of the worshipper - but to the low and gentle sounds of the
instrument itself.

[Psalms 92:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 92:4</span></span>

For thou, Lord, hast made me glad - Thou hast made me happy; thou hast
given me such a state of feeling as finds an appropriate expression in
"praise."

Through thy work - Either the work of creation, the finishing of which
the Sabbath was designed particularly to commemorate; or the works of
God in general - the universe; or the general dealings of his
providence; or some particular interpositions of Providence in his
behalf that called for special praise. All these are appropriately
combined in the celebrations - the praises - of the Sabbath; to these
should be added, as among the most marvelous of his works, and that
which furnishes special occasion for praise on the Christian Sabbath,
the wonderful work of redemption - that which of all the "works" of God
makes a heart rightly affected most "glad."

I will triumph - I will exult or rejoice.

In the works of thy hands - In all thy works; in all that thou hast
done.

[Psalms 92:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 92:5</span></span>

O Lord, how great are thy works! - Compare [Psa
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003); [Psa
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#005). See also the notes at [Job
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#007). The meaning here is this: The
psalmist, on the Sabbath, in giving himself to meditation on the works
of God, is overwhelmed with a sense of their vastness, their
incomprehensible nature, and the depth of wisdom evinced, far beyond the
grasp of man, in what God had done. How soon is man lost; how soon does
he get beyond his depth; how soon does he feel that here is greatness
which he cannot comprehend, and wisdom which he cannot fathom, and
goodness which he cannot appreciate, when he sits down to meditate on
the works of God!

And thy thoughts are very deep - Compare [Isa
28:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#029); [Rom
11:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033). The meaning is, that the
plans or the purposes of God, as evinced in the works of creation and
providence, are too profound for man to understand them. Who but God
himself can comprehend them?

[Psalms 92:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 92:6</span></span>

A brutish man knoweth not - A man who is stupid, and who is like the
beasts or brutes; that is, a man whose tastes and propensities are like
the brutes, or who does not seem to act as if endowed with a rational
nature. The idea evidently is, that there are many such people, and that
it is not to be wondered at that they have no exalted idea of the
greatness of God. As a matter of fact there are many in human form -
many made in the image of God - who seem to have no more notion of God,
and who see no more wisdom and goodness in his works, than the horse or
the ox. Compare [Isa 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003).

Neither doth a fool understand this - A fool, in the sense that he has
been made foolish and stupid by sin; that he does not worship and honor
God. He has no right understanding in regard to the Maker and the
Governor of the universe.

[Psalms 92:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 92:7</span></span>

When the wicked spring as the grass - When they grow up as plants do;
when they seem to flourish and prosper. Compare [Psa
90:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#005); [Psa
37:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#002), [Psa
37:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#035), [Psa
37:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#038). The word "grass" here refers to
the vegetable creation generally, embracing plants and flowers of all
kinds.

And when all the workers of iniquity do flourish - As plants and flowers
do. They are like vigorous plants; not like the stunted and dry shrubs
of the desert.

It is that they shall be destroyed for ever - The meaning here is, not
that the design of their being thus made to flourish is that they should
be destroyed, or that they are made to flourish for that purpose, but
that such "will be" the result. They will not be made happy in another
world by their prosperous and prospered wickedness here, as if God
approved of their course; but the end will be that they will be
destroyed forever. The design of the psalmist seems to be to turn the
mind from the idea that mere external prosperity is necessarily
connected with happiness; or that one who is prospered in this life is
on that account safe. There is another world, and "there" ample justice
will be done to all. See [Psa
73:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#016).

[Psalms 92:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 92:8</span></span>

But thou, Lord, art most high for evermore - In the treatment of the
righteous and the wicked, thou wilt maintain thine own exalted place as
a sovereign. Whatever may occur to people, God will maintain this
exalted position as supreme over all.

[Psalms 92:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 92:9</span></span>

For, lo, thine enemies, O Lord, for, lo, thine enemies shall perish -
The repetition of the word "lo" here - "behold!" - is emphatic. The
attention of the psalmist was fixed on this as an event which would be
sure to occur. It was certain that God would be exalted; it followed
from this, that all his enemies would be subdued in order that he might
be thus exalted.

All the workers of iniquity shall be scattered - More literally, "shall
scatter or disperse themselves;" implying eagerness and activity, as if
they were in haste to flee away. The allusion is to an army that is
discomfited, disorganized, "demoralized," and scattered; or to chaff
that is dispersed by the wind. See [Job
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#018); [Isa
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#013); [Isa
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#005); [Hos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#003).

[Psalms 92:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 92:10</span></span>

But my horn shalt thou exalt - The horn is a symbol of strength or power
(see the notes at [Psa 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002)); and the
meaning here is, that, while the wicked would be cut off, he would be
prospered; that is, he had such confidence that he was the friend of
God, that he believed God would honor him and exalt him. The psalmist
here speaks of himself not so much with reference to his own particular
case, but as the representative of the righteous. The idea is, that God
will thus exalt "a righteous man."

Like the horn of an unicorn - Supposed to be remarkable for the strength
of its horn. On the animal here referred to, see the notes at [Job
39:9](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#009); compare [Psa
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#021).

I shall be anointed with fresh oil - Oil pure and sweet; not old and
rancid. That is, he would be made happy, cheerful, bright, and
prosperous. Anointing with oil in the East was the symbol of all this,
or was equivalent to what we mean by putting on festive apparel -
holiday apparel. Compare the notes at [Psa
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005).

[Psalms 92:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 92:11</span></span>

Mine eye also shall see my desire - That is, I shall be permitted to see
the destruction of my foes; I shall be gratified with seeing them
overthrown. On the sentiment here expressed, see [Psa
54:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#007), note; [Psa
59:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#010), note.

On mine enemies - The word used here - שׁור shûr - occurs nowhere else.
It means, properly, a lier-in-wait; one who "watches;" one who is in
ambush; and refers to persons who "watched" his conduct; who "watched"
for his ruin.

And mine ears ... - literally, "Of those rising up against me,
evil-doers, my ear shall hear." He would hear of their ruin; he would
hear what he desired to hear.

[Psalms 92:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 92:12</span></span>

The righteous shall flourish like the palm-tree - That is, the beauty,
the erectness, the stateliness, the growth of the palm-tree - all this
is an emblem of the condition, the prosperity, the happiness of a
righteous man. The wicked shall be cut down; but the righteous shall
flourish. This image - the comparison of a righteous man to a
flourishing, majestic, green, and beautiful tree - is not uncommon in
the Scriptures. See the notes at [Psa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003); compare [Jer
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#008). On the "palm-tree," see the
notes at [Mat 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#008). "The stem," says
Dr. Thomson ("land and the Book," vol. i. p. 65)" tall, slender, and
erect as Rectitude herself, suggests to the Arab poets many a symbol for
their lady-love; and Solomon, long before them, has sung, 'How fair and
how pleasant art thou, O love! for delights; this thy stature is like
the palm-tree." [Sol 7:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#006). The
following remarks of Dr. Thomson ("land and the Book," vol. i. pp. 65,
66) will illustrate the passage before us; - "The palm grows slowly, but
steadily, from century to century, uninfluenced by those alternations of
the seasons which affect other trees. It does not rejoice overmuch in
winter's copious rain, nor does it droop under the drought and the
burning sun of summer. Neither heavy weights which people place upon its
head, nor the importunate urgency of the wind, can sway it aside from
perfect uprightness. There it stands, looking calmly down upon the world
below, and patiently yielding its large clusters of golden fruit from
generation to generation. They 'bring forth fruit in old age.' The
allusion to being planted in the house of the Lord is probably drawn
from the custom of planting beautiful and long-lived trees in the courts
of temples and palaces, and in all 'high places' used for worship.

This is still common; nearly every palace, and mosque, and convent in
the country has such trees in the courts, and, being well protected
there, they flourish exceedingly. Solomon covered all the walls of the
'holy of holies' round about with palm-trees. They were thus planted, as
it were, within the very house of the Lord; and their presence there was
not only ornamental, but appropriate and highly suggestive; the very
best emblem, not only of patience in well-doing, but of the rewards of
the righteous - a fat and flourishing old age - a peaceful end - a
glorious immortality." The following cut will furnish an apt
representation of the appearance of the tree, and a proper illustration
of the beauty of the passage before us.

He shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon - On the cedars of Lebanon, see
the notes at [Isa 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#013). The following
remarks by Dr. Thomson ("land and the Book," vol. i. pp. 292, 295), with
the accompanying cut, will show the propriety of the image here. "The
platform where the cedars stand is more than six thousand feet above the
Mediterranean, and around it are gathered the very tallest and grayest
heads of Lebanon. The forest is not large - not more than five hundred
trees, great and small, grouped irregularly on the sides of shallow
ravines, which mark the birthplace of the Khadisha, or Holy River.

"But, though the space covered by them does not exceed half a dozen
acres, yet, when fairly within the grove, and beneath the giant arms of
those old patriarchs of a hundred generations, there comes a solemn hush
upon the soul as if by enchantment. Precisely the same sort of magic
spell settles on the spirits, no matter how often you repeat your
visits. But it is most impressive in the night. Let us by all means
arrange to sleep there. The universal silence is almost painful. The
gray old towers of Lebanon, still as a stone, stand all around, holding
up the stars of heaven to look at you, and the trees gather like
phantoms about you, and wink knowingly, or seem to, and whisper among
themselves you know not what. You become suspicious, nervous, until,
broad awake, you find that it is nothing but the flickering of your
drowsy fire, and the feeble flutter of bats among the boughs of the
trees. A night among the cedars is never forgotten; the impressions,
electrotyped, are hid away in the inner chamber of the soul, among her
choicest treasures, to be visited a thousand times with never-failing
delight.

"There is a singular discrepancy in the statements of travelers with
regard to the number of trees. Some mention seven, others thirteen -
intending, doubtless, only those whose age and size rendered them
Biblical, or at least historical. It is not easy, however, to draw any
such line of demarcation. There is a complete gradation from small and
comparatively young to the very oldest patriarchs of the forest. I
counted four hundred and forty-three, great and small, and this cannot
be far from the true number. This, however, is not uniform. Some are
struck down by lightning, broken by enormous loads of snow, or torn to
fragments by tempests. Even the sacrilegious axe is sometimes lifted
against them. But, on the other hand, young trees are constantly
springing up from the roots of old ones, and from seeds of ripe cones. I
have seen these infant cedars in thousands just springing from the soil;
but as the grove is wholly unprotected, and greatly frequented both by
human beings and animals, they are quickly destroyed. The fact, however,
proves that the number might be increased "ad libitum." Beyond a doubt,
the whole of these upper terraces of Lebanon might again be covered with
groves of this noble tree, and furnish timber enough not only for
Solomon's Temple and the house of the forest of Lebanon, but for all the
houses along this coast. But, unless a wiser and more provident
government controls the country, such a result can never be realized,
and, indeed, the whole forest will slowly die out under the dominion of
the Arab and Turk. Even in that case the tree will not be lost. It has
been propagated by the nut or seed in many parks in Europe, and there
are more of them within fifty miles of London than on all Lebanon.

"We have seen larger trees every way, and much taller, on the banks of
the Ohio, and the loftiest cedar might take shelter under the lowest
branches of California's vegetable glories. Still, they are respectable
trees. The girth of the largest is more than forty-one feet; the height
of the highest may be one hundred. These largest, however, part into two
or three only a few feet from the ground. Their age is very uncertain,
nor are they more ready to reveal it than others who have an uneasy
consciousness of length of days. Very different estimates have been
made. Some of our missionary band, who have experience in such matters,
and confidence in the results, have counted the "growths" (as we Western
people call the annual concentric circles) for a few inches into the
trunk of the oldest cedar, and from such data carry back its birth three
thousand five hundred years. It may be so. They are carved full of names
and dates, going back several generations, and the growth "since the
earliest date" has been almost nothing. At this rate of increase they
must have been growing ever since the Flood. But young trees enlarge far
faster, so that my confidence in estimates made from such specimens is
but small." The idea in the passage before us is, that the righteous
will flourish like the most luxuriant and majestic trees of the forest;
they may be compared with the most grand and beautiful objects in
nature.

[Psalms 92:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 92:13</span></span>

Those that be planted in the house of the Lord - As if plants were
reared up in the house of God. The same image, under the idea of the
olive tree, occurs in [Psa 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008). See
the notes at that verse. The passage here may refer particularly to
those who have been trained up in connection with the church; young
plants set out in the sanctuary, and cultivated until they have reached
their growth.

Shall flourish in the courts of our God - That is, Having been planted
there, they will grow there; they will send out their boughs there; they
will produce fruit there. The "courts" of the house of God were properly
the areas or open spaces around the tabernacle or the temple (see the
notes at [Mat 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012)); but the word
came also to denote the tabernacle or the temple itself, or to designate
a place where God was worshipped. It has this meaning here. The passage
affords an encouragement to parents to train up their children in
attendance on the ordinances of public worship; and it shows the
advantage of having been born in the church, and of having been trained
up in it - an advantage which no one can fully appreciate. The passage
may also be regarded as furnishing a proof of what will be the result of
being thus "planted" and nurtured in connection with the church,
inasmuch as trees carefully planted and cultivated are expected to
produce more and better fruit than those which grow wild.

[Psalms 92:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 92:14</span></span>

They shall still bring forth fruit in old age - As a tree that is
carefully planted and cultivated may be expected to live long, and to
bear fruit even when it is old. It is true that such a tree may be cut
down; or that it may be blown down by winds and tempests; or that it may
be unproductive, but as a general rule, and as laying the foundation of
a reasonable hope, such a tree may be expected to live long, and to
produce fruit even when it is old. So of one devoted early to God, and
trained up under the influences of religion. The care, the culture, the
habits of temperance, of industry, of moderation, and of sobriety so
formed, are favorable to length of days, and lay the foundation for
usefulness when old age comes. An aged man should be useful. He should
feel that whatever wisdom he may possess as the result of long study and
experience, belongs to God and to truth; that one great reason for
sparing him is that he may be useful; that the world needs the benefit
of his counsel and his prayers; that his life is lengthened out not for
his own ease or enjoyment, but that virtue and piety may be extended in
the world by all the influence which he can bring to bear upon it in
advanced years. It may be added that, as a matter of fact, those who are
thus trained and are thus preserved, are useful in old age. No one thus
spared need be useless; perhaps almost none are. There is something
appropriate for old men to do, as there is for the young and the
middle-aged; and it should be the object of an aged Christian to find
out what that is, and to do it. The word rendered "old age means
literally grey or hoary hair."

They shall be fat - The meaning is, that they shall be vigorous, or have
the appearance of vigor and health.

And flourishing - Margin, as in Hebrew, "green." This image is taken
from a tree, as if it were still green in old age, or gave no
indications of decay.

[Psalms 92:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 92:15</span></span>

To shew that the Lord is upright - That is, This will be a proof that
God is faithful to his promises; that he is the true friend of his
people. The fact that they live long - that they are happy and useful
even in old age, will be a demonstration that God is the friend of
virtue, and that he deals with people according to their character.

He is my rock - He is my defense; that which constitutes my security.
See the notes at [Psa 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002). This is
language of strong confidence in view of all that is said in the psalm.

And there is no unrighteousness in him - This is said in the most
absolute form - implying the most entire confidence. God is altogether
to be trusted. There is no evil or wrong in his character or in his
dealings. In all respects he is worthy of confidence: "worthy" to be
loved, trusted, adored, obeyed, by the inhabitants of all worlds. What a
sublime thought is this! What a consolatory truth! What would the
universe be if God, a Being of infinite POWER, were not a Being of
perfect RIGHTEOUSNESS, and could not be trusted by the creatures which
he has made!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 93](psa093)

</div>
