<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa085)  [Next](psa087) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 86](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 86:0</span></span>

This psalm purports to be a psalm of David; and there is nothing in the
psalm that is contrary to this supposition. Why it has its place among
the psalms which are designated as the compositions of "the sons of
Korah," and had not its place among those which are ascribed to David
Ps. 1-70 we have no means of ascertaining. It is not said, however, that
those were the only psalms of David, and there is no improbability in
supposing that he may have composed others. It is not improperly named
"a prayer," since it is made up mostly of petitions, though this is true
of others which are called "psalms," and though it is true that this one
has so much of praise in it that it might also (as it is in the margin)
be designated a psalm. The occasion on which it was composed is unknown,
but it has been commonly supposed that it was written in the time of the
persecutions under Saul. DeWette regards it as a national song composed
in a time of national trouble.

This psalm does not admit of any minute subdivision. It is made up of
earnest prayers, with reasons why those prayers should be answered; and
perhaps the leading practical suggestion which would properly follow
from the psalm is, that it is proper for us, in our prayers, to urge
reasons why they should be answered: the reasons why we pray at all. We
cannot, indeed, suppose that we can suggest anything which would not
occur to the divine mind, but in all our prayers there is some reason
why we pray; there are reasons why we ask the particular things which
are the burden of our supplications, and it cannot be improper, in order
that our own minds at least may be suitably impressed, to mention those
reasons when we come before God.

[Psalms 86:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 86:1</span></span>

Bow down thine ear, O Lord, hear me - See the notes at [Psa
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#001).

For I am poor and needy - This is the reason here assigned why God
should hear him. It is not a plea of merit. It is not that there was any
claim on God in the fact that he was a poor and needy man - a sinner
helpless and dependent, or that it would be any injustice if God should
not hear, for a sinner has no claim to favor; but it is that this was a
condition in which the aid of God was needed, and in which it was proper
or appropriate for God to hear prayer, and to render help. We may always
make our helplessness, our weakness, our poverty, our need, a ground of
appeal to God; not as a claim of justice, but as a case in which he will
glorify himself by a gracious interposition. It is also to be remarked
that it is a matter of unspeakable thankfulness that the "poor and
needy" may call upon God; that they will be as welcome as any class of
people; that there is no condition of poverty and want so low that we
are debarred from the privilege of approaching One who has infinite
resources, and who is as willing to help as he is able.

[Psalms 86:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 86:2</span></span>

Preserve my soul - Preserve, or keep, my life; for so the word rendered
soul means in this place, as it does commonly in the Scriptures.

For I am holy - Margin, "One whom thou favorest." The Hebrew word - חסיד
châsı̂yd - means properly, benevolent, kind; then, good, merciful,
gracious; and then pious, godly. [Psa
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#004); [Psa
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#023); [Psa
37:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#028). The ground of the plea here is,
that he was a friend of God; and that it was proper on that account to
look to him for protection. He does not say that he was holy in such a
sense that he had a claim on that account to the favor of God, or that
his personal holiness was a ground of salvation; but the idea is, that
he had devoted himself to God, and that it was, therefore, proper to
look to him for his protection in the time of danger. A child looks to a
parent for protection, because he is a child; a citizen looks to the
protection of the laws, because he is a citizen; and so the people of
God may look to him for protection, because they are his people. In all
this there is no plea of merit, but there is the recognition of what is
proper in the case, and what may he expected and hoped for.

Save thy servant - Save him from threatening danger and from death.

That trusteth in thee - Because I trust or confide in thee. I go nowhere
else for protection; I rely on no one else. I look to thee alone, and I
do this with entire confidence. A man who does this has a right to look
to God for protection, and to expect that God will interpose in his
behalf.

[Psalms 86:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 86:3</span></span>

Be merciful unto me, O Lord - It was mercy after all that he relied on,
and not justice. It was not because he had any claim on the ground that
he was "holy," but all that he had and hoped for was to be traced to the
mercy of God.

For I cry unto thee daily - Margin, as in Hebrew, "All the day." The
meaning is, that he did this constantly, or without intermission.

[Psalms 86:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 86:4</span></span>

Rejoice the soul of thy servant - Cause me to rejoice; to wit, by thy
gracious interposition, and by delivering me from danger and death.

For unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul - Compare the notes at [Psa
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#004). The idea is that of arousing
himself, or exerting himself, as one does who makes strenuous efforts to
obtain an object. He was not languid, or indifferent; he did not put
forth merely weak and fitful efforts to find God, but he bent his whole
powers to that end; he arouses himself thoroughly to seek the divine
help. Languid and feeble efforts in seeking after God will be attended
with no success. In so great a matter - when so much depends on the
divine favor - when such great interests are at stake - the whole soul
should be roused to one great and strenuous effort; not that we can
obtain his favor by force or power, and not that any strength of ours
will prevail of itself, but

\(a\) because nothing less will indicate the proper intensity of desire;
and

\(b\) because such is his appointment in regard to the manner in which
we are to seek his favor.

Compare [Mat 7:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007); [Luk
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#024); [Luk
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016).

[Psalms 86:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 86:5</span></span>

For thou, Lord, art good ... - This is another reason why God should
hear his prayer; and it is a reason which may be properly urged at all
times, and by all classes of persons. It is founded on the benevolence
of God; on the fullness of his mercy to all that invoke his name. We
should call in vain on a God who was not merciful and ready to forgive;
but in the divine character there is the most ample foundation for such
an appeal. In his benevolence; in his readiness to forgive; in the
plenitude of his mercy, God is all that a penitent sinner could wish him
to be. For if such a sinner should endeavor to describe what he would
desire to find in God as a ground of appeal in his prayers, he could not
express his feelings in language more full and free than God has himself
employed about his own readiness to pardon and save. The language of the
Bible on this subject would express, better than any language which he
could himself employ, what in those circumstances he would wish to find
God to be.

[Psalms 86:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 86:6</span></span>

Give ear, O Lord, unto my prayer ... - See the notes at [Psa
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#001).

[Psalms 86:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 86:7</span></span>

In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee - That is, I do it now; I
have done it; I will do it. The language implies a habit, or a steady
purpose of mind, that in all times of trouble he would make God his
refuge. It was this fixed purpose - this regular habit - which was now
the ground of his confidence. A man who always makes God his refuge, who
has no other ground of reliance, may feel assured that God will
interpose and save him.

For thou wilt answer me - This also implies a fixed and steady assurance
of mind, applicable not only to this case, but to all similar cases. He
had firm confidence in God at all times; an unwavering belief that God
is a hearer of prayer. This is a just foundation of hope when we
approach God. Compare [Jam 1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#006).

[Psalms 86:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 86:8</span></span>

Among the gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord - Among all those
which are worshipped as gods there is no one that can hear and save. The
psalmist, in respect to prayer, and to help to be obtained by prayer,
compares his own condition with that of those who worshipped false gods.
He had a God who could hear; they had none. A true child of God now in
trouble may properly compare his condition in this respect with that of
those who make no profession of religion; who do not profess to worship
God, or to have a God. To him there is a throne of grace which is always
accessible; to them there is none. There is One to whom he may always
pray; they profess to have no one on whom they can call.

Neither are there any works like unto thy works - That is, as done by
those "gods." There is nothing they have done which can be a ground of
confidence that can be compared with what thou hast done. The allusion
is to the power, the wisdom, and the skill evinced in the works of
creation, and in the merciful interpositions of Providence. From these
the psalmist derives a proof that God is able to save. There is no such
argument to which the worshippers of false gods can appeal in the time
of trouble.

[Psalms 86:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 86:9</span></span>

All nations whom thou hast made shall come ... - In this verse the
psalmist expresses his belief that the conviction which he entertained
about the ability of God to save - about his being the only true God -
would yet pervade all the nations of the earth; that they all would yet
be convinced that he was the true God, and would come and worship him
alone. So clear to him seemed to be the evidence of the existence and
perfections of God that he did not doubt that all people would come yet
to see it also, and to acknowledge him. Compare [Isa
2:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002); [Isa
60:3-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#003); [Psa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008); [Psa
72:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#017).

And shall glorify thy name - Shall honor thee as the true God. They will
renounce their idols; they will come and worship thee. This belief -
this hope - is held out through the entire volume of revealed truth. It
cheered and encouraged the hearts of the saints of the Old Testament and
the New; and it may and should cheer and encourage our hearts. It is not
less certain because it seems to be long delayed. To the view of man
this is all that is certain in the future. No man can predict what will
occur in regard to any of the existing political institutions on the
earth - either the monarchies of the old world, or the republics of the
new. No man can tell in reference to the arts; to the sciences; to
social life; to manners; to the cities and towns which now exist on the
earth, what they will be in the far distant future. Only one thing is
certain in that future - that the kingdom of God will be set up, and
that the Redeemer's throne will be established over all the earth; that
the time is to come when "all nations shall come and worship before God,
and shall glorify his name."

[Psalms 86:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 86:10</span></span>

For thou art great, and doest wondrous things - Things suited to excite
wonder or admiration; things which lie beyond the power of any creature,
and which could be performed by no one but a being of almighty power. A
God who could do these things could also do that which the psalmist
asked of him, for what God actually does proves that there is nothing
within the limits of possibility which he cannot perform. The greatness
and the power of God are reasons why we should appeal to him in our
weakness, and in our times of trouble.

Thou art God alone - Thou only canst do what a God can do, or what
belongs to God. In those things, therefore, which require the
interposition of divine power our appeal must be to thee alone. So in
the matter of salvation.

[Psalms 86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 86:11</span></span>

Teach me thy way, O Lord - That is, in the present emergency. Show me
what thou wouldst have me to do that I may obtain thy favor, and thy
gracious help.

I will walk in thy truth - I will live and act in accordance with what
thou dost declare to be true. Whatever that may be, I will pursue it,
having no will of my own.

Unite my heart to fear thy name - That is, to worship, obey, and honor
thee.

\(a\) The end which he desired to secure was that he might truly fear
God, or properly reverence and honor him;

\(b\) the means which he saw to be necessary for this was that his
"heart" might be "united" in this one great object; that is, that his
heart might be single in its views and purposes; that there might be no
distracting purposes; that one great aim might be always before him.

The word rendered "unite" - יחד yāchad - occurs as a verb only in three
places. In [Gen 49:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#006), it is rendered
united: "Unto their assembly, mine honor, be not thou united." In [Isa
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#020), it is translated joined: "Thou
shalt not be joined with them." The adverb - יחד yachad, occurs often,
and is rendered together, [Gen 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#006);
[Gen 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#006), [Gen
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#008),[Gen
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#019); [Gen
36:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#007); et saepe. The idea is that of
union, or conjunction; of being together; of constituting one; and this
is accomplished in the heart when there is one great ruling object
before the mind which nothing is allowed to interfere with. It may be
added, that there is no more appropriate prayer which a man can offer
than that his heart may have such a unity of purpose, and that nothing
may be allowed to interfere with that one supreme purpose.

[Psalms 86:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 86:12</span></span>

I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart - This is but
carrying out the idea in the previous verse. He would give his whole
heart to God. He would allow nothing to divide or distract his
affections. He would withhold nothing from God.

And I will glorify thy name for evermore - Not merely in the present
emergency; but I will do it ever onward - even to eternity. The meaning
is, that he would in all cases, and at all times - in this world and in
the world to come - honor God. He would acknowledge no God but him, and
he would honor him as God.

[Psalms 86:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 86:13</span></span>

For great is thy mercy toward me - In respect to me; or, Thou hast
manifested great mercy to me; to wit, in past times. He makes use of
this now as an argument or reason why God should interpose again.

\(a\) He had shown on former occasions that he had power to save;

\(b\) the fact that he had thus treated him as his friend was a reason
why he should now befriend him.

And thou hast delivered my soul - My life. The meaning is, that he had
kept him alive in times of imminent danger. At the same time David could
say, as every child of God can say, that God had delivered his soul in
the strict and proper sense of the term - from sin, and death, and hell
itself.

From the lowest hell - Margin, grave; Hebrew, שׁאול she'ôl; Greek, ᾅδης
Hadēs. See the word explained in the notes at [Isa
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#009). Compare the notes at [Job
10:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#021). The word rendered "lowest"
means simply under, or beneath: the grave or hades beneath. The idea of
lowest, or the superlative degree, is not necessarily implied in the
word. The idea of the grave as deep, or as under us, however, is
implied, and the psalmist means to say that he had been saved from that
deep dwelling-place - from the abode of departed spirits, to which the
dead descend under ground. The meaning is, that he had been kept alive;
but the greatness of the mercy is designed to be set forth by having
before the mind a vivid idea of the darkness, the horror, and the gloom
of the world to which the dead descend, and where they dwell.

[Psalms 86:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 86:14</span></span>

O God, the proud are risen against me - People who are self-confident,
ambitious, haughty; who do not regard the welfare or the rights of
others; who are disposed to trample down all others in order that they
may accomplish their own purposes; these are the people who have opposed
me and sought my life. This would apply either to the time of Saul or of
Absalom. In both these cases there were men who would correspond to this
description.

And the assemblies of violent men - Margin," terrible." The Septuagint
and the Vulgate render this, "the synagogue of the wicked." The word
rendered violent means properly terrible, inspiring terror; then,
violent, fierce, lawless, tyrants. The idea here is that they pursued
their object by violence and not by right; they did it in a fierce and
savage manner, or in such a way as to inspire terror. The word assembly
here means merely that they were banded together; what was done was the
result of a conspiracy or combination.

Have sought after my soul - After my life.

And have not set thee before them - They do not fear thee; they do not
act as if in thy presence; they have no regard for thee, for thy law,
for thy favor, for thy threatenings.

[Psalms 86:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 86:15</span></span>

But thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion ... - See the notes at
[Psa 86:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#005). The words rendered
"long-suffering" mean that there was and would be delay in his anger;
that it was not soon excited; that he did not act from passion or sudden
resentment; that he endured the conduct of sinners long without rising
up to punish them; that he was not quick to take vengeance, but bore
with them patiently. On this account the psalmist, though conscious that
he was a sinner, hoped and pleaded that God would save him.

Plenteous in ... truth - That is, in faithfulness. When thou hast made a
promise, thou wilt faithfully keep it.

[Psalms 86:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 86:16</span></span>

O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me - Look upon me; as if God were
now turned away, and were unmindful of his danger, his needs, and his
pleading. The expression is equivalent to those in which he prays that
God would incline his ear to him. See [Psa
86:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#001), [Psa
86:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#006), and the notes at [Psa
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#001).

Give thy strength unto thy servant - Give such strength as proceeds from
thee, and such as will accomplish what thou alone canst effect. Enable
me to act as if clothed with divine power. The ground of the plea here
is, that he was the "servant" of God, and he might, therefore, hope for
God's interposition.

And save the son of thine handmaid - This is, as far as I know, the only
separate allusion which David ever makes to his mother individually,
unless the passage in [Psa 35:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#014) - "I
bowed down heavily as one that mourneth for his mother" - be supposed to
refer to his own mother. But we have elsewhere no such mention of his
mother as can give us any idea of her character, and indeed it is not
easy to determine who she was. The language here, however, would seem to
imply that she was a pious woman, for the words "thy handmaid," as
employed in the Scriptures, would most naturally suggest that idea. If
so, then the ground of the plea here is that his mother was a child of
God; that she had lived for his service; and that she had trained up her
children for him. David now prays that, as he had been devoted to God by
her, and had thus been trained up, God would remember all this, and
would interfere in his behalf. Can it be wrong to urge before God, as a
reason for his interposition, that we have been devoted to him by
parental faithfulness and prayer; that we have been consecrated to him
by baptism; that we have been trained up for his service; that in
reference to us high hopes were cherished that we might carry out the
purposes of pious parents, and live to accomplish what was so dear to
their hearts? He who has had a pious mother has entered on life under
great advantages; he has been placed under solemn responsibilites; he is
permitted to hope that a mother's prayers will not be forgotten, but
that her example, her teachings, and her piety will shed a hallowed
influence on all the paths of life until he joins her in heaven.

[Psalms 86:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 86:17</span></span>

Shew me a token for good ... - Hebrew, "Make me a sign for good;" that
is, Do that for me in my trouble which will be an evidence that thou
dost favor me, and wilt save me. Let there be such a manifest
interposition in my behalf that others may see it, and may be convinced
that thou art God, and that thou art the Protector and Friend of those
who put their trust in thee. We need not suppose that the psalmist
refers here to a miracle in his behalf. Any interposition which would
save him from the hands of his enemies - which would defeat their
purposes - which would rescue him when there seemed to be no help, would
be such an evidence that they could not doubt that he was the friend of
God. Thus they would be made "ashamed" of their purposes; that is, they
would be disappointed and confounded; and there would be furnished a new
proof that God was the protector of all who put their trust in him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 87](psa087)

</div>
