<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa022)  [Next](psa024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 23:0</span></span>

This psalm is asserted in the title to have been composed by David, and
there is nothing in its contents contrary to this supposition, as there
is nothing in it that would lead us necessarily to ascribe it to him.
The contents of the psalm indeed correspond with the facts of his
history, and with the recollections of his early life as a shepherd; but
it is such as might have been composed by anyone who had been, and in
fact by anyone though he had not been, a shepherd, as the images in it
are such as are common in all poetry. Still, there is nothing to lead us
to doubt that it was written by David.

It is wholly uncertain on what occasion the psalm was composed, since
there are in the psalm no historical references, no indications of time,
and no allusions to any circumstances in the life of the author. It is
impossible even to determine whether it was composed in a time of
prosperity or adversity; whether when the author was persecuted, or when
he was prosperous and triumphant. The only apparent allusion to any
circumstance of the poet's life is in [Psa
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#006), where he says, as the crowning
joy which he anticipated, that he would "dwell in the house of the Lord
forever," from which it has been inferred by some that he was then in
exile. But this allusion is of too general a character to justify this
inference with certainty. Such a hope might be expressed by anyone in
any circumstances, as the highest desire of a pious heart. Kimchi
supposes that the psalm was composed by David in the wilderness of
Hareth [Sa1 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#005); and that it
pertained to the people of Israel, and to their return from exile. But
this is mere conjecture. The Aramaic Paraphrase applies the psalm to the
Hebrew people when delivered from captivity and exile, as a song of
triumph on their return to their own land. Rudinger, and John D.
Michaelis, suppose that it refers to the time when David had obtained a
complete victory over all his enemies - when the rebellion of Absalom
was quelled, when he was seated quietly on throne. Probably, if we are
to to fix a time, it was at that period of life - an advanced period -
when the recollection of the merciful interpositic of God in his behalf
so often would suggest the brightest image of his earlier years, the
watchful care which he as a shepherd had extended over his own flock - a
care which God had now extended over him in the perils of his own life.
Still, all this is no more than conjecture.

The psalm has always been regarded as one of exquisite beauty. The main
subject is the watchful care which God had extended over the author, and
the consequent assurance which he felt that God would still watch over
him, and supply all his need. The leading thought - the essential idea -
is, his full belief that God would provide for him, and that he would
never be left to want. This is the thought with which the psalm
commences: "The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want:" and this thought
is carried through the psalm. It is illustrated by two facts or images:

\(a\) That God was his shepherd; that He had always manifested toward
him (David) the care which a shepherd takes of his flock, [Psa
23:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001); and

\(b\) That God had prepared a table before him (David) in the very
presence of his enemies, or that he had abundantly led for him in their
very sight, when they were endeavoring to destroy him - thus giving him
the assurance that God never would leave him, [Psa
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005).

The psalm, therefore, may be regarded as consisting of two main parts:

I. The general subject of the psalm - the confidence of the author in
God - the assurance that he would always so provide for him that he
would not want, [Psa 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001).

II\. The grounds or reasons for this confidence, [Psa
23:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#002). These are twofold:

\(1\) An argument derived from the care of God over him as a shepherd,
[Psa 23:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#002).

\(a\) The statement of the fact, [Psa
23:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#002).

\(b\) The argument, [Psa 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004). From
his experience of the divine care in the past, he says that he would not
be afraid even to descend into the valley of death.

\(2\) an argument derived from the fact that God had provided for him in
the very presence of his enemies, [Psa
23:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005).

\(a\) The statement of the fact; or a reference to his life, during
which God had shown the same care and goodness as if He had spread a
table for him even in the sight of his enemies, [Psa
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005).

\(b\) The confident assurance, derived from that fact, that God would
follow him with goodness and mercy all the days of his life; that his
future course would be as if he were always to dwell in the house of the
Lord, [Psa 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#006).

[Psalms 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 23:1</span></span>

The Lord is my shepherd - Compare [Gen
49:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#024), "From thence is the shepherd,
the stone of Israel;" [Psa 80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001), "Give
ear, O Shepherd of Israel." See also the notes at [Joh
10:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001). The comparison of the care
which God extends over his people to that of a shepherd for his flock is
one that would naturally occur to those who were accustomed to pastoral
life. It would be natural that it should suggest itself to Jacob [Gen
49:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#024), and to David, for both of them
had been shepherds. David, in advanced years, would naturally remember
the occupations of his early life; and the remembrance of the care of
God over him would naturally recall the care which he had, in earlier
years, extended over his flocks. The idea which the language suggests is
that of tender care; protection; particular attention to the young and
the feeble (compare [Isa 40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011)); and
providing for their wants. All these things are found eminently in God
in reference to his people.

I shall not want - This is the main idea in the psalm, and this idea is
derived from the fact that God is a shepherd. The meaning is, that, as a
shepherd, he would make all needful provision for his flock, and evince
all proper care for it. The words shall not want, as applied to the
psalmist, would embrace everything that could be a proper object of
desire, whether temporal or spiritual; whether pertaining to the body or
the soul; whether having reference to time or to eternity. There is no
reason for supposing that David limited this to his temporal
necessities, or to the present life, but the idea manifestly is that God
would provide all that was needful for him always. Compare [Psa
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#009), "There is no want to them that
fear him." This idea enters essentially into the conception of God as
the shepherd of his people, that all their real wants shall be supplied.

[Psalms 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 23:2</span></span>

He maketh me to lie down in green pastures - Margin, "Pastures of tender
grass." The Hebrew word rendered "pastures" means usually "dwellings,"
or "habitations." It is applied here properly to "pastures," as places
where flocks and herds lie down for repose. The word rendered in the
margin "tender grass" - דשׁא deshe' - refers to the first shoots of
vegetation from the earth - young herbage - tender grass - as clothing
the meadows, and as delicate food for cattle, [Job
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#005). It differs from ripe grass ready
for mowing, which is expressed by a different word - חציר châtsı̂yr. The
idea is that of calmness and repose, as suggested by the image of flocks
"lying down on the grass." But this is not the only idea. It is that of
flocks that lie down on the grass "fully fed" or "satisfied," their
wants being completely supplied. The exact point of contemplation in the
mind of the poet, I apprehend, is that of a flock in young and luxuriant
grass, surrounded by abundance, and, having satisfied their wants, lying
down amidst this luxuriance with calm contentment. It is not merely a
flock enjoying repose; it is a flock whose wants are supplied, lying
down in the midst of abundance. Applied to the psalmist himself, or to
the people of God generally, the idea is, that the wants of the soul are
met and satisfied, and that, in the full enjoyment of this, there is the
conviction of abundance - the repose of the soul at present satisfied,
and feeling that in such abundance want will always be unknown.

[Psalms 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 23:3</span></span>

He leadeth me beside the still waters - Margin, "waters of quietness."
Not stagnant waters, but waters not tempestuous and stormy; waters so
calm, gentle, and still, as to suggest the idea of repose, and such as
prompt to repose. As applied to the people of God, this denotes the
calmness - the peace - the repose of the soul, when salvation flows as
in a gently running stream; when there is no apprehension of want; when
the heart is at; peace with God.

He restoreth my soul - literally, "He causes my life to return."
DeWette, "He quickens me," or causes me to live. The word soul" here
means life, or spirit, and not the soul in the strict sense in which the
term is now used. It refers to the spirit when exhausted, weary, or sad;
and the meaning is, that God quickens or vivifies the spirit when thus
exhausted. The reference is not to the soul as wandering or backsliding
from God, but to the life or spirit as exhausted, wearied, troubled,
anxious, worn down with care and toil. the heart, thus exhausted, He
re-animates. He brings back its vigor. He encourages it; excites it to
new effort; fills it with new joy.

He leadeth me in the paths of righteousness - In right paths, or right
ways. He conducts me in the straight path that leads to Himself; He does
not permit me to wander in ways that would lead to ruin. In reference to
His people it is true:

\(a\) that He leads them in the path by which they become righteous, or
by which they are "justified" before him; and

\(b\) that He leads them in the way of "uprightness" and "truth." He
guides them in the way to heaven; His constant care is evinced that they
"may" walk in that path.

For his name's sake - For His own sake; or, that His name may be
honored. It is not primarily on their account; it is not solely that
they may be saved. It is that He may be honored:

\(a\) in their being saved at all;

\(b\) in the manner in which it is done;

\(c\) in the influence of their whole life, under His guidance, as
making known His own character and perfections.

Compare [Isa 43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025); [Isa
48:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#009); [Isa
66:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#005); [Jer
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#007). The feeling expressed in this
verse is that of confidence in God; an assurance that he would always
lead his people in the path in which they should go. Compare [Psa
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#009). This he will always do if people
will follow the directions of His word, the teachings of His Spirit, and
the guidance of His providence. No one who submits to Him in this way
will ever go astray!

[Psalms 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 23:4</span></span>

Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death - The
meaning of this in the connection in which it occurs is this: "God will
lead and guide me in the path of righteousness, even though that path
lies through the darkest and most gloomy vale - through deep and dismal
shades - in regions where there is no light, as if death had cast his
dark and baleful shadow there. It is still a right path; it is a path of
safety; and it will conduct me to bright regions beyond. In that dark
and gloomy valley, though I could not guide myself, I will not be
alarmed; I will not be afraid of wandering or of being lost; I will not
fear any enemies there - for my Shepherd is there to guide me still." On
the word here rendered "shadow of death" - צלמות tsalmâveth - see [Job
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#005), note; and [Isa
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002), note. The word occurs besides
only in the following places, in all of which it is rendered "shadow of
death:" [Job 10:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#021); [Job
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#022); [Job
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#016); [Job
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#017) (twice); [Job
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#003); [Job
34:22](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#022); [Job
38:17](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#017); [Psa
44:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#019); [Psa
107:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#010), [Psa
107:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#014); [Jer
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#006); [Jer
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#016); [Amo
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#008). The idea is that of death casting
his gloomy shadow over that valley - the valley of the dead. Hence, the
word is applicable to any path of gloom or sadness; any scene of trouble
or sorrow; any dark and dangerous way. Thus understood, it is applicable
not merely to death itself - though it embraces that - but to any or all
the dark, the dangerous, and the gloomy paths which we tread in life: to
ways of sadness, solitude, and sorrow. All along those paths God will be
a safe and certain guide.

I will fear no evil - Dark, cheerless, dismal as it seems, I will dread
nothing. The true friend of God has nothing to fear in that dark valley.
His great Shepherd will accompany him there, and can lead him safely
through, however dark it may appear. The true believer has nothing to
fear in the most gloomy scenes of life; he has nothing to fear in the
valley of death; he has nothing to fear in the grave; he has nothing to
fear in the world beyond.

For thou art with me - Thou wilt be with me. Though invisible, thou wilt
attend me. I shall not go alone; I shall not be alone. The psalmist felt
assured that if God was with him he had nothing to dread there. God
would be his companion, his comforter, his protector, his guide. How
applicable is this to death! The dying man seems to go into the dark
valley alone. His friends accompany him as far as they can, and then
they must give him the parting hand. They cheer him with their voice
until he becomes deaf to all sounds; they cheer him with their looks
until his eye becomes dim, and he can see no more; they cheer him with
the fond embrace until he becomes insensible to every expression of
earthly affection, and then he seems to be alone. But the dying believer
is not alone. His Saviour God is with him in that valley, and will never
leave him. Upon His arm he can lean, and by His presence he will be
comforted, until he emerges from the gloom into the bright world beyond.
All that is needful to dissipate the terrors of the valley of death is
to be able to say, "Thou art with me."

Thy rod and thy staff - It may not be easy to mark the difference
between these two words; but they would seem probably to refer, the
latter to the "staff" which the shepherd used in walking, and the former
to the "crook" which a shepherd used for guiding his flock. The image is
that of a shepherd in attendance on his flock, with a staff on which he
leans with one hand; in the other hand the "crook" or rod which was the
symbol of his office. Either of these also might be used to guard the
flock, or to drive off the enemies of the flock. The "crook" is said
(see Rosenmuller, in loc.) to have been used to seize the legs of the
sheep or goats when they were disposed to run away, and thus to keep
them with the flock. "The shepherd invariably carries a rod or staff
with him when he goes forth to feed his flock. It is often bent or
hooked at one end, which gave rise to the shepherd's crook in the hand
of the Christian bishop. With this staff he rules and guides the flock
to their green pastures, and defends them from their enemies. With it
also he corrects them when disobedient, and brings them back when
wandering." (The land and the book, vol. i., p. 305.)

They comfort me - The sight of them consoles me. They show that the
Shepherd is there. As significant of his presence and his office, they
impart confidence, showing that he will not leave me alone, and that he
will defend me.

[Psalms 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 23:5</span></span>

Thou preparest a table - The image is now changed, though expressing the
general idea which is indicated in the first verse of the psalm, "I
shall not want." The evidence or proof of this in the previous verses
is, that God was a shepherd, and would provide for him as a shepherd
does for his flock; the evidence here is that God had provided a table,
or a feast, for him in the very presence of his enemies, and had filled
his cup with joy. The word "table" here is synonymous with "feast;" and
the meaning is, "thou providest for my wants." There "may" be an
allusion here to some particular period of the life of the psalmist,
when he was in want, and when he perhaps felt an apprehension that he
would perish, and when God had unexpectedly provided for his wants; but
it is impossible now to determine to what occasion he thus refers. There
were numerous occasions in the life of David which would be well
represented by this language, "as if" God had provided a meal for him in
the very "presence" of his foes, and in spite of them.

Before me - For me. It is spread in my presence, and for me.

In the presence of mine enemies - That is, in spite of them, or so that
they could not prevent it. They were compelled to look on and see how
God provided for him. It was manifest that this was from God; it was a
proof of the divine favor; it furnished an assurance that he who had
done this would never leave him to want. The friends of God are made to
triumph in the very presence of their foes. Their enemies are compelled
to see how He interposes in their behalf, how He provides for them, and
how He defends them. Their final triumph in the day of judgment will be
in the very presence of all their assembled enemies, for in their very
presence He will pronounce the sentence which will make their eternal
happiness sure, [Mat 25:31-36](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031).

Thou anointest my head with oil - Margin, as in Hebrew, "makest fat."
That is, thou dost pour oil on my head so abundantly that it seems to be
made fat with it. The expression indicates abundance. The allusion is to
the custom of anointing the head on festival occasions, as an indication
of prosperity and rejoicing (see [Mat
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#017), note; [Luk
7:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#046), note), and the whole is
indicative of the divine favor, of prosperity, and of joy.

My cup runneth over - It is not merely "full;" it runs over. This, too,
indicates abundance; and from the abundance of the favors thus bestowed,
the psalmist infers that God would always provide for him, and that He
would never leave him to want.

[Psalms 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 23:6</span></span>

Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me - God will bestow them upon
me. This is the "result" of what is stated in the previous verses. The
effect of God's merciful dealings with him had been to lead his mind to
the assurance that God would always be his shepherd and friend; that He
would never leave him to want.

All the days of my life - Through all its changes; in every variety of
situation; until I reach its close. Life indeed would end, and he does
not venture to conjecture when that would be; but as long as life should
continue, he felt confidently assured that everything needful for him
would be bestowed upon him. The language is the utterance of a heart
overflowing with joy and gratitude in the recollection of the past, and
full of glad anticipation (as derived from the experience of the past)
in regard to the future.

And I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever - Margin, as in
Hebrew: "to length of days." The expression, I think, does not refer to
eternity or to heaven, but it is parallel with the former expression
"All the days of my life;" that is, he would dwell in the house of the
Lord as long as he lived - with the idea added here, which was not in
the former member of the sentence, that his life would be long, or that
he hoped and anticipated that he would live long on the earth. The
phrase used here, "I will dwell in the house of the Lord," is one that
is several times employed in the Psalms as indicative of the wish of the
psalmist. Thus, in [Psa 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004), "One
thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life." [Psa
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#008), "lord, I have loved the
habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honor dwelleth." [Psa
65:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#004), "blessed is the man whom thou
choosest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy
courts."

[Psa 84:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#004), "blessed are they that
dwell in thy house." (Compare also [Psa
87:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001), [Psa
87:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#003),10). The "language" here is
obviously taken from the employment of those who had their habitation
near the tabernacle, and afterward the temple, whose business it was to
attend constantly on the service of God, and to minister in his courts.
We are not to suppose of David that he anticipated such a residence in
or near the tabernacle or the house of God; but the meaning is, that he
anticipated and desired a life as if he dwelt there, and as if he was
constantly engaged in holy occupations. His life would be spent as if in
the constant service of God; his joy and peace in religion would be as
if he were always within the immediate dwelling-place of the Most High.
This expresses the desire of a true child of God. He wishes to live as
if he were always engaged in solemn acts of worship, and occupied in
holy things; he desires peace and joy in religion as if he were
constantly in the place where God makes his abode, and allowed to
partake of his smiles and friendship. In a very important sense it is
his privilege so to live even on earth; it will certainly be his
privilege so to live in heaven: and, full of grateful exultation and
joy, every child of God may adopt this language as his own, and say
confidently, "Goodness and mercy will follow me all the days of my life
here, and I shall dwell in the house of the Lord forever," for heaven,
where God dwells, will be his eternal home.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 24](psa024)

</div>
