<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa001)  [Next](psa003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 2:0</span></span>

Section 1

The author. This psalm, like the one preceding, is without any title
prefixed to it, and, like that, is without anything in the psalm itself
to indicate its authorship. Its authorship must be learned, therefore,
elsewhere, if it can be ascertained at all. There is, however, every
reason to suppose that David was the author; and by those who admit the
authority of the New Testament this will not be doubted. The reasons for
supposing that its authorship is to be traced to David are the
following:

\(a\) It is expressly ascribed to him in [Act
4:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#025) : "Who by the mouth of thy
servant David hast said, Why did the heathen rage, and the people
imagine vain things?" etc. There can be no doubt that this psalm is here
referred to, and the quotation in this manner proves that this was the
common understanding among the Jews. It may be presumed that in a matter
of this kind the general tradition would be likely to be correct; and to
those who admit the inspiration of the apostles as bearing on points
like this, the fact of its being quoted as the production of David is
decisive.

\(b\) This is the common opinion respecting its origin among Hebrew
writers. Kimchi and Aben Ezra expressly ascribe it to David, and they
are supposed in this to express the prevailing opinion of the Hebrew
people.

\(c\) Its place among the Psalms of David may, perhaps, be regarded as a
circumstance indicating the same thing. Thus, to the seventy-second
psalm there are none which are ascribed expressly to any other author
than David (except the Ps. 50, which is ascribed to Asaph, or 'for
Asaph,' as it is in the margin), though there are several whose authors
are not mentioned; and the common impression has been that this portion
of the Book of Psalms was arranged in this manner because they were
understood by the collector of the Psalms to have been composed by him.

\(d\) The character of the composition accords well with this
supposition. It is true, indeed, that nothing can be certainly inferred
from this consideration respecting its authorship; and that it must be
admitted that there are no such peculiarities in the style as to prove
that David is the author. But the remark now made is, that there is
nothing inconsistent with this supposition, and that there is nothing in
the sentiment, the style, or the allusions, which might not have flowed
from his pen, or which would not be appropriate on the supposition that
he was the author. The only objection that could be urged to this would
be derived from [Psa 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006), "I have set
my King upon my holy hill of Zion." But this will be considered in
another place.

Section 2

The time when written. As we cannot with absolute certainty determine
who was the author, it is, of course, not possible to ascertain the
exact time when it was composed; nor, if it be admitted that David was
the author, can we now ascertain what was the occasion on which it was
written. There are no names of the kings and people who are represented
as conspiring against the Anointed One who is the chief subject of the
psalm; and there is no local allusion whatever except in the single
phrase the "hill of Zion," in [Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006). The probability would seem to be
that the psalm was not designed to refer to anything which had occurred
in the time of the author himself, but, as will be seen in another part
of these introductory remarks (Section 4), that the writer intended to
refer mainly to the Messiah, who was to come in a distant age, although
this may have been suggested by something which took place in the time
of the writer.

The opposition made to David himself by surrounding nations, their
attempts to overwhelm the Hebrew people and himself as their king, the
fact that God gave him the victory over his foes, and established him as
the king of his people, and the prosperity and triumph which he had
experienced, may have given rise to the ideas and imagery of the psalm,
and may have led him to compose it with reference to the Messiah,
between whose treatment and his own there would be so strong a
resemblance, that the one might suggest the other. If conjecture may be
allowed where it is impossible to be certain, it may be supposed that
the psalm was composed by David after the termination of the wars in
which he had been engaged with surrounding nations, and in which he had
struggled for the establishment of his throne and kingdom; and after he
had been peacefully and triumphantly established as ruler over the
people of God. Then it would be natural to compare his own fortunes with
those of the Son of God, the future Messiah, who was to be, in his human
nature, his descendant; against whom the rulers of the earth would also
"rage," as they had against himself; whom it was the purpose of God to
establish on a permanent throne in spite of all opposition, as he had
established him on his throne; and who was to sway a scepter over the
nations of the earth, of which the scepter that he swayed might be
regarded as an emblem.

Thus understood, it had, in its original composition, no particular
reference to David himself, or to Solomon, as Paulus supposed, or to any
other of the kings of Israel; but it is to be regarded as having sole
reference to the Messiah, in language suggested by events which had
occurred in the history of David, the author. It is made up of the
peaceful and happy reflections of one who had been engaged, in the face
of much opposition, in establishing his own throne, now looking forward
to the similar scenes of conflict and of triumph through which the
Anointed One would pass.

Section 3

The structure and contents of the psalm. The psalm is exceedingly
regular in its composition, and has in its structure much of a dramatic
character. It naturally falls into four parts, of three verses each.

I. In the first [Psa 2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001) the conduct
and purposes of the raging nations are described. They are in the
deepest agitation, forming plans against Yahweh and His Anointed One,
and uniting their counsels to break their bands asunder, and to cast off
their authority, that is, as [Psa 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006)
shows, to prevent the establishment of the Anointed One as King on the
holy hill of Zion. The opening of the psalm is bold and abrupt. The
psalmist looks out suddenly on the nations, and sees them in violent
commotion.

II\. In the second part [Psa 2:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004) the
feelings and purposes of God are described. It is implied that he had
formed the purpose, by a fixed decree (compare [Psa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)), to establish his Anointed One as
king, and he now calmly sits in the heavens and looks with derision on
the vain designs of those who are opposed to it. He smiles upon their
impotent rage, and goes steadily forward to the accomplishment of his
plan. He solemnly declares that he had established his King on his holy
hill of Zion, and consequently, that all their efforts must be vain.

III\. In the third part [Psa 2:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007) the
King himself, the Anointed One, speaks, and states the decree which had
been formed in reference to himself, and the promise which had been made
to him. That decree was, that he should be declared to be the Son of
Yahweh himself; the promise was that he should, at his own request, have
the nations of the earth for a possession, and rule over them with an
absolute scepter.

IV\. In the fourth part [Psa 2:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010)
the psalmist exhorts the rulers of the nations to yield to the claims of
the Anointed One, threatening divine wrath on those who should reject
him, and promising a blessing on those who should put their trust in
him.

The psalm is, therefore, regularly constructed, and the main thought is
pursued through the whole of it - the exalted claims and ultimate
triumph of him who is here called "the Anointed;" the vanity of
opposition to his decrees; and the duty and advantage of yielding to his
authority. "The several sentences are also very regular in form,
exhibiting parallelisms of great uniformity." - Prof. Alexander. The
psalm, in its construction, is one of the most perfect in the Book of
Psalms, according to the special ideal of Hebrew poetry.

Section 4. The question to whom the psalm refers. There can be but three
opinions as to the question to whom the psalm was designed to refer:

\(a\) That in which it is supposed that it refers exclusively to David,
or to some other one of the anointed kings of Israel;

\(b\) that in which it is supposed that it had this original reference,
but has also a secondary reference to the Messiah; and

\(c\) that in which it is supposed that it has exclusive and sole
reference to the Messiah.

There are few who maintain the first of these opinions. Even Grotius, in
respect to whom it was said, in comparison with Cocceius, that "Cocceius
found Christ everywhere, and Grotius nowhere," admits that while, in his
view, the psalm had a primary reference to David, and to the
Philistines, Moabites, Ammonites, Idumeans, etc., as his enemies, yet,
in a more "mystical and abstruse sense, it pertained to the Messiah."
The reasons why the psalm should not be regarded as referring
exclusively to any Hebrew king are conclusive. They are summed up in
this one: that the expressions in the psalm are such as cannot be
applied exclusively to any Hebrew monarch. This will appear in the
exposition of this psalm. For like reasons, the psalm cannot be regarded
as designed to refer primarily to David, and in a secondary and higher
sense to the Messiah. There are no indications in the psalm of any such
double sense; and if it cannot be applied exclusively to David, cannot
be applied to him at all.

The psalm, I suppose, like [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001), had an original and exclusive
reference to the Messiah. This may be shown by the following
considerations:

\(1\) It is so applied in the New Testament, and is referred to in no
other way. Thus, in [Act 4:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#024), the
whole company of the apostles is represented as quoting the first verses
of the psalm, and referring them to Christ: "They lifted up their voice
to God with one accord, and said, Lord, thou art God ... who by the
mouth of thy servant David hast said, Why did the heathen rage, and the
people imagine vain things. The kings of the earth stood up, and the
rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and against his Christ.
For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou hast anointed,
both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of
Israel, were gathered together." If the authority of the apostles,
therefore, is to be admitted in the case, there can be no doubt that the
psalm was intended to refer to the Messiah. This statement of the
apostles may also be adduced as proof that this was, probably, the
prevailing mode of interpretation in their age.

Again, the psalm is quoted by Paul [Act
13:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#032) as applicable to Christ, and
with reference to the fact that it was a doctrine of the Old Testament
that the Messiah was to rise from the dead: "And we declare unto you
glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the fathers, God
hath fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that he hath raised
up Jesus again; as it is also written in the second psalm, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee. And again, in [Heb
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005), the same passage is quoted by
Paul to establish the exalted rank of the Messiah as being above the
angels: "For unto which of the angels said he at any time, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee?" These quotations prove that in the
estimation of the writers of the New Testament the psalm had an original
reference to the Messiah; and the manner in which they make the
quotation proves that this was the current belief of the Jews in their
day, as they appear to have been under no apprehension that the
propriety of the application which they made would be called in
question.

\(2\) But, besides this, there is other evidence that such was the
prevailing interpretation among the ancient Hebrews: "In the older
Jewish writings, as the Sohar, the Talmud, etc., there is a variety of
passages in which the Messianic interpretation is given to the psalm.
See the collections by Raym. Martini, Pug. Fid. ed. Carpzov., in several
places, and by Schottgen, de Messia, pp. 227ff. Even Kimchi and Jarchi
confess that it was the prevailing interpretation among their
forefathers; and the latter very honestly gives his reasons for
departing from it, when he says he prefers to explain it of David, for
the refutation of the heretics; that is, in order to destroy the force
of the arguments drawn from it by the Christians." (Hengstenberg,
Christ., i. 77.)

\(3\) That it refers to the Messiah is manifest from the psalm itself.
This will be apparent from a few subordinate considerations.

\(a\) It cannot be applied to David, or to any other earthly king; that
is, there are expressions in it which cannot be applied with any degree
of propriety to any earthly monarch whatever. This remark is founded
particularly on the remarkable use of the word "Son" in the psalm, and
the promise that "the uttermost parts of the earth" should be placed
under the control of him to whom that word is applied. The word "son"
is, indeed, of large signification, and is, in a certain sense, applied
to the righteous in the plural number, as being the sons or the children
of God by adoption; but it is not so applied in the singular number, and
there is a peculiarity in its use here which shows that it was not
intended to be applied to an earthly monarch, or to any pious man
considered as a child of God. That appellation - the Son of God -
properly denotes a nearer relation to God than can be applied to a mere
mortal of any rank (compare the notes at [Joh
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#018)), and was so understood by the
Jews themselves. It is not used in the Old Testament, as applied to an
earthly monarch, in the manner in which it is employed here. The remark
here made is entirely irrespective of the doctrine which is sometimes
supposed to be taught in this passage, of "the eternal generation" of
the Son of God, since what is here said is equally true, whether that
doctrine is well-founded or not.

\(b\) There is an extent of dominion and a perpetuity of empire promised
here which could not be applied to David or to any other monarch, but
which is entirely applicable to the Messiah (see [Psa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008), [Psa
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010)).

\(c\) Such, too, is the nature of the promise to those who put their
trust in him, and the threatening on those who do not obey him [Psa
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012). This is language which will be
seen at once to be entirely applicable to the Messiah, but which cannot
be so regarded in respect of any earthly monarch.

\(d\) There is a strong probability that the psalm is designed to refer
to the Messiah, from the fact that they who deny this have not been able
to propose any other plausible interpretation, or to show with any
degree of probability to whom it does refer. There were no Israelite
kings or princes to whom it could be regarded with any show of
probability as applicable, unless it were David or Solomon; and yet
there are no recorded circumstances in their lives to which it can be
regarded as adapted, and there is no substantial agreement among those
who maintain that it does refer to either of them. It is maintained by
both Rosenmuller and DeWette that it cannot relate to David or Solomon.
Some of the modern Jews maintain that it was composed by David
respecting himself when the Philistines came up against him [Sa2
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017); but this is manifestly an
erroneous opinion, for not only was there nothing in the occurrence
there to correspond with the language of the psalm, but there was at
that time no particular consecration of the hill of Zion [Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006), nor was that mount regarded as
holy or sacred until after the tabernacle was erected on it, which was
after the Philistine war. The same remark may be made substantially of
the supposition that it refers to the rebellion of Absalom, or to any of
the circumstances in which David was placed. And there is still less
reason for supposing that it refers to Solomon, for there is no mention
of any rebellion against him; of any general attempt to throw off his
yoke; of any solemn consecration of him as king in consequence of, or in
spite of such an attempt.

\(e\) The psalm agrees with the account of the Messiah, or is in its
general structure and details applicable to him. This will be shown in
the exposition, and indeed is manifest on the face of it. The only
plausible objection to this view is, as stated by DeWette, "According to
the doctrine of Christianity, the Messiah is no conqueror of nations,
bearing an iron scepter; his kingdom is not of this world." But to this
it may be replied, that all that is meant in [Psa
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009) may be, that he will set up a
kingdom over the nations of the earth; that all his enemies will be
subdued under him; and that the scepter which he will sway will be firm
and irresistible. See, for the applicability of this to the Messiah, the
notes at [Psa 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009).

\(4\) It may be added that the psalm is such as one might expect to find
in the poetic writings of the Hebrews, with the views which they
entertained of the Messiah. The promised Messiah was the object of
deepest interest to their minds. All their hopes centered in him. To him
they looked forward as the Great Deliverer; and all their anticipations
of what the people of God were to be clustered around him. He was to be
a Prince, a Conqueror, a Deliverer, a Saviour. To him the eyes of the
nation were directed; he was shadowed forth by their pompous religious
rites, and their sacred bards sang his advent. That we should find an
entire psalm composed with reference to him, designed to set forth his
character and the glory of his reign, is no more than what we should
expect to find among a people where poetry is cultivated at all, and
where these high hopes were cherished in reference to his advent; and
especially if to this view of their national poetry, in itself
considered, there be added the idea that the sacred bards wrote under
the influence of inspiration, nothing is more natural than that we
should expect to find a poetic composition having such a sole and
exclusive reference. Nothing would have been more unnatural than that,
with these prevailing views and hopes, and with the fact before us that
so much of the Old Testament is sacred poetry, we should have found no
such production as the second psalm, on the supposition that it had an
original and exclusive reference to the Messiah.

[Psalms 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 2:1</span></span>

Why do the heathen rage - "Why do nations make a noise?" Prof.
Alexander. The word "heathen" here - גוים gôyim - means properly
"nations," with out respect, so far as the word is concerned, to the
character of the nations. It was applied by the Hebrews to the
surrounding nations, or to all other people than their own; and as those
nations were in fact pagans, or idolators, the word came to have this
signification. [Neh 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#008); [Jer
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#010); [Eze
23:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#030); [Eze
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#011); compare אדם 'âdâm, [Jer
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#020). The word Gentile among the
Hebrews (Greek, ἔθνος ethnos expressed the same thing. [Mat
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#015); [Mat
6:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#032); [Mat
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005), [Mat
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#018); [Mat
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#021), et soepe. The word rendered
"rage" - רגשׁ râgash - means to make a noise or tumult, and would be
expressive of violent commotion or agitation. It occurs in the Hebrew
Scriptures only in this place, though the corresponding Chaldee word -
רגשׁ regash is found in [Dan 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#006), [Dan
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#011), [Dan
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#015) - rendered in [Dan
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#006), "assembled together," in the
margin "came tumultuously," - and in [Dan
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#011), [Dan
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#015), rendered "assembled." The
psalmist here sees the nations in violent agitation or commotion, as if
under high excitement, engaged in accomplishing some purpose - rushing
on to secure something, or to prevent something. The image of a mob, or
of a tumultuous unregulated assemblage, would probably convey the idea
of the psalmist. The word itself does not enable us to determine how
extensive this agitation would be, but it is evidently implied that it
would be a somewhat general movement; a movement in which more than one
nation or people would participate. The matter in hand was something
that affected the nations generally, and which would produce violent
agitation among them.

And the people - לאמים Le'umiym. A word expressing substantially the
same idea, that of people, or nations, and referring here to the same
thing as the word rendered "heathen" - according to the laws of Hebrew
parallelism in poetry. It is the people here that are seen in violent
agitation: the conduct of the rulers, as associated with them, is
referred to in the next verse.

Imagine - Our word "imagine" does not precisely express the idea here.
We mean by it, "to form a notion or idea in the mind; to fancy."
Webster. The Hebrew word, הגה hâgâh, is the same which, in [Psa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002), is rendered "meditate." See the
notes at that verse. It means here that the mind is engaged in
deliberating on it; that it plans, devises, or forms a purpose; - in
other words, the persons referred to are thinking about some purpose
which is here called a vain purpose; they are meditating some project
which excites deep thought, but which cannot be effectual.

A vain thing - That is, which will prove to be a vain thing, or a thing
which they cannot accomplish. It cannot mean that they were engaged in
forming plans which they supposed would be vain - for no persons would
form such plans; but that they were engaged in designs which the result
would show to be unsuccessful. The reference here is to the agitation
among the nations in respect to the divine purpose to set up the Messiah
as king over the world, and to the opposition which this would create
among the nations of the earth. See the notes at [Psa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002). An ample fulfillment of this
occurred in the opposition to him when he came in the flesh, and in the
resistance everywhere made since his death to his reign upon the earth.
Nothing has produced more agitation in the world (compare [Act
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#006)), and nothing still excites more
determined resistance. The truths taught in this verse are:

\(1\) that sinners are opposed - even so much as to produce violent
agitation of mind, and a fixed and determined purpose - to the plans and
decrees of God, especially with respect to the reign of the Messiah; and

\(2\) that their plans to resist this will be vain and ineffectual;
wisely as their schemes may seem to be laid, and determined as they
themselves are in regard to their execution, yet they must find them
vain.

What is implied here of the particular plans against the Messiah, is
true of all the purposes of sinners, when they array themselves against
the government of God.

[Psalms 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 2:2</span></span>

The kings of the earth - This verse is designed to give a more specific
form to the general statement in [Psa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001). In the first verse the psalmist
sees a general commotion among the nations as engaged in some plan that
he sees must be a vain one; here he describes more particularly the
cause of the excitement, and gives a nearer view of what is occurring.
He now sees kings and rulers engaged in a specific and definite plot
against Yahweh and against His Anointed. The word "kings" here is a
general term, which would be applicable to all rulers - as the kingly
government was the only one then known, and the nations were under the
control of absolute monarchs. A sufficient fulfillment would be found,
however, if any rulers were engaged in doing what is here described.

Set themselves - Or, take their stand. The latter expression would
perhaps better convey the sense of the original. It is the idea of
taking a stand, or of setting themselves in array, which is denoted by
the expression; - they combine; they resolve; they are fixed in their
purpose. Compare [Exo 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#004); [Exo
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#017); [Exo
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#005). The attitude here is that of
firm or determined resistance.

And the rulers - A slight addition to the word kings. The sense is, that
there was a general combination among all classes of rulers to
accomplish what is here specified. It was not confined to any one class.

Take counsel together - Consult together. Compare [Psa
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#013), "While they took counsel
together against me." The word used here, יחד yachad, means properly to
found, to lay the foundation of, to establish; then, to be founded
(Niphal); to support oneself; to lean upon - as, for example, to lean
upon the elbow. Thus used, it is employed with reference to persons
reclining or leaning upon a couch or cushion, especially as deliberating
together, as the Orientals do in the divan or council. Compare the notes
at [Psa 83:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#003). The idea here is that of
persons assembled to deliberate on an important matter.

Against the Lord - Against Jehovah - the small capitals of "Lord" in our
common version indicating that the original word is Yahweh. The meaning
is, that they were engaged in deliberating against Yahweh in respect to
the matter here referred to - to wit, his purpose to place the "Anointed
One," his King ([Psa 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006)), on the hill
of Zion. It is not meant that they were in other respects arrayed
against him, though it is true in fact that opposition to God in one
respect may imply that there is an aversion to him in all respects, and
that the same spirit which would lead men to oppose him in any one of
his purposes would, if carried out, lead them to oppose him in all
things.

And against his Anointed - - משׁיחו meshı̂ychô - his Messiah: hence, our
word Messiah, or Christ. The word means "Anointed," and the allusion is
to the custom of anointing kings and priests with holy oil when setting
them apart to office, or consecrating them to their work. Compare [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001), note; [Dan
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026), note. The word Messiah, or
Anointed, is therefore of so general a character in its signification
that its mere use would not determine to whom it was to be applied -
whether to a king, to a priest, or to the Messiah properly so called.
The reference is to be determined by something in the connection. All
that the word here necessarily implies is, that there was some one whom
Yahweh regarded as his Anointed one, whether king or priest, against
whom the rulers of the earth had arrayed themselves. The subsequent part
of the psalm [Psa 2:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006) enables us to
ascertain that the reference here is to one who was a King, and that he
sustained to Yahweh the relation of a Son. The New Testament, and the
considerations suggested in the introduction to the psalm (Section 4),
enable us to understand that the reference is to the Messiah properly so
called - Jesus of Nazareth. This is expressly declared [Act
4:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#025) to have had its fulfillment in
the purposes of Herod, Pontius Pilate, the Gentiles, and the people of
Israel, in rejecting the Saviour and putting him to death. No one can
doubt that all that is here stated in the psalm had a complete
fulfillment in their combining to reject him and to put him to death;
and we are, therefore, to regard the psalm as particularly referring to
this transaction. Their conduct was, however, an illustration of the
common feelings of rulers and people concerning him, and it was proper
to represent the nations in general as in commotion in regard to him.

[Psalms 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 2:3</span></span>

Let us break their bands asunder - The bands of Yahweh and of his
Anointed. They who are engaged in this combination or conspiracy regard
Yahweh and his Anointed as one, and as having one object - to set up a
dominion over the world. Hence, they take counsel against both; and,
with the same purpose and design, endeavor to cast off the authority of
each. The word "bands" here refers to the restraints imposed by their
authority. The figure is probably taken from fastening a yoke on oxen,
or the bands or cords which were used in plowing - the bands of the yoke
being significant of their subjection to the authority or will of
another. The same figure is used by the Saviour in [Mat
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029) : "Take my yoke upon you." The
idea here is, that it was the purpose of Yahweh and his Anointed to
establish a dominion over men, and that it was equally the purpose of
the kings and rulers here referred to that it should not be done.

And cast away their cords from us - The same idea under another form -
the cords referring not to that which would bind them as prisoners, but
to the ropes or thongs which bound oxen to the plow; and, hence, to that
which would bind men to the service of God. The word translated "cords"
is a stronger word than that which is rendered bands. It means properly
what is twisted or interlaced, and refers to the usual manner in which
ropes are made. Perhaps, also, in the words "let us cast away" there is
the expression of an idea that it could be easily done: that they had
only to will it, and it would be done. Together, the expressions refer
to the purpose among men to cast off the government of God, and
especially that part of his administration which refers to his purpose
to establish a kingdom under the Messiah. It thus indicates a prevalent
state of the human mind as being impatient of the restraints and
authority of God, and especially of the dominion of his Son, anointed as
King.

The passage [Psa 2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001) proves:

\(1\) that the government of Yahweh, the true God, and the Messiah or
Christ, is the same;

\(2\) that opposition to the Messiah, or to Christ, is in fact
opposition to the purposes of the true God;

\(3\) that it may be expected that men will oppose that government, and
there will be agitation and commotion in endeavoring to throw it off.

The passage, considered as referring to the Messiah, had an ample
fulfillment

\(a\) in the purposes of the high priests, of Herod, and of Pilate, to
put him to death, and in the general rejection of him by his own
countrymen;

\(b\) in the general conduct of mankind - in their impatience of the
restraints of the law of God, and especially of that law as promulgated
by the Saviour, demanding submission and obedience to him; and

\(c\) in the conduct of individual sinners - in the opposition of the
human heart to the authority of the Lord Jesus.

The passage before us is just as applicable to the world now as it was
to the time when the Saviour personally appeared on the earth.

[Psalms 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 2:4</span></span>

He that sitteth in the heavens - God, represented as having his home,
his seat, his throne in heaven, and thence administering the affairs of
the world. This verse commences the second strophe or stanza of the
psalm; and this strophe [Psa 2:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004)
corresponds with the first [Psa 2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)
in its structure. The former describes the feelings and purposes of
those who would cast off the government of God; this describes the
feelings and purposes of God in the same order, for in each case the
psalmist describes what is done, and then what is said: the nations rage
tumultuously [Psa 2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001), and then say
[Psa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#003), "Let us break their bands."
God sits calmly in the heavens, smiling on their vain attempts [Psa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004), and then solemnly declares [Psa
2:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#005) that, in spite of all their
opposition, he "has set his King upon his holy hill of Zion." There is
much sublimity in this description. While men rage and are tumultuous in
opposing his plans, he sits calm and undisturbed in his own heaven.
Compare the notes at the similar place in [Isa
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#004).

Shall laugh - Will smile at their vain attempts; will not be disturbed
or agitated by their efforts; will go calmly on in the execution of his
purposes. Compare as above [Isa 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#004).
See also [Pro 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#026); [Psa
37:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#013); [Psa
59:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#008). This is, of course, to be
regarded as spoken after the manner of men, and it means that God will
go steadily forward in the accomplishment of his purposes. There is
included also the idea that he will look with contempt on their vain and
futile efforts.

The Lord shall have them in derision - The same idea is expressed here
in a varied form, as is the custom in parallelism in Hebrew poetry. The
Hebrew word לעג lâ‛ag, means properly to stammer; then to speak in a
barbarous or foreign tongue; then to mock or deride, by imitating the
stammering voice of anyone. Gesenius, Lexicon Here it is spoken of God,
and, of course, is not to be understood literally, anymore than when
eyes, and hands, and feet are spoken of as pertaining to him. The
meaning is, that there is a result in the case, in the Divine Mind, as
if he mocked or derided the vain attempts of men; that is, he goes
calmly forward in the execution of his own purposes, and he looks upon
and regards their efforts as vain, as we do the efforts of others when
we mock or deride them. The truth taught in this verse is, that God will
carry forward his own plans in spite of all the attempts of men to
thwart them. This general truth may lie stated in two forms:

\(1\) He sits undisturbed and unmoved in heaven while men rage against
him, and while they combine to cast off his authority.

\(2\) He carries forward his own plans in spite of them. This he does:

\(a\) directly, accomplishing his schemes without regard to their
attempts; and

\(b\) by making their purposes tributary to his own, so making them the
instruments in carrying out his own plans. Compare [Act
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#028).

[Psalms 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 2:5</span></span>

Then shall he speak unto them - That is, this seeming indifference and
unconcern will not last forever. He will not always look calmly on, nor
will he suffer them to accomplish their purposes without interposing.
When he has shown how he regards their schemes - how impotent they are,
how much they are really the objects of derision, considered as an
attempt to cast off his authority - he will interpose and declare his
own purposes - his determination to establish his king on the hill of
Zion. This is implied in the word "then."

In his wrath - In anger. His contempt for their plans will be followed
by indignation against themselves for forming such plans, and for their
efforts to execute them. One of these things is not inconsistent with
the other, for the purpose of the rebels may be very weak and futile,
and yet their wickedness in forming the plan may be very great. The
weakness of the scheme, and the fact that it will be vain, does not
change the character of him who has made it; the fact that he is foolish
does not prove that he is not wicked. God will treat the scheme and
those who form it as they deserve - the one with contempt, the other
with his wrath. The word "wrath" here, it is hardly necessary to say,
should be interpreted in the same manner as the word "laugh" in [Psa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004), not as denoting a feeling
precisely like that which exists in the human mind, subject as man is to
unreasonable passion, but as it is proper to apply it to God - the
strong conviction (without passion or personal feeling) of the evil of
sin, and the expression of his purpose in a manner adapted to show that
evil, and to restrain others from its commission. It means that he will
speak to them as if he were angry; or that his treatment of them will be
such as men experience from others when they are angry.

And vex them - The word here rendered "vex" - בהל bâhal - means in the
original or Qal form, to tremble; and then, in the form used here, the
Piel, to cause to tremble, to terrify, to strike with consternation.
This might be done either by a threat or by some judgment indicative of
displeasure or anger. [Psa 83:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#015); [Dan
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#044); [Job
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#010). The idea here is that he would
alarm them, or make them quake with fear, by what is specified of his
purpose; to wit, by his determination to set his King on his holy hill,
and by placing the scepter of the earth in his hands. Their designs,
therefore, would be frustrated, and if they did not submit to him they
must perish (see [Psa 2:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009)).

In his sore displeasure - literally, in his "heat" or "burning," that
is, in his anger; as we speak of one that is inflamed with anger, or
that burns with indignation; or, as we speak of the passions, kindling
into a flame. The meaning here is, that God would be displeased with
their purposes, and that the expression of his design would be adapted
to fill them with the deepest alarm. Of course, all such words are to be
interpreted in accordance with what we know to be the nature of God, and
not in accordance with the same passions in men. God is opposed to sin,
and will express his opposition as if he felt angry, but it will be in
the most calm manner, and not as the result of passion. It will be
simply because it ought to be so.

[Psalms 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 2:6</span></span>

Yet have I set my king - The word "yet" is merely the translation of the
conjunction "and." It is rendered in the Vulgate "but ...autem;" and so
in the Septuagint, δέ de. It would be better rendered perhaps by the
usual word "and:" "And I have set or constituted my king," etc. This is
properly to be regarded as the expression of God himself; as what he
says in reply to their declared purposes [Psa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#003), and as what is referred to in
[Psa 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#005). The meaning is, he would
speak to them in his anger, and say, "In spite of all your purposes and
all your opposition, I have set my king on the hill of Zion." That is,
they had their plans and God had his; they meant to cast off his
authority, and to prevent his purpose to set up the Messiah as king; he
resolved, on the contrary, to carry out his purposes, and he would do
it. The word rendered set - נסך nâsak - means, literally, to pour, to
pour out, as in making a libation to the Deity, [Exo
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#009); [Hos
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#004); [Isa
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001); then, to pour out oil in
anointing a king or priest, and hence, to consecrate, to inaugurate,
etc. See [Jos 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#021); [Psa
83:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#011); [Mic
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#005). The idea here is, that he had
solemnly inaugurated or constituted the Messiah as king; that is, that
he had formed the purpose to do it, and he therefore speaks as if it
were already done. The words "my King" refer, of course, to the anointed
One, the Messiah, [Psa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002). It is not
simply a king, or the king, but "my king," meaning that he derived his
appointment from God, and that he was placed there to execute his
purposes. This indicates the very near relation which the anointed One
sustains to him who had appointed him, and prepares us for what is said
in the subsequent verse, where he is called His Son.

Upon my holy hill of Zion - Zion was the southern hill in the city of
Jerusalem. See the notes at [Isa 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008).
It was the highest of the hills on which the city was built. It was made
by David the capital of his kingdom, and was hence called the city of
David, [Ch2 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#002). By the poets and
prophets it is often put for Jerusalem itself, [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003); [Isa
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018); [Isa
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#024); [Isa
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#014), et al. It did not obtain this
distinction until it was taken by David from the Jebusites, [Sa2
5:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#005); [Ch1
11:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#004). To that place David removed
the ark of the covenant, and there he built an altar to the Lord in the
threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite, [Sa2
24:15-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#015). Zion became thenceforward
the metropolis of the king dom, and the name was transferred to the
entire city. It is to this that the passage here refers; and the meaning
is, that in that metropolis or capital God had constituted his Messiah
king, or had appointed him to reign over his people. This cannot refer
to David himself, for in no proper sense was he constituted or
inaugurated king in Jerusalem; that is, there was no such ceremony of
inauguration as is referred to here. Zion was called the "holy hill," or
"the hill of my holiness" (Hebrew), because it was set apart as the seat
of the theocracy, or the residence of God, from the time that David
removed the ark there. That became the place where God reigned, and
where his worship was celebrated. This must refer to the Messiah, and to
the fact that God had set him apart to reign over his people, and thence
over all the earth. The truth taught in this passage is, that God will
carry forward his own purposes in spite of all the opposition which men
can make, and that it is his deliberate design to make his anointed One
- the Messiah - King over all.

[Psalms 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 2:7</span></span>

I will declare the decree - We have here another change in the speaker.
The Anointed One is himself introduced as declaring the great purpose
which was formed in regard to him, and referring to the promise which
was made to him, as the foundation of the purpose of Yahweh [Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006) to set him on the hill of Zion.
The first strophe or stanza [Psa 2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)
is closed with a statement made by the rebels of their intention or
design; the second [Psa 2:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004) with a
statement of the purpose of Yahweh; the third is introduced by this
declaration of the Messiah himself. The change of the persons speaking
gives a dramatic interest to the whole psalm. There can be no doubt that
the word "I" here refers to the Messiah. The word decree - חק chôq -
means properly something decreed, prescribed, appointed. See [Job
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#014). Compare [Gen
47:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#026); [Exo
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#024). Thus it is equivalent to law,
statute, ordinance. Here it refers not to a law which he was to obey,
but to an ordinance or statute respecting his reign: the solemn purpose
of Yahweh in regard to the kingdom which the Messiah was to set up; the
constitution of his kingdom. This, as the explanation shows, implied two
things:

\(a\) that he was to be regarded and acknowledged as his Son, or to have
that rank and dignity [Psa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007); and

\(b\) that the pagan and the uttermost parts of the earth were to be
given him for a possession, or that his reign was to extend over all the
world [Psa 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008).

The word "declare" here means that he would give utterance to, or that
he would now himself make a statement in explanation of the reason why
Yahweh had determined to establish him as King on his holy hill of Zion.
There is great beauty in thus introducing the Messiah himself as making
this declaration, presenting it now in the form of a solemn covenant or
pledge. The determination of Yahweh [Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006) to establish him as King on his
holy hill is thus seen not to be arbitrary, but to be in fulfillment of
a solemn promise made long before, and is therefore an illustration of
his covenant faithfulness and truth. "The Lord hath said unto me."
Yahweh hath said. See [Psa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002), [Psa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004). He does not intimate when it was
that he had said this, but the fair interpretation is, that it was
before the purpose was to be carried into execution to place him as King
in Zion; that is, as applicable to the Messiah, before he became
incarnate or was manifested to execute his purpose on earth. It is
implied, therefore, that it was in some previous state, and that he had
come forth in virtue of the pledge that he would be recognized as the
Son of God. The passage cannot be understood as referring to Christ
without admitting his existence previous to the incarnation, for all
that follows is manifestly the result of the exalted rank which God
purposed to give him as his Son, or as the result of the promise made to
him then.

Thou art my Son - That is, Yahweh had declared him to be his Son; he had
conferred on him the rank and dignity fairly involved in the title The
Son of God. In regard to the general meaning of this, and what is
implied in it, see [Mat 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001), note;
[Heb 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002), note; [Heb
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005), note; [Rom
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004), note; and [Joh
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#018), note. The phrase "sons of God"
is elsewhere used frequently to denote the saints, the children of God,
or men eminent for rank and power (compare [Gen
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#002), [Gen
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#004); [Job
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006); [Hos
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010); [Joh
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012); [Rom
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#014), [Rom
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019); [Phi
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015); [Jo1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001)); and once to denote angels [Job
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#007); but the appellation "The Son of
God" is not appropriated in the Scriptures to anyone but the Messiah. It
does not occur before this in the Old Testament, and it occurs but once
after this, [Dan 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#025). See the notes
at that passage. This makes its use in the case before us the more
remarkable, and justifies the reasoning of the author of the epistle to
the Hebrews [Heb 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005) as to its
meaning. The true sense, therefore, according to the Hebrew usage, and
according to the proper meaning of the term, is, that he sustained a
relation to God which could be compared only with that which a son among
men sustains to his father; and that the term, as thus used, fairly
implies an equality in nature with God himself. It is such a term as
would not be applied to a mere man; it is such as is not applied to the
angels [Heb 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005); and therefore it must
imply a nature superior to either.

This day - On the application of this in the New Testament, see the
notes at [Act 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033) and the notes at
[Heb 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005). The whole passage has been
often appealed to in support of the doctrine of the "eternal generation"
of Christ, meaning that he was "begotten" from eternity; that is, that
his divine nature was in some sense an emanation from the Father, and
that this is from eternity. Whatever may be thought of that doctrine,
however, either as to its intelligibility or its truth, there is nothing
in the use of the phrase "this day," or in the application of the
passage in the New Testament [Act
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033); [Heb
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005), to sustain it. The language,
indeed, in the connection in which it is found, does, as remarked above,
demonstrate that he had a pre-existence, since it is addressed to him as
the result of a decree or covenant made with him by Yahweh, and as the
foundation of the purpose to set him as King on the hill of Zion. The
words "this day" would naturally refer to that time when this "decree"
was made, or this covenant formed; and as that was before the creation
of the world, it must imply that he had an existence then.

The time referred to by the meaning of the word is, that when it was
determined to crown him as the Messiah. This is founded on the relation
subsisting between him and Yahweh, and implied when in that relation he
is called his "Son;" but it determines nothing as to the time when this
relation commenced. Yahweh, in the passage, is regarded as declaring his
purpose to make him King in Zion, and the language is that of a solemn
consecration to the kingly office. He is speaking of this as a purpose
before he came into the world; it was executed, or carried into effect,
by his resurrection from the dead, and by the exaltation consequent on
that. Compare [Act 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033) and [Eph
1:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020). Considered, then, as a
promise or purpose, this refers to the period before the incarnation;
considered as pertaining to the execution of that purpose, it refers to
the time when he was raised from the dead and exalted over all things as
King in Zion. In neither case can the words "this day" be construed as
meaning the same as eternity, or from eternity; and therefore they can
determine nothing respecting the doctrine of" eternal generation."

Have I begotten thee - That is, in the matter referred to, so that it
would be proper to apply to him the phrase "my Son," and to constitute
him "King" in Zion. The meaning is, that he had so constituted the
relationship of Father and Son in the case, that it was proper that the
appellation "Son" should be given him, and that he should be regarded
and addressed as such. So Prof. Alexander: "The essential meaning of the
phrase "I have begotten thee" is simply this, "I am thy Father." This
is, of course, to be understood in accordance with the nature of God,
and we are not to bring to the interpretation the ideas which enter into
that human relationship. It means that in some proper sense - some sense
appropriate to the Deity - such a relation was constituted as would
justify this reference to the most tender and important of all human
relationships. In what sense that is, is a fair subject of inquiry, but
it is not proper to assume that it is in anything like a literal sense,
or that there can be no other sense of the passage than that which is
implied in the above-named doctrine, for it cannot be literal, and there
are other ideas that may be conveyed by the phrase than that of "eternal
generation." The word rendered "begotten" (ילד yâlad) determines nothing
certainly as to the mode in which this relationship was formed. It means
properly:

\(1\) to bear, to bring forth as a mother, [Gen
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#001);

\(2\) to beget, as a father, [Gen
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#018); and then

\(3\) as applied to God it is used in the sense of creating - or of so
creating or forming as that the result would be that a relation would
exist which might be compared with that of a father and a son.

[Deu 32:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#018) : "of the Rock that begat
thee thou art unmindful." Compare [Jer
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#027) : "Saying to a block (idol), Thou
art my father, thou hast begotten me." So Paul says, [Co1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015) : "In Christ Jesus I have
begotten you through the Gospel." The full meaning, therefore, of this
word would be met if it be supposed that Yahweh had given the Messiah
this place and rank in such a sense that it was proper to speak of
himself as the Father and the Anointed One as the Son. And was there not
enough in designating him to this high office; in sending him into the
world; in raising him from the dead; in placing him at his own right
hand - appointing him as King and Lord - to justify this language? Is
not this the very thing under consideration? Is it proper, then, in
connection with this passage, to start the question about his eternal
generation? Compare the notes at [Rom
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004). On this passage Calvin says (in
loc.), "I know that this passage is explained by many as referring to
the eternal generation of Christ, who maintain that in the adverb today
there is, as it were, a perpetual act beyond the limits of time,
denoted. But the Apostle Paul is a more faithful and competent
interpreter of this prophecy, who in [Act
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033) recalls us to that which I have
called a glorious demonstration of Christ. He was said to be begotten,
therefore, not that he might be the Son of God, by which he might begin
to be such, but that he might be manifested to the world as such.
Finally, this begetting ought to be understood not of the mutual
relation of the Father and the Son, but it signifies merely that he who
was from the beginning hidden in the bosom of the Father, and who was
obscurely shadowed forth under the law, from the time when he was
manifested with clear intimation of his rank, was acknowledged as the
Son of God, as it is said in [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)." So Prof. Alexander, though
supposing that this is founded on an eternal relation between the Father
and the Son, says, "This day have I begotten thee may be considered as
referring only to the coronation of Messiah, which is an ideal one,"
vol. i., p. 15. The result of the exposition of this passage may
therefore be thus stated:

\(a\) The term "Son," as used here, is a special appellation of the
Messiah - a term applicable to him in a sense in which it can be given
to no other being.

\(b\) As used here, and as elsewhere used, it supposes his existence
before the incarnation.

\(c\) Its use here, and the purpose formed, imply that he had an
existence before this purpose was formed, so that he could be personally
addressed, and so that a promise could be made to him.

\(d\) The term "Son" is not used here in reference to that anterior
relation, and determines nothing as to the mode of his previous being -
whether from eternity essentially in the nature of God; or whether in
some mysterious sense begotten; or whether as an emanation of the Deity;
or whether created.

\(e\) The term, as Calvin suggests, and as maintained by Prof.
Alexander, refers here only to his being constituted King - to the act
of coronation - whenever that occurred.

\(f\) This, in fact, occurred when he was raised from the dead, and when
he was exalted to the right hand of God in heaven [Act
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033), so that the application of the
passage by Paul in the Acts accords with the result to which we are led
by the fair interpretation of the passage.

\(g\) The passage, therefore, determines nothing, one way or the other,
respecting the doctrine of eternal generation, and cannot, therefore, be
used in proof of that doctrine.

[Psalms 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 2:8</span></span>

Ask of me - That is, of God. This is a part of the "decree" or purpose,
as mentioned in [Psa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007). That decree
embraced not only the design to constitute him as his Son, in the sense
that he was to be king in Zion, but also the purpose to give him a
dominion embracing "the heathen" and "the uttermost parts of the earth."
This wide dominion was to be given him on condition that he would "ask"
for it, thus keeping up the idea that Yahweh, as such, is the great
source of authority and empire, and that the Messiah, as such occupies a
rank subordinate to him. This relation of the Father and Son is
everywhere recognized in the New Testament. As we may be sure that the
Messiah will ask for this, it follows that the world will yet be brought
under his scepter. It may be added that as this wide dominion is
promised to the Messiah only on condition that he "asks" for it or prays
for it, much more is it true that we can hope for this and for no favor
from God, unless we seek it by earnest prayer.

And I shall give thee - I will give thee. That is, he would ultimately
give him this possession. No time is specified when it would be done,
and the prophecy will be fulfilled if it shall be accomplished in any
period of the history of the world.

The heathen - The nations (notes, [Psa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)); that is, the world. In the time
of the writer of the psalm, the world would be spoken of as divided into
Hebrews and other nations; the people of God and foreigners. The same
division is often referred to in the New Testament under the terms Jew
and Gentile, as the Greeks divided all the world into Greeks and
barbarians. The word would now embrace all the nations which are not
under the influence of the true religion.

For thine inheritance - Thy heritage; thy portion as my Son. There is an
allusion here to the fact that he had constituted him as his Son, and
hence, it was proper to speak of him as the heir of all things. See the
notes at [Heb 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#004).

And the uttermost parts of the earth - The farthest regions of the
world. This promise would properly embrace all the world as then known,
as it is now known, as it shall be hereafter known.

For thy possession - That is, as king. This, on the earth, was be to his
possession as the Son of Yahweh, constituted as king. It may be remarked
here,

\(a\) that this can have its fulfillment only in the Lord Jesus Christ.
It was not true of David nor of any other Hebrew monarch that he had
conceded to him, in fact, any such possession. Their dominions extended,
at any time, but little beyond the bounds of Palestine, and embraced a
very limited part of the earth - but a small territory, even as compared
with many then existing kingdoms. The phrase used here could never have
been applied to the limited and narrow country of Palestine.

\(b\) The promise is to be understood as still in full force. It has
never been cancelled or recalled, and though its fulfillment has seemed
to be long delayed, yet as no time was specified, its spirit and meaning
have not been disregarded. Events have shown that it was not intended
that it should be speedily accomplished; and events, when no time is
specified, should be allowed to be interpreters of the original meaning
of the prophecy.

\(c\) The promise will yet be fulfilled. It is evidently supposed in the
promise that the Messiah would ask for this; and it is solemnly affirmed
that if he did, this wide inheritance would be granted to him. The
world, then, is to be regarded as given by covenant to the Son of God,
and in due time he will set up his dominion over the earth, and rule
over mankind. The period is coming when the actual scepter swayed over
the nations of the earth will be that of the Son of God, and when his
right to give laws and to reign will be acknowledged from the rising to
the setting sun. This is the only thing in the future that is certainly
known to us, and this is enough to make everything in that future
bright.

[Psalms 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 2:9</span></span>

Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron - That is, evidently, thine
enemies, for it cannot be supposed to be meant that he would sway such a
scepter over his own people. The idea is that he would crush and subdue
all his foes. He would have absolute power, and the grant which had been
made to him would be accompanied with authority sufficient to hold it.
That dominion which was to be conceded to him would be not only one of
protection to his friends, but also of punishment on his enemies; and
the statement here is made prominent because the former part of the
psalm had respect to rebels, and the Messiah is here represented as
being invested with power sufficient to punish and restrain them. The
Vulgate renders this "thou shalt rule;" the Septuagint, "thou shalt feed
- ποιμανεῖς poimaneis; that is, thou shalt feed them as a shepherd does
his flock; thou shalt exercise over them the care and protection of a
shepherd. This rendering occurs by a slight change in the pointing of
the Hebrew word, though the most approved mode of pointing the word is
that which is followed in our common translation. DeWette, Hengstenberg,
Alexander, Horsley, adopt the common reading. What is said in this verse
has been urged as an objection to referring it to the Messiah. The
remark of DeWette on this matter has been quoted in the introduction to
this psalm, Section 4 (3). But it may be observed, while it is
everywhere represented that the scepter of the Messiah over the earth
will be a mild scepter, it is also everywhere stated that he will
ultimately crush and overthrow all his foes.

Thus, in [Isa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004) : "He shall smite
the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips
shall he slay the wicked." So [Psa
110:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#006) : "He shall judge among the
heathen; he shall fill the places with the dead bodies." So, likewise,
[Rev 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#015) : "And out of his mouth
goeth a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations; and he
shall rule them with a rod of iron; and he treadeth the winepress of the
fierceness and wrath of Almighty God." So also in Matt. 25, and
elsewhere, it is said that he will come to judgment, and will consign
all his foes to appropriate punishment. While it is said that the reign
of the Messiah would be a mild reign, and that his kingdom would not be
of this world, and while he is represented as the Prince of peace, it is
also said that he would be invested with all the authority of a
sovereign. While he would have power to protect his friends, he would
also have power to humble and crush his foes. The expression "with a rod
of iron" refers to the scepter which he would bear. A scepter was
sometimes made of wood, sometimes of gold, sometimes of ivory, and
sometimes of iron. The idea, when the past was the case, was, that the
dominion was absolute, and that there was nothing that could resist it.
Perhaps the idea of justice or severity would be that which would be
most naturally suggested by this. As applicable to the Messiah, it can
only mean that his enemies would be crushed and subdued before him.

Thou shalt dash them in pieces - The same idea is here expressed in
another form, but indicating more particularly the ease with which it
would be done. The word rendered "dash them in pieces" means to break in
pieces as an earthen vessel, [Jdg
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#020); [Jer
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#028). It is used to denote the
crushing of infants on stones, [Psa
137:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#009). The word "shiver" would well
express the idea here - "thou shalt shiver them."

Like a potter's vessel - A vessel or instrument made by a potter; a
vessel made of clay. This is easily broken, and especially with a rod of
iron, and the idea here is that he would crush and subdue his enemies as
easily as this could be done. No image could more happily express the
ease with which he would subdue his foes; and this accords with all the
representations of the New Testament - that with infinite case - with a
word - Christ can subdue his enemies, and consign them to ruin. Compare
[Mat 25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041), [Mat
25:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046); [Luk
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#027). The sense here is, simply, that
the Messiah would be absolute; that he would have power to quell all
rebellion against God, and to punish all those that rise up against him;
and that on those who are incorrigibly rebellious he would exercise that
power, and take effectual means to subdue them. This is merely what is
done by all just governments, and is by no means inconsistent with the
idea that such a government would be mild and gentle toward those who
are obedient. The protection of the righteous makes the punishment of
the wicked necessary in all governments, and the one cannot be secured
without the other. This verse is applied to the Messiah in the Book of
Revelation, [Rev 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#027), note; [Rev
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#015), note; compare [Rev
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#005), note (see the notes at these
passages).

[Psalms 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 2:10</span></span>

Be wise now, therefore, O ye kings - This is to be understood as the
language of the psalmist. See introduction to the psalm, Section 3. It
is an exhortation addressed to the rulers and princes whom the psalmist
saw engaged in opposition to the purpose of Yahweh [Psa
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001) - and hence, to all rulers and
princes - to act the part of wisdom, by not attempting to resist the
plans of God, but to submit to him, and secure his friendship. The
psalmist cautions them to take warning, in view of what must certainly
come upon the enemies of the Messiah; to cease their vain attempts to
oppose his reign, and, by a timely submission to him, to ensure his
friendship, and to escape the doom that must come upon his foes. The way
of wisdom, then, was not to engage in an attempt in which they must
certainly be crushed, but to secure at once the friendship of one
appointed by God to reign over the earth.

Be instructed - In your duty to Yahweh and his Anointed One; that is, in
the duty of submitting to this arrangement, and lending your influence
to promote it. The word used here, and rendered "be instructed," means
properly to chastise, chasten, correct; and it here means, be
admonished, exhorted, or warned. Compare [Pro
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#007); [Job
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#003); [Psa
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#007).

Ye judges of the earth - Ye who administer justice; that is, ye rulers.
This was formerly done by kings themselves, as it is now supposed to be
in monarchical governments, where the judges act in the name of the
king. In Republics, justice is supposed to be administered by the people
through those whom they have appointed to execute it. The word here is
equivalent to rulers, and the call is on those who occupy posts of
office and honor not to oppose the purposes of Yahweh, but to bring
their influence to the promotion of his designs. At the same time, it
cannot be doubted that it is implied that they should seek to be
interested personally in his reign.

[Psalms 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 2:11</span></span>

Serve the Lord with fear - With reverence, and with deep apprehensions
of the consequences of not serving and obeying him. That is, serve him
in not opposing, but in promoting his purpose of establishing a kingdom
under the Messiah, with the deep apprehension that if you do not do it,
he will arise and crush you in his wrath.

And rejoice - Prof. Alexander renders this "shout," and supposes that it
refers to the customary recognition of a present sovereign. The word
used - גיל gı̂yl - means properly to move in a circle, to revolve; and
then to dance in a circle, to exult, to rejoice. Then, according to
Gesenius, it means to tremble, to fear, from the leaping or palpitation
of the heart [Job 37:1](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#001); [Hos
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#005); [Psa
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#006). Gesenius renders it here "fear
with trembling." The common translation, however, better expresses the
sense. It means that they should welcome the purposes of Yahweh, and
exult in his reign, but that it should be done with a suitable
apprehension of his majesty and power, and with the reverence which
becomes the public acknowledgment of God.

With trembling - With reverence and awe, feeling that he has almighty
power, and that the consequences of being found opposed to him must be
overwhelming and awful. The duty here enjoined on kings and rulers is
that of welcoming the purposes of God, and of bringing their influence -
derived from the station which they occupy - to bear in promoting the
reign of truth upon the earth - a duty binding on kings and princes as
well as on other men. The feelings with which this is to be done are
those which belong to transactions in which the honor and the reign of
God are concerned. They are mingled feelings, derived from the mercy of
God on the one hand, and from his wrath on the other; from the hope
which his promise and purpose inspires, and from the apprehension
derived from his warnings and threatenings.

[Psalms 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 2:12</span></span>

Kiss the Son - Him whom God hath declared to be his Son [Psa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007), and whom, as such, he has
resolved to set as King on his holy hill [Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006). The word "kiss" here is used in
accordance with Oriental usages, for it was in this way that respect was
indicated for one of superior rank. This was the ancient mode of doing
homage or allegiance to a king, [Sa1
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001). It was also the mode of
rendering homage to an idol, [Kg1
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018); [Hos
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#002); [Job
31:27](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#027). The mode of rendering homage to
a king by a kiss was sometimes to kiss his hand, or his dress, or his
feet, as among the Persians. DeWette. The practice of kissing the hand
of a monarch is not uncommon in European courts as a token of
allegiance. The meaning here is that they should express their
allegiance to the Son of God, or recognize him as the authorized King,
with suitable expressions of submission and allegiance; that they should
receive him as King, and submit to his reign. Applied to others, it
means that they should embrace him as their Saviour.

Lest he be angry - If you do not acknowledge his claims, and receive him
as the Messiah.

And ye perish from the way - The word from in this place is supplied by
the translators. It is literally, "And ye perish the way." See the notes
at [Psa 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006). The meaning here seems to
be either "lest ye are lost in respect to the way," that is, the way to
happiness and salvation; or "lest ye fail to find the way" to life; or
"lest ye perish by the way," to wit, before you reach your destination,
and accomplish the object you have in view. The design seems to be to
represent them as pursuing a certain journey or path - as life is often
represented (compare [Psa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)) - and
as being cut down before they reached the end of their journey.

When his wrath is kindled - When his wrath burns. Applying to anger or
wrath a term which is common now, as when we speak of one whose anger is
heated, or who is hot with wrath.

But a little - Prof. Alexander renders this, "For his wrath will soon
burn." This, it seems to me, is in accordance with the original; the
word "little" probably referring to time, and not to the intensity of
his anger. This accords better also with the connection, for the design
is not to state that there will be degrees in the manifestation of his
anger, but that his anger would not long be delayed. In due time he
would execute judgment on his enemies; and whenever his anger began to
burn, his enemies must perish.

Blessed are all they that put their trust in him - Kings, princes,
people; - all, of every age and every land; the poor, the rich, the
bond, the free; white, black, copper-colored, or mixed; all in sickness
or health, in prosperity or adversity, in life or in death; all, of
every condition, and in all conceivable circumstances - are blessed who
put their trust in him. All need him as a Saviour; all will find him to
be a Saviour adapted to their wants. All who do this are happy (compare
the notes at [Psa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)); all are safe
in time and in eternity. This great truth is stated everywhere in the
Bible; and to induce the children of men - weak, and guilty, and
helpless - to put their trust in the Son of God, is the great design of
all the communications which God has made to mankind.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 3](psa003)

</div>
