<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa092)  [Next](psa094) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 93](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 93:0</span></span>

The author of this psalm is unknown, and there is nothing by which we
can determine this, or its date, or the occasion on which it was
written. It seems, from [Psa 93:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#005), to
have been composed with some reference to the sanctuary, and to the
service there: "Holiness becometh thine "house," O Lord," and it may
have been designed, with the last psalm, to have been used in the place
of public worship on the sabbath-day. It would appear, also, from the
structure of the psalm, that it was composed in view of some danger
which may have threatened the nation from some hostile power [Psa
93:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001), and that the design was to
impart confidence in God, or to keep up the assurance in the mind of the
people that God presided over all, and that his kingdom was safe. With
this view, it is adapted to inspire confidence in God in all ages, and
in all times of danger. In the Septuagint and the Latin Vulgate, the
title is, "The praise of an ode by David, for the day preceding the
sabbath, when the earth was founded." The origin of this title is
unknown, and it has no authority. There is no evidence that it was
composed by David, and the presumption from [Psa
93:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#005) is that it was composed after the
temple was built, and consequently after the death of David.

[Psalms 93:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 93:1</span></span>

The Lord reigneth - The same commencement of a psalm occurs in [Psa
97:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#001); [Psa
99:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#001). The same idea is often found
in the Scriptures. [Ch1 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#031); [Psa
47:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#008); [Isa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007); [Rev
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#006). The thought seems abrupt here.
It would appear as if the psalmist had been meditating on the dark
things which occur in the world; the mysteries which abound; the things
which seem irreconcilable with the idea that there is a just government
over the world, and that suddenly the idea occurs, as a flash of
lightning in a storm, that Yahweh reigns over all, and that all must be
right. Amidst all these things God sits upon the throne; he orders all
events; he sways his scepter over all; he orders all things according to
his own will; he secures the accomplishment of his own purposes.

He is clothed with majesty - That is, he puts on, or wears this; he
appears in this as a garb, or robe. The word rendered "majesty" means
properly "loftiness," and is applied to the swelling of the sea [Psa
89:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#009), or to a column of smoke, [Isa
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#018). The idea here is, that God is
exalted; and that he appears in such a manner as to indicate his proper
dignity. See the notes at [Isa 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001).

The Lord is clothed with strength, wherewith he hath girded himself -
There is an allusion here to the mode of dress among the Orientals - the
custom of girding the loins when one labored, or walked, or ran. See the
notes at [Mat 5:38-41](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#038).

The world also is stablished - Is firm; is on a solid foundation. It
cannot be shaken or destroyed by natural convulsions, or by the power of
man.

That it cannot be moved - Moved out of its place; overthrown; destroyed.
This seems to have been spoken in view of some impending calamity, as if
everything were to be swept away. The psalmist consoles himself with the
thought that the world was firmly established; that no storm or tempest
could be so violent as to remove it out of its place. The ground of
consolation is the essential stability of what God has ordained.

[Psalms 93:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 93:2</span></span>

Thy throne is established of old - Whatever might occur, the throne of
God was firm. That could not be moved. It had been set up from all
eternity. It had stood through all the convulsions and changes which had
occurred in the universe; and it would stand firm forever. Whatever
might change, that was immovable; and as long as that is unchanged we
have a ground of security and hope. Should "that" be moved, all would be
gone. The margin here is, as in Hebrew, "from then:" but it means "of
old;" from the most ancient times; that is, from the period indicated by
the next clause, "from everlasting."

Thou art from everlasting - From all eternity; thou hast always existed;
thou art ever the same [Psa 90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001).

[Psalms 93:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 93:3</span></span>

The floods have lifted up, O Lord, the floods have lifted up their voice
- The word here rendered "floods," means properly rivers, and then it
may be applied to any waters. The word voice here refers to the noise of
raging waters when they are agitated by the winds, or when they dash on
the shore. See the notes at [Psa 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#007).

The floods lift up their waves - As if they would sweep everything away.
The allusion here is to some calamity or danger which might, in its
strength and violence, be compared with the wild and raging waves of the
ocean. Or if it refers literally to the ocean in a storm, then the psalm
may have been the reflections of the author as he stood on the shore of
the sea, and saw the waves beat and dash against the shore. To one thus
looking upon the billows as they roll in toward the shore, it seems as
if they were angry; as if they intended to sweep everything away; as if
the rocks of the shore could not resist them. Yet they have their
bounds. They spend their strength; they break, and retire as if to
recover their force, and then they renew their attack with the same
result. But their power is limited. The rocky shore is unmoved. The
earth abides. God is over all. His throne is unshaken. No violence of
the elements can affect that; and, under his dominion, all is secure.

[Psalms 93:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 93:4</span></span>

The Lord on high is mightier than the noise of many waters - That is, he
is more powerful than those waters; he is able to control them. See [Psa
65:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#007), note; [Job
38:11](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#011), note. The original here is more
rapid in the course of the thought; more emphatic and forcible: "More
than the voice of waters - many - mighty - the breakers of the sea - in
the high place is Jehovah." He is over all those billows and breakers;
more mighty than they all. They can proceed no further than he permits;
they will be stayed when and where he commands. We can conceive of few
things which more illustrate the power and the majesty of God than the
fact that he thus presides over, and controls, the waves of the ocean.

Yea, than the mighty waves of the sea - The original word here
corresponds precisely with our word "breakers" - the mighty waves that
"break" on the beach.

[Psalms 93:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 93:5</span></span>

Thy testimonies are very sure - All that thou hast borne witness to; all
that thou hast affirmed or declared to be true. This would embrace "all
that" God has spoken, whether his law, his promises, his commands, his
prophecies, or his statements of what has occurred and of what will
occur. See the notes at [Psa 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007).

Holiness becometh thine house, O Lord - The psalm seems to have been
intended to be used in the sanctuary, as a part of public worship, and
the word "holiness" here would seem to mean a proper respect for God;
confidence in him; a state of mind free from all doubt, and from all
that is impure. Perhaps there may be here, also, the idea that in all
the convulsions of the world; in all that threatens to overthrow truth
and righteousness; in all the attacks which are made on the divine
government; in all the efforts of the defenders of error, and in the
midst of abounding iniquity, the church should maintain a firm adherence
to the principles of "holiness," to that which is right and true. There
should be one place - the church - where there would be no wavering in
regard to truth and holiness; one place, where the truth would be
defended whatever commotions might be abroad. The main idea, therefore,
in the psalm is, that, in view of the fact that God reigns, and that
nothing can frustrate his plans, or disturb his throne, we should
approach him with reverence, with humble trust, with sincere and pure
hearts.

In a larger sense, also, in the largest sense conceivable - it is true
that "holiness," purity, freedom from evil thoughts, from a wanton eye
and a wanton imagination, from unholy plans and purposes, should prevail
in the house of God, and should be regarded as indispensable to proper
worship. As heaven is pure, and as there shall enter there nothing "that
defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination or maketh a lie" [Rev
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027), so in the place where we seek
to prepare for that holy world - the sanctuary of God - nothing should
be allowed to enter that is impure and polluting; nothing that tends to
corrupt or defile the soul. It may be added, that attendance in a place
of public worship is calculated to make the heart pure, and to banish
unholy thoughts and purposes from the soul. A man who feels that he is
in the presence of a holy God, will not be likely to welcome into his
soul polluted images and unholy desires.

Forever - Margin, as in Hebrew, "to length of days." The idea is, that
it is always appropriate. See the notes at [Psa
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#006).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 94](psa094)

</div>
