<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa061)  [Next](psa063) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 62](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 62:0</span></span>

On the phrase in the title to this psalm, "To the chief Musician," see
the notes at the title to [Psa 4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001).
On the expression "To Jeduthun," see the notes at the title to [Psa
39:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001). Jeduthun was one of those who
were appointed by David to preside over the music of the tabernacle [Ch1
25:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#001), but it is impossible now to
determine why this psalm, and the others where his name is found in the
title [Psa 39:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001); Ps. 77, were
dedicated to him, or committed to his special care. The psalm is, in the
title, ascribed to David as the author, but we have no certain knowledge
on what occasion it was composed. Its contents agree well with the
common supposition that it is to be referred to the time of Absalom, and
to the troubles which David experienced in his rebellion.

The psalm, apparently for musical purposes only, is divided into three
parts, the divisions being indicated by the word Selah, [Psa
62:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#004), [Psa
62:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#008). Another division is indicated in
the original by the recurrence of the word אך 'ak - "truly" - at the
beginning of [Psa 62:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001), [Psa
62:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#004), [Psa
62:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#009), as if the mind of the author had
been greatly impressed with the importance of the particular sentiment
introduced by that word.

The general purpose of the psalm is to lead people to trust in God. The
contents are as follows:

I. A statement of the humble trust of the author in God - trust in him
as his only hope - as his rock and his refuge, [Psa
62:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001).

II\. A description of his enemies and of their designs. They devised
mischief; they sought to cast down others from their high places; they
delighted in falsehood; they made great pretensions of friendship, but
they were false in heart, [Psa 62:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#003).

III\. A renewed expression of the confidence of the psalmist in God -
repeating what he had said in [Psa
62:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001) - and reaffirming his entire
trust in the divine protection, [Psa
62:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#005).

IV\. An exhortation to others to trust in God, and not in people;
whether people of high or low condition; to trust in nothing else than
God: not in power - the power of oppression; not in the robbery of
others, or that which was obtained from others by violence; not in
riches, in whatever way they might have been acquired, [Psa
62:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#008).

V. Reasons for trusting in God, [Psa
62:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#011).

\(a\) All power belongs to him, [Psa
62:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#011),

\(b\) He is merciful or kind, [Psa
62:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#012),

\(c\) He is just or equitable, [Psa
62:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#012).

[Psalms 62:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 62:1</span></span>

Truly - Indeed; really. The state of mind indicated by this particle is
that of one who had been seriously contemplating a subject; who had
looked round on his own actual condition; who had taken an estimate of
all his resources, and of all his means of reliance, and who had
carefully examined his own state of mind to see what was his real trust,
and what were his real feelings toward God. Having done all this, he, at
last, breaks out with the expression - "My soul does sincerely confide
in God; I have no other resource; I have no power to meet my foes, and I
am sure - my inmost soul testifies - that my real trust is, where it
ought to be, in God; I see nothing in myself on which to rely; I see so
much crime, falsehood, treachery in people, that I cannot confide in
them; I have had so much painful experience of their insincerity and
baseness that I cannot rely on them; but I do see that in God which
leads me to trust in him, and I am sure that my heart truly does rely on
him."

My soul waiteth upon God - Margin, is silent. Septuagint, "Is not my
soul subject to God?" So the Latin Vulgate. Luther, "My soul is still
(calm) in God." The Hebrew word - דומיה dûmı̂yâh - means "silence, quiet,
rest"; and then, a silent expectation or hope. The idea here is, "Truly
toward God is the silent waiting of my soul"; that is, "In him alone do
I trust; there is calmness of mind; I have no apprehension as to what
can happen. My mind is at peace, for I feel that all is in the hands of
God, and that lie is worthy of entire trust and confidence." The feeling
is that which exists when we have entrusted all to God; when, having
entire confidence in his power, his goodness, his wisdom, his mercy, we
commit the whole case to him as if it were no longer our own. Such is
the calmness - the peace - the quiet - the silence of the soul - when
all is left with God. See the notes at [Isa
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#003), and [Phi
4:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006).

From him cometh my salvation - That is, My safety is from him; my
security is with him. It is true, also, that all that is ever implied in
this word salvation, whether pertaining to this life or the life to
come, is derived from God.

[Psalms 62:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 62:2</span></span>

He only is my rock ... - See the notes at [Psa
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002).

I shall not be greatly moved - The word greatly here, or much - "I shall
not be much moved," implies that he did not anticipate perfect security
from danger or calamity; he did not suppose that he would escape all
disaster or trouble, but he felt that no great evil would befall him,
that his most important interests were safe, and that he would be
ultimately secure. He would be restored to his home and his throne, and
would be favored with future peace and tranquility. None of us can hope
wholly to escape calamity in this life. It is enough if we can be
assured that our great interests will be ultimately secured; that we
shall be safe at last in the heavenly world. Having that confidence the
soul may be, and should be, calm; and we need little apprehend what will
occur in this world.

[Psalms 62:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 62:3</span></span>

How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? - The original word
here rendered "imagine mischief," from התת hâthath, occurs only in this
place. It means, according to Gesenius (Lexicon), to break in upon; to
set upon; to assail: "How long will ye break in upon a man?" that is,
set upon him. So the Septuagint, and the Latin Vulgate. It does not
refer to their merely forming purposes of mischief against a man, but to
their making assaults upon him; to their endeavoring to take his life or
to destroy him. The address here is to the enemies of David, and the
language would apply well to the attempts made upon his life by Absalom
and his followers. The question here is, "how long" they would continue
to do this; how long they would show this determined purpose to take his
life; whether they would never cease thus to persecute him. They had
already done it long; they had showed great perseverance in this course
of wickedness; and he asks whether it would never come to an end? Who
these persons were he does not intimate; but there can be no great
danger of mistake in referring the description to Absalom and his
adherents.

Ye shall be slain all of you - Prof. Alexander renders this entire
passage," Will ye murder (that is, seek to murder him) all of you
(combined against a single person, who is consequently) like wall
inclined (or bent by violence), fence (or hedge) crushed (broken down)."
So, substantially, DeWette renders it. Those who thus interpret the
passage give it an active signification, meaning that his enemies
pressed upon him, like a wall that was bent by violence, or a fence that
was likely to fall on one. The original word rendered "ye shall be
slain," traatschuw - תרצחוּ terâtsechû, is in the active form (Piel),
and cannot without violence be rendered in the passive, as it is in our
translation. But the active form may still be retained, and a consistent
meaning be given to the whole passage without the forced meaning put on
it in the rendering by Prof. Alexander. It is not natural to speak of
enemies as so coming on a man as to make him like a falling wall, or a
tottering fence. The evident idea is, that they themselves would be as a
falling wall; that is, that they would be defeated or disappointed in
their purpose, as a wall that has no solid foundation tumbles to the
ground. The meaning of the original may be thus expressed: "How long
will ye assail a man, that ye may put him to death? All of you shall be
as a bowing wall," etc. That is, You will not accomplish your design;
you will fail in your enterprise, as a wall without strength falls to
the ground.

As a bowing wall - A wall that bows out, or swells out; a wall that may
fall at any moment. See the notes at [Isa
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#013).

And as a tottering fence - A fence that is ready to fall; that has no
firmness. So it would be with them. Their purposes would suddenly give
way, as a fence does when the posts are rotted off, and when there is
nothing to support it.

[Psalms 62:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 62:4</span></span>

They only consult to cast him down from his excellency - This is the
object of all their counsels and plans. They aim at one high in rank -
and their purpose, their sole purpose, is to bring him down. This would
apply well to the case of David in the time of the rebellion of Absalom.

They delight in lies - In false pretences; in secret plans of evil; in
hypocritical assurances. This was eminently true of Absalom, who made
use of these arts to seduce the people from allegiance to his father.
[Sa2 15:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#001).

They bless with their mouth, but they curse inwardly - They profess true
attachment and zeal, but they are traitors at heart. See the notes at
[Psa 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003). This, too, would apply well
to the conduct of Absalom and those associated with him.

[Psalms 62:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 62:5</span></span>

My soul, wait thou only upon God - See the notes at [Psa
62:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001). There is, in the word used here,
and rendered wait, the same idea of rest or repose which occurs in [Psa
62:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001). The meaning is, that he would
commit the whole cause to God, and that his soul would thus be calm and
without apprehension.

For my expectation is from him - In [Psa
62:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001), this is salvation. The idea here
is, that all that he expected or hoped for must come from God. He did
not rely on his fellow men; he did not rely on himself. God alone could
deliver him, and he confidently believed that God would do it. Often are
we in such circumstances that we feel that our only "expectation" - our
only hope - is in God. All our strength fails; all our resources are
exhausted; our fellow-men cannot or will not aid us; our own efforts
seem to be vain; our plans are frustrated, and we are shut up to the
conclusion that God alone can help us. How often is this felt by a
Christian parent in regard to the conversion of his children. All his
own efforts seem to be vain; all that he says is powerless; his hopes,
long-cherished, are disappointed; his very prayers seem not to be heard;
and he is made to feel that his only hope is in God - a sovereign God -
and that the whole case must be left in His hands. This state of mind,
when it is fully reached, is often all that is needful in order that our
desires may be granted. It is desirable that this state of mind should
be produced; and when it is produced, the prayer is answered.

[Psalms 62:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 62:6</span></span>

He only is my rock ... - See the notes at [Psa
62:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#002). The only difference between this
verse and [Psa 62:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#002) is, that in this
verse the word "greatly" is omitted. The psalmist declares here in the
most absolute manner, that he shall not be "moved" at all. In [Psa
62:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#002), he said that he would not be
"greatly moved;" his mind would not be much or materially disturbed. The
language here indicates more entire confidence - more certain conviction
- showing that the slight apprehension or fear which existed in the
beginning of the psalm, had been wholly dissipated, and that his mind
had become perfectly calm.

[Psalms 62:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 62:7</span></span>

In God is my salvation - See [Psa
62:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001). That is, his salvation, his
safety, his anticipated deliverance, was to come only from God.

And my glory - That in which I glory or boast; the source of all in me
that is glorious or honorable. he gloried that there was such a God; he
gloried that He was his God.

The rock of my strength - The strong rock; the refuge that cannot be
successfully assailed; where I shall feel strong and secure. See the
notes at [Psa 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002).

My refuge - That to which I may flee for safety. See the notes at [Psa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001).

[Psalms 62:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 62:8</span></span>

Trust in him at all times - This exhortation, addressed to all persons,
in all circumstances, and at all times, is founded on the personal
experience of the psalmist, and on the views which he had of the
character of God, as worthy of universal confidence. David had found him
worthy of such confidence; he now exhorts all others to make the same
trial, and to put their trust in God in like manner. What he had found
God to be, all others would find him to be. His own experience of God's
goodness and mercy - of his gracious interposition in the time of
trouble - had been such that he could confidently exhort all others, in
similar circumstances, to make the same trial of his love.

Ye people, pour out your heart before him - All people. On the meaning
of the phrase "pour out your heart," see the notes at [Psa
42:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#004). The idea is, that the heart
becomes tender and soft, so that its feelings and desires flow out as
water, and all its emotions, all its wishes, its sorrows, its troubles,
are poured out before God. All that is in our hearts may be made known
to God. There is not a desire which he cannot gratify; not a trouble in
which he cannot relieve us; not a danger in which he cannot defend us.
And, in like manner there is not a spiritual want in which he will not
feel a deep interest, nor a danger to our souls from which he will not
be ready to deliver us. Much more freely than to any earthly parent - to
a father, or even to a mother - may we make mention of all our troubles,
little or great, before God.

God is a refuge for us - For all. For one as well as another. He is the
only refuge; he is all the refuge that we need.

[Psalms 62:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 62:9</span></span>

Surely men of low degree are vanity - literally, "vanity are the sons of
Adam," but the word Adam here is used evidently to represent men, or the
race. The same word is also employed particularly to represent common
men, or men of the humbler rank, in contradistinction to the word אישׁ
'ı̂ysh - which is the other word used here, and rendered "men of high
degree." Compare, for this use of the word, [Hos
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#007). The same antithesis between the
two words is found in [Isa 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#009); [Isa
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#015). The idea here is, that in the
great matters which pertain to us, we cannot depend on men, and that our
hope - our trust - must be in God. Of men of the humbler or lower
classes, it is said that they are "vanity;" that is, they are like a
vain, empty, unsubstantial thing. They cannot help us. It is useless to
rely on them when we most need aid.

Men of high degree are a lie - Men of exalted rank, kings, princes,
nobles. This does not refer to their personal character, as if they were
always false, deceitful, treacherous; but the idea is, that any prospect
of protection or aid from men of rank and station - front any power
which they wield - is unworthy to be relied on. It is not that which we
need; it is not that on which we can depend.

To be laid in the balance - literally, "In the scales to go up;" that
is, they are seen to go up, or to show how light they are. They have no
real weight; no real value. On the scales or balance, see the notes at
[Dan 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#027).

They are altogether lighter than vanity - They are all vain; single or
combined, they have no power to save us. The meaning is not that if
these two ranks of persons were weighed against each other they would
both be found to be vanity; but that it is true of each and every rank
of men - high and low - whether single or combined - that, as weighed
against our interests and needs, they are nothing. All the kings of the
earth with all their hosts of war, all princes and nobles with all that
they can summon from the lower ranks of their people, cannot save one
soul from death - cannot deliver us from the consequences of our
transgressions. God, and God alone, can do this.

[Psalms 62:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 62:10</span></span>

Trust not in oppression - The general meaning here is, that we are not
to trust in anything but God. In the previous verse the psalmist had
stated reasons why we should not trust in men of any rank. In this verse
he enumerates several things on which people are accustomed to rely, or
in which they place confidence, and he says that we should put no
confidence in them in respect to the help which we need, or the great
objects which are to be accomplished by us. The first thing mentioned is
oppression; and the idea is, that we must not hope to accomplish our
object by oppressing others; extorting their property or their service;
making them by force subject to us, and subservient to our wishes. Many
do this. Conquerors do it. Tyrants do it. The owners of slaves do it.

And become not vain in robbery - That is, Do not resort to theft or
robbery, and depend on that for what is needed in life. Many do. The
great robbers of the world - conquerors - have done it. Thieves and
burglars do it. People who seek to defraud others of their earnings do
it. They who withhold wages from laborers, and they who cheat in trade,
do it.

If riches increase, set not your heart upon them - If you become rich
without oppression, or without robbery. If your riches seem to grow of
themselves - for that is the meaning of the original word (compare [Mar
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#002)) - do not rely on them as being
all that you require. People are prone to do this. The rich man confides
in his wealth, and supposes that he has all he needs. The psalmist says
that none of these things constitute the true reliance of man. None of
them can supply his real needs; none can defend him in the great perils
of his existence; hone can save his soul. He needs, over and above all
these, a God and Saviour; and it is such a God and Saviour only that can
meet the real needs of his nature.

[Psalms 62:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 62:11</span></span>

God hath spoken once; twice have I heard this - This repetition, or this
declaration that he had heard the thing repeated, is designed to give
emphasis to what was said, or to call attention to it as particularly
worthy of notice. See the notes at [Job
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#014). Compare [Job
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#005). The sentiment here is
particularly important, or is deserving of special attention, because,
as the psalmist had shown, all other resources fail, and confidence is
to be placed in nothing else for that which man so much needs; neither
in people, whether of low degree or high [Psa
62:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#009); not in oppressive acts - acts of
mere power; not in plunder; not in wealth, however acquired, [Psa
62:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#010).

That power belongeth unto God - Margin, strength. The idea is, that the
strength which man needs - the ability to defend and to save him - is to
be found in God. All else may fail, but the power of God will not fail.
The result of all, therefore, should be to lead us to put our trust in
God alone.

[Psalms 62:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 62:12</span></span>

Also unto thee, O Lord, belongeth mercy - Power, indeed, belongs to God
[Psa 62:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#011); but this is an attribute
to be feared, and while, in one respect, it will inspire confidence, or
while it gives us the assurance that God is able to defend us when all
else shall fail, yet, unattended by any other attribute, it might
produce only apprehension and alarm. What man, weak and sinful man,
needs to know is not merely that God has almighty power, but how that
power will be wielded, or with what other attributes it is combined;
whether it will be put forth to destroy or to save; to kill or to keep
alive; to crush or to uphold. Man, therefore, needs the assurance that
God is a benevolent Being, as really as that he is a powerful Being;
that he is disposed to show mercy; that his power will be put forth in
behalf of those who confide in him, and not employed against them.
Hence, the attribute of mercy is so essential to a proper conception of
God; and hence, the psalm so appropriately closes by a reference to his
mercy and compassion.

For thou renderest to every man according to his work - As this stands
in our version, it would seem that the psalmist regarded what is here
referred to as a manifestation of mercy. Yet the "rendering to every man
according to his work" is an act of justice rather than of mercy. It is
probable, therefore, that the word rendered "for" - כי kı̂y - does not
refer here to either of the attributes mentioned exclusively - either
power or mercy - but is to be understood with reference to the general
course of argument in the psalm, as adapted to lead to confidence in
God. The fact that he is a God who will deal impartially with mankind,
or who will regard what is right and proper to be done in view of the
characters of mankind, is a reason why they should confide in God -
since there could be no just ground of confidence in a Being who is not
thus impartial and just. All these combined - power, mercy, equity -
constitute a reason why people should confide in God. If either of these
were missing in the divine character, man could have no confidence in
God. If these things do exist in God, unlimited confidence may be placed
in him as having all needful power to save; as being so merciful that
sinful people may trust in him; and as being so just and equal in his
dealings that all may feel that it is right to repose confidence in a
Being by whom all the interests of the universe will be secured. Compare
[Jo1 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 63](psa063)

</div>
