<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa044)  [Next](psa046) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 45](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 45:0</span></span>

This psalm is entitled "To the chief Musician upon Shoshannim, for the
sons of Korah, Maschil. A song of love." On the phrase" To the chief
Musician," see the notes at the title to [Psa
4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001). The words "Upon Shoshannim"
occur also, as a title, or part of a title, in Ps. 69; 80; and, in a
different form, in the title to [Psa
60:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001), "Shushan-eduth." The word
Shoshan - שׁושׁן shôshân - occurs in [Kg1
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#022), [Kg1
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#026); [Sol
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#016); [Sol
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#005); [Sol
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#013); [Sol
6:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#002); [Sol
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#002); and, in a modified form - שׁושׁנה
shôshânnâh - in [Ch2 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#005); [Sol
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#001); [Hos
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#005); in all which it is rendered
lily, or lilies. The word, therefore, probably means a lily; and then it
came to denote, probably, a musical instrument that had a resemblance to
a lily, or that was shaped like a lily. It is not known to what kind of
musical instrument there is a reference, but it would seem probable that
something like the trumpet or the cymbal was intended.

The special reference here would seem to be to the chief musician who
presided over this part of the musical instruments employed in public
worship - as it would seem not improbable that each of the different
parts, as trumpets, horns, viols, harps, etc., would have a special
leader. On the portion of the title, "for the sons of Korah," and on the
word "Maschil," see the notes at the title to [Psa
42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001). The portion of the title, "A
Song of Loves," would properly denote a song devoted to love, or in
celebration of love; that is, in which love would be the main idea. The
phrase "a lovely song," or "a charming song," as Gesenius renders it
here, would not, it seems to me, express the meaning of the original. An
author would hardly prefix such a title to a psalm himself, as
indicating that the psalm had special beauty, or was especially adapted
to please; and if we suppose that the titles were prefixed by some other
person than the author, or by common usage, it would be difficult to see
why such a title should be prefixed to this psalm rather than to many
others. It has, indeed, great beauty; but so have very many of the rest.
If we suppose, however, that the title was prefixed as indicating the
general subject of the psalm, or as indicating the feelings of the
author toward the main persons referred to in it, the title is eminently
appropriate. In this sense the title would be proper whether we regard
the psalm as having reference to the Messiah, or as an epithalamium - a
bridal or marriage hymn.

The author of the psalm is wholly unknown, and nothing can be determined
on the subject, unless it be supposed that the portion of the title "for
the sons of Korah," or "of the sons of Korah," conveys the idea that it
was the composition of one of that family. On that point, see the notes
at the title to [Psa 42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001). That it
may have been written by David no one can disprove, but there is no
certain evidence that he was the author, and as his name is not
mentioned, the presumption is that it is not his.

Very various opinions have been entertained in regard to the reference
of the psalm, and the occasion on which it was composed. A very material
question is, To whom does the psalm refer? And especially, Has it
reference to the Messiah, and is it to be classed with the Messianic
Psalms?

Nearly all the older Christian interpreters, without hesitation, suppose
that it refers to the Messiah. This opinion has been held, also, by a
large part of the modern interpreters of the Bible, among others by
Michaelis, Lowth, Dathe, Rosenmuller (in his second edition),
Hengstenberg, Tholuck, Professor Alexander. Many, however, have defended
the opposite opinion, though they have not been agreed on the question
to whom the psalm refers. Grotius, Dereser, and Kaiser suppose it to
have been sung at the marriage of Solomon with a foreign princess,
probably the daughter of the king of Egypt. Doederlein supposes the king
whose praises are sung to be an Israelite. Augusti thinks that it was
sung at the nuptials of a Persian king. This last opinion DeWette
adopts.

On this question it may be remarked,

\(1\) There is no evidence that the psalm refers to David; and, indeed,
from the psalm itself it is evident that it could not have such a
reference. The term "O God" [Psa 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006)
could not be applied to him, nor the expression "Thy throne is forever
and ever," ibid. In the life of David, moreover, there was no marriage
with a foreign princess that would correspond with the statement here;
and no occasion on which the "daughter of "Tyre" was present with a
gift, [Psa 45:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012).

\(2\) it seems equally clear that the psalm does not refer to Solmon. In
addition to the considerations already suggested as reasons why it does
not refer to David, and which are as applicable in the main to Solomon
as to him, it may be added that Solomon was never a warlike prince, and
was never distinguished for conquests. But the "hero" of the psalm is a
warrior - a prince who goes forth to conquest, and who would be
distinguished for his victories over the enemies of the king, [Psa
45:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003).

\(3\) for stronger reasons still the Psalm cannot be supposed to refer
to a Persian prince. Such a supposition is a mere conjecture, with not
even the pretence that there are any historical facts that would justify
such an application, and without even the suggestion as to a particular
case to which it could be applicable. It is, moreover, wholly improbable
that a nuptial ode designed to celebrate the marriage of a Persian king
- a foreigner - would have been introduced into a book of sacred poetry
among the Hebrews.

\(4\) The remaining opinion, therefore, is, that the psalm had original
and exclusive reference to the Messiah. For this opinion the following
reasons may be assigned:

\(a\) The authority of the New Testament. If the Bible is an inspired
book, then one part of it may properly be regarded as an authoritative
interpretation of another; or a statement in one part must be admitted
to be proof of what is meant in another, since the entire book has one
Author only - the Holy Spirit. But there can be no doubt that the author
of the Epistle to the Hebrews meant to quote this psalm as having
reference to the Messiah, or as containing an intended statement in
regard to him which might be appealed to as proof that he was divine.
Thus, in [Heb 1:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008), he quotes [Psa
45:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006), of the psalm, "Thy throne, O
God, is forever and ever," etc., in proof that the Son of God is
superior to the angels. See the notes at the Epistle to the Hebrews, on
the passage referred to, where this point is considered at length. There
can be no doubt that the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews meant to
quote the passage as having original reference to the Messiah; and his
argument would have no force whatever on the supposition that the psalm
had original reference to David, or to Solomon, or to a Persian prince.

\(b\) The testimony of tradition, or of early interpretation, is in
favor of this supposition. Thus, the Chaldee Paraphrase [Psa
45:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003) applies the psalm expressly, to
the Messiah: "Thy beauty, king Messiah - משׁיחא מלכא malekâ' meshı̂yachâ'
- is more excellent than the sons of men." This may not improperly be
understood as representing the current opinion of the Hebrews at the
time when the Chaldee interpretation was made, in regard to the design
and reference of the psalm. The two eminent Jewish interpreters,
Aben-Ezra and Kimchi, explain the psalm in the same manner, and may be
supposed also to represent the prevailing mode of explaining it away
among the Hebrews. On this point, also, the Epistle to the Hebrews may
be referred to, as showing that such was the current explanation up to
the time when that was written. I have referred to the fact that the
author of that epistle quotes the psalm as an inspired man, and as thus
furnishing the authority of inspiration in favor of this interpretation.
I now refer to it as showing that this must have been the prevailing and
well-understood opinion in regard to the design of the psalm. The author
of the epistle was establishing by argument, not by authority, the
claims of the Messiah to a rank above that of the angels. He made use of
an argument which he evidently believed would have force among those who
regarded the Old Testament as of divine origin. But the argument which
he used, and on which he relied, would have no weight with those for
whom he wrote unless they admitted that the psalm had reference to the
Messiah, and that this point might be assumed without further proof. The
fact, therefore, that he thus quotes and applies the psalm demonstrates
that such was its current and admitted interpretation in his time.

\(c\) The internal evidence may be referred to. This will be further
illustrated in the notes. At present it is necessary only to remark:

\(1\) That there are passages in this psalm which cannot be applied to
any man - to any created being - and which can be applied only to one
who may properly be called God, [Psa
45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006).

\(2\) The characteristics of the principal personage in the psalm are
such as accurately describe the Messiah. These points will be
illustrated in the notes.

\(d\) The psalm, on the supposition that it refers to the Messiah, is in
accordance with a prevailing mode of writing in the Old Testament. See
the notes at [Heb 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008); compare
Introduction to Isaiah, Section 7; and Introduction to Ps. 40. It is to
be remembered that the expectation of a Messiah was the special hope of
the Jewish people. He is really the" hero" of the Old Testament - more
so than Achilles is of the Iliad, or Aeneas of the Aeneid. The sacred
poets were accustomed to employ their most magnificent imagery in
describing him, that they might present him in every form that was
beautiful in conception, and that would be gratifying to the pride and
the hopes of the nation. Everything that is gorgeous and splendid in
description is lavished upon him. And they were never under any
apprehension of attributing to him too high a rank, too great perfection
of moral character, or too wide an extent of dominion.

They freely applied to him language which would be a magnificent
description of an earthly monarch; and the terms which usually denote
splendid conquests, or a wide and permanent reign, are freely given to
hint. Under this view, and in this style, this psalm was evidently
composed; and although the language may have been taken from the
magnificence of the court of David or Solomon, or even from the splendor
of a Persian king, yet there can be no reason to doubt that the
description is that of the Messiah, and not of David or Solomon, or any
Persian prince. The writer in the psalm imagines to himself a
magnificent and beautiful prince - a prince riding prosperously to his
conquests; swaying a permanent scepter over a wide empire; clothed in
rich and splendid vestments; eminently upright and pure; and scattering
blessings on every hand. That prince was the Messiah. He describes the
queen - the bride of such a prince - as attended by the daughters of
kings; as clad in the gold of Ophir; as greatly beloved by the prince;
as glorious in her appearance and character; as having on robes of
wrought gold and raiment of needlework; as followed by a numerous
retinue; and as brought to the king in his palace. That queen is the
"bride of the Lamb" - the church. All this is in the magnificent style
of the Orientals, but all accords with the custom of the sacred writers
in speaking of the Messiah.

\(e\) It may be added that this is in harmony with the constant language
of the sacred writers in the New Testament, who speak of the Messiah as
the "husband" of the church, and of the church as his "bride." Compare
the notes at [Eph 5:23-32](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#023); notes at
[Co2 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002); notes at [Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002), notes at [Rev
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009); notes at [Rev
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#017).

The proof, therefore, seems to me to be conclusive that the psalm had
original and sole reference to the Messiah.

The contents of the psalm are as follows:

I. A statement of the purpose or design of the psalm. It is to speak of
the things which the psalmist had meditated on respecting the "king;"
some one in his view to whom that title was applicable, and whose
praises he intended particularly to set forth [Psa
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001).

II\. A description of the king, [Psa
45:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#002).

\(a\) He is the fairest among people; distinguished for grace and
beauty, [Psa 45:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#002).

\(b\) He is a warrior - a conqueror. He will go forth to conquest, and
will be successful in overcoming his enemies, [Psa
45:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003).

\(c\) His throne is the throne of God, and will endure forever, [Psa
45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006).

\(d\) His character is eminently righteous, [Psa
45:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006).

\(e\) He is clad in robes of beauty; his garments are rich with
perfumes; his attendants are the daughters of kings, [Psa
45:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008).

III\. A description of the queen, the bride, [Psa
45:9-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009).

\(a\) She is clad in robes of gold - the gold of Ophir, [Psa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009).

\(b\) She is entreated to forget her own people, and her father's house
- to become wholly devoted to him who had espoused her, assured that
thus she would secure his heart, and be certain of his love, [Psa
45:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#010).

\(c\) She would be honored with the favor of the rich, and the
attendance of foreign princesses, represented by the "daughter of Tyre;"
Tyre, distinguished for wealth and splendor; Tyre, the representative of
the commercial world, [Psa 45:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012).

\(d\) The daughter of the king - the bride - is glorious and beautiful,
as seen "within" her own palace or dwelling, [Psa
45:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013).

\(e\) Her raiment is of wrought gold; of needlework of delicate finish
and taste, [Psa 45:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013).

\(f\) She is attended by virgins, her companions, who with her shall
enter into the palace of the king, [Psa
45:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#014).

IV\. An address to the king. He is to be honored by his children, who
will be more to him than even his ancestors. His praise will spring from
those children rather than from the luster and fame of his great
progenitors. He will be remembered in all coming generations, and
praised forever and ever, [Psa
45:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#016). See the notes at [Psa
45:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#016).

Such is the outline or substance of this exquisite specimen of sacred
song - this very beautiful Hebrew ode. It must be apparent, I think, at
once, that it cannot be applied with propriety to either David, or
Solomon, or to a Persian prince. How far it is applicable to the Messiah
and the church; to him as the bridegroom, and to the church as a bride -
will be made apparent in the exposition of its particular words and
phrases.

[Psalms 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 45:1</span></span>

My heart is inditing - That is, I am engaged in inditing a good matter;
though implying at the same time that it was a work of the heart - a
work in which the heart was engaged. It was not a mere production of the
intellect; not a mere work of skill; not a mere display of the beauty of
song, but a work in which the affections particularly were engaged, and
which would express the feelings of the heart: the result or effusion of
sincere love. The word rendered is "inditing" - רחשׁ râchash - is
rendered in the margin, boileth or bubbleth up. It means properly to
boil up or over, as a fountain; and the idea here is that his heart
boiled over with emotions of love; it was full and overflowing; it found
expression in the words of this song. The Hebrew word does not occur
elsewhere in the Bible.

A good matter - literally, a good word; that is, it was something which
he was about to say which was good; something interesting, pure,
important; not only a subject on which his heart was engaged, but also
which was worthy of attention.

I speak of the things which I have made - literally, "I say my works to
the king." That is, My work - that which I meditate and am about to
compose - pertains to the king.

Touching the king - He is to be the main subject of my song. Compare the
notes at [Isa 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001). If the remarks made
in the introduction to the psalm are correct, then the "king" here
referred to was the future Messiah - the great personage to whom all the
writers of the Old Testament looked forward, and whose glory they were
so anxious to see and to describe. Compare the notes at [Pe1
1:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010).

My tongue is the pen of a ready writer - Let my tongue in speaking of
him be as the pen of a rapid writer. That is, let my tongue rapidly and
freely express my thoughts and feelings. The word rendered "pen" - עט
‛êṭ - means a stylus, usually made of iron, used for the purpose of
inscribing letters on lead or wax. See the notes at [Job
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#024). The idea is that the psalmist's
mind was full of his subject, and that he desired to express his
thoughts in warm, free, gushing language - the language of overflowing
emotion.

[Psalms 45:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 45:2</span></span>

Thou art fairer than the children of men - That is, Thou art more fair
and comely than men; thy comeliness is greater than that which is found
among men. In other words, Thou art beautiful beyond any human standard
or comparison. The language, indeed, would not necessarily imply that he
was not a man, but it means that among all who dwell upon the earth
there was none to be found that could be compared with him. The Hebrew
word rendered "thou art fairer" - יפיפית yāpeyāpiytha - is a very
unusual term. It is properly a reduplication of the word meaning
"beautiful," and thus means to be very beautiful. It would be well
expressed by the phrase "Beautiful - beautiful - art thou above the
children of men." It is the language of surprise - of a sudden
impression of beauty - beauty as it strikes at the first glance - such
as the eye had never seen before. The impression here is that produced
by the general appearance or aspect of him who is seen as king.
Afterward the attention is more particularly directed to the "grace that
is poured into his lips." The language here would well express the
emotions often felt by a young convert when he is first made to see the
beauty of the character of the Lord Jesus as a Saviour: "Beautiful;
beautiful, above all men."

Grace is poured into thy lips - The word here rendered "is poured" means
properly to pour, to pour out as liquids - water, or melted metal: [Gen
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#018); [Kg2
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#004). The meaning here is, that grace
seemed to be spread over his lips; or that this was strikingly manifest
on his lips. The word grace means properly favor; and then it is used in
the general sense of benignity, kindness, mildness, gentleness,
benevolence. The reference here is to his manner of speaking, as
corresponding with the beauty of his person, and as that which
particularly attracted the attention of the psalmist: the mildness; the
gentleness; the kindness; the persuasive eloquence of his words. It is
hardly necessary to remark that this, in an eminent degree, was
applicable to the Lord Jesus. Thus if is said [Luk
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#022), "And all bare him witness, and
wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth." So
[Joh 7:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#046) : "Never man spake like this
man." See also [Mat 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#029); [Mat
13:54](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#054); [Luk
2:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#047).

Therefore God hath blessed thee for ever - In connection with this moral
beauty - this beauty of character - God will bless thee to all eternity.
Since he has endowed thee with such gifts and graces, he will continue
to bless thee, forever. In other words, it is impossible that one who is
thus endowed should ever be an object of the divine displeasure.

[Psalms 45:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 45:3</span></span>

Gird thy sword upon thy thigh - That is, Arm or prepare thyself for
battle and conquest. The Messiah is introduced here as a conquering
king; as about to go forward to subdue the nations to himself; as about
to set up a permanent kingdom.

O most mighty - That is, Hero; Warrior; Conqueror.

With thy glory and thy majesty - With the glory and majesty appropriate
to thee; or which properly belong to thee. This is at the same time the
expression of a wish on the part of the author of the psalm, and a
prophetic description. The psalmist desired that he would thus go forth
to the conquest of the world; and saw that he would do it. Compare [Psa
45:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#005). It is needless to remark that
this is easily and naturally applicable to the Messiah - the Lord Jesus
- as going forth for the subjugation of the world to the authority of
God. Compare [Co1 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025), [Co1
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028). See also, in reference to the
figure used here, [Isa 49:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#002); [Heb
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012); [Rev
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016); [Rev
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#015).

[Psalms 45:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 45:4</span></span>

And in thy majesty ride prosperously - Margin, "Prosper thou, ride
thou." The majesty here referred to is the glory or magnificence which
became a prince of such rank, and going forth to such deeds. The prayer
is, that he would go forth with the pomp and glory becoming one in that
station. The word used here, rendered in the margin, "prosper thou,"
means properly to go over or through, to pass over, and may be correctly
rendered here, pass on; that is, move forward to conquest. The word
"ride" refers to the way in which warriors usually went forth to
conquest in a chariot of war. The idea is that of one caparisoned for
war, and with the glory appropriate to his rank as king, going forth to
victory. This language is such as is often employed in the Scriptures to
describe the Messiah as a conquering king.

Because of truth - On account of truth; or in the cause of truth. That
is, the great purpose of his conquests would be to establish a kingdom
based on truth, in contradistinction from the existing kingdom of
darkness as based on error and falsehood. The "object" of his conquests
was to secure the reign of truth over the minds of people. Compare [Joh
18:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#037).

And meekness and righteousness - literally, "humility-righteousness;"
or, humble right. It would be a kingdom or a conquest of righteousness,"
not" established, as most kingdoms are, by pride and arrogance and mere
power, but a dominion where humility, meekness, gentleness would be at
the foundation - that on which the whole superstructure would be reared.
Its characteristic would be righteousness or justice - a righteousness
and justice, however, not asserted and established by mere power, or by
the pride of conquest, but which would be established and maintained by
meekness or gentleness: a kingdom not of outward pomp and power, but the
reign of the gentle virtues in the heart.

And thy right hand - The instrument of martial power and success; that
which, in war, wields the sword and the spear. "Shall teach thee." Shall
guide thee, or lead thee to the performance of terrible things.

Terrible things - Fearful deeds; things that are suited to excite
astonishment or wonder. They were such things as would be regarded as
distinguished achievements in war, indicating extraordinary valor; such
conquests as would strike the world with amazement. We have here,
therefore, a description of the Messiah as going forth to the great
conquest of the world; and at the same time we have this intimation of
the nature of his kingdom, that however great the "power" which would be
exerted in securing its conquests, it would be founded on "truth:" it
would be a kingdom where righteousness would prevail, and whose
essential characteristic would be gentleness and peace.

[Psalms 45:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 45:5</span></span>

Thine arrows are sharp in the heart ... - literally, "Thine arrows are
sharp - the people under thee shall fall - in the heart of the enemies
of the king." The process of "thought" in the verse seems to be this:
First. The "arrows" are seen as sharp or penetrating. Second. The
"people" are seen falling as those arrows are shot forth. Third. It is
seen that those who fall are the "enemies of the king," and that the
arrows have pierced the "heart." The word "sharp" is applied to the
arrows as denoting that they were adapted to "pierce." Sometimes arrows
are blunted, or with a thick head, rather adapted to smite with force
than to wound by penetrating. The bow and the arrow were common
instruments in ancient wars, and were mainly used by those who went
forth to battle in a chariot. Compare [Kg1
22:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#034); [Kg2
9:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#021). As pertaining to the Messiah,
the reference here is, of course, to the "truth," and to the power of
that truth in penetrating the hearts of people. Compare the notes at
[Heb 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012).

In the heart of the king's enemies - That is, the "truths" stated by the
Messiah, the conquering king, would penetrate deep into the soul, and
slay the sinner, the enemy of the king, that is, of the Messiah. The
idea is, that truth would produce an effect in regard to the hopes of
the sinner - his self-confidence - his life "as" a sinner - like that
which the arrow does when it penetrates the heart. Compare [Rom
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#009) : "For I was alive without the law
once, but when the commandment came, sin revived and I died." See also
the notes at [Rom 7:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#010).

Whereby the people fall under thee - As the effect of the arrows; as the
effect of truth. The representation is that of victory. As here
represented, it is the victory of truth; a conquest by subjecting people
to the authority and reign of God.

[Psalms 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 45:6</span></span>

Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever - This passage is quoted by the
author of the Epistle to the Hebrews in proof that the Messiah is
exalted above the angels, and it is, beyond all question, adduced by him
as having original reference to the Messiah. See the passage explained
at length in the notes at [Heb 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008). I
do not perceive, after an interval of nearly twenty years since those
notes were written, that it is necessary to alter or to add anything to
what is there said in explanation of the passage. It is undoubtedly an
address to the "king" here referred to as God - as one to whom the name
"God" - אלהים 'Elohiym - may be properly applied; and, as applied to the
Messiah by the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, it clearly proves
that Christ is Divine.

[Psalms 45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 45:7</span></span>

Thou lovest righteousness ... - See this verse explained in the notes at
[Heb 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#009), where it is applied to the
Messiah. The word "God" is rendered in the margin "O God"; "O God, thy
God, hath anointed thee," etc. According to this construction, the
thought would be carried on which is suggested in [Psa
45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006), of a direct address to the
Messiah as God. This construction is not necessary, but it is the most
obvious one. The Messiah - the Lord Jesus - though he is described as
God himself ([Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001), et al.), yet
addresses God as "his" God, [Joh
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017). As Mediator, as appearing in
human form, as commissioned to perform the work of redemption, and to
subdue the world to the divine authority, it was proper thus to address
his Father as "his" God, and to, acknowledge Him as the source of all
authority and law.

[Psalms 45:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 45:8</span></span>

All thy garments smell of myrrh - The word "smell" is not in the
original. The literal translation would be, "Myrrh, and aloes - cassia -
all thy garments;" that is, they were so impregnated with perfumes that
these seemed to constitute his very clothing. The mention of the
"anointing" in the previous verse may have suggested the idea of these
perfumes, as the anointing with a richly perfumed unguent seemed to have
spread over, and to have pervaded all his raiment. Compare [Psa
133:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002). It was common, however, for
Orientals to use much perfumery, particularly on festive occasions.
Myrrh - מר môr or מוּר mur - is an article which exudes from a tree
found in Arabia, and still more extensively in Abyssinia. It is obtained
by making an incision in the bark. It constituted one of the earliest
articles of commerce [Gen 43:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#011), and
was highly esteemed by the Egyptians and Jews, as well as by the Greeks
and the Romans. It is mentioned in [Est
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#012) as an article used in the
purification of women; and as a perfume, [Sol
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#006); [Sol
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#005). It was used among the ancients,
not only as a perfume, but as a fumigator, and as an article of
medicine, and was employed in embalming the bodies of the dead.
Herodotus, speaking of the practice of embalming among the Egyptians,
says, "They then fill the body with powder of pure myrrh, cassia, and
other perfumes, except frankincense," ii. 86. Compare [Exo
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023); [Mat
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#011); [Mar
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#023); [Joh
19:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#039). Of the tree which produces the
myrrh, however, we have as yet no very accurate accounts. See Kitto's
Encyc., art. "Mor."

And aloes - The word rendered "aloes" - אהלות 'ăhâlôth - occurs four
times in the Old Testament: [Num 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#006),
where it is rendered "lign-aloes;" and here, as in [Pro
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#017); [Sol
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#014), where it is rendered "aloes."
The reference is, undoubtedly, to some odoriferous substance, well known
in ancient times. Why the word "aloe" has been used as a translation of
the original word, in the English and in the older versions, it is not
easy to ascertain, but it is certain that the substance referred to is
not to be confounded with the bitter and nauseous aloes known as a
medicine. It is now generally understood that the reference in the word
as used in the Scriptures, is to a species of odoriferous tree growing
in India, and which anciently doubtless constituted part of the valuable
commerce of the East. It is not a "fruit" or a "gum," but the tree
itself. It is a species of sweet-smelling "wood," and was valued on
account of its fragrance. It is produced still in India. The tree is
believed to be a native of the mountainous tracts east and southeast of
Silhet, in about 24 degrees of north latitude. See Kitto's Encyc., art.
"Ahalim."

And cassia. - Cassia - קציעות qetsiy‛ôth - is better known. It is a bark
resembling cinnamon, but less aromatic. It is mentioned in two other
places in the Scriptures, [Exo 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#024);
[Eze 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#019). This, as well as "aloes,"
is a production of India and its islands. See Kitto's Encyc., art.
"Ketzioth."

Out of the ivory palaces - That is, As thou comest out of the ivory
palaces. The representation is that of the king as coming out of the
palace where he dwelt, and as clad in apparel appropriate to his
station, and surrounded by his attendants, diffusing joy all around
them. The imagery has "chanqed" from what it was in [Psa
45:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003), where he goes forth as a
conqueror, with his sword on his "thigh," and ascending his war-chariot.
Here he appears clothed, indeed, in regal splendor, in the magnificence
of state, but as the husband of the bride, and as encircled with the
attendants of an Oriental court. Ivory palaces are palaces adorned with
ivory, or where ivory constituted a prominent and striking part of the
ornaments. It cannot be supposed that the palace was constructed
entirely of ivory. Kitto supposes that this refers to the interior
decorations, or that the walls were "inlaid" with ivory, gold, etc., as
constituting a part of the decorations of the building. "Ivory," it
would seem, was so abundant and conspicu ous that the name might be
given to the whole structure. Such a palace was that built by Ahab: [Kg1
22:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#039).

Whereby they have made thee glad - Hebrew, "from them (or thence) they
have gladdened thee." That is, They, the attendants referred to more
particularly in the following verses, have gladdened thee; have diffused
around a general joy; have contributed to make thee happy. He was clad
in robes that became his station, and was accompanied and surrounded by
attendants who diffused around a general joy, and who made his own heart
glad. The "idea" may be, that the Redeemer, the Messiah, is made happy
by the affection and the companionship of the redeemed, his people.

[Psalms 45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 45:9</span></span>

Kings' daughters were among thy honorable women - Those who were in
attendance on him and on the bride were from the most elevated ranks;
among the most honorable of the earth. The word rendered "honorable
women," means properly, precious, costly; and then, dear, beloved; and
this might be rendered "kings' daughters are among thy beloved ones;"
that is, in the number of thy maidens, or of those attending on thee.
The allusion is to a marriage, and the description is drawn from the
usual accompaniments of a marriage in the east. The design, as
applicable to the Messiah and to his union with the Church, his bride,
is to describe him as accompanied with every circumstance of distinction
and honor, to throw around him all that constituted beauty and splendor
in an Oriental marriage ceremony. Nothing of earth could be too rich or
beautiful to illustrate the glory of the union of the Redeemer with his
redeemed Church.

Upon thy right hand did stand the queen - The right hand is the place of
honor, and that idea is intended here: [Kg1
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#019); [Mar
14:62](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#062); [Mar
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#019); [Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003); [Act
7:55](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#055). The idea here is, that the
Church, the bride of the Lamb of God, as seen in the vision, is exalted
to the highest post of honor. That Church has the place in his
affections which the newly-married bride has in the affections of her
husband.

In field of Ophir - In garments decked or ornamented with the finest
gold. On the phrase "the gold of Ophir," see the notes at [Isa
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#012).

[Psalms 45:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 45:10</span></span>

Hearken, O daughter, and consider - This is probably to be understood as
the language of the psalmist, in vision, as uttering counsel and advice
which would be appropriate to the new condition of the bride. Some have
understood it as the language of the father of the bride, uttering
appropriate counsel to his daughter on entering upon her new
relationship; exhorting her to affection and obedience in that
relationship; charging her to feel that she is his, that she is to go
with him, that she is to identify herself with his interests, and to
"forget," - that is, not improperly to long for her own people and her
father's house. All this would be good advice for a father to give to
his daughter in such circumstances; but the most natural interpretation
is to regard the language here as that of the psalmist, or as inspired
wisdom, in regard to the proper feeling in entering on such a relation.
If this be the meaning, the word "daughter" may be used as a term of
affection or kindness, as the word "son" often is, to denote one who is
a disciple or learner. The "thought" suggested here is, that counsel or
advice in regard to the manner in which she should demean herself to
secure the continual confidence of her husband, may be very properly
given to a newly-married bride. The counsel here suggested, considered
with reference only to that relation, would be eminently wise.

And incline thine ear - Attend to what is now said. The address is
repeated - "Hearken;" "consider;" "incline thine ear;" as if the matter
were of great importance. On the phrase "incline thine ear," see the
notes at [Psa 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#002); compare [Psa
78:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001).

Forget also thine own people - This is said on the supposition that the
bride was a foreign princess. As such, it is to be supposed that she had
been trained under other customs, under other forms of religion, and
with reference to other interests than those which would now pertain to
her. The counsel is, that she must now forget all these, and identify
herself with her husband, and with his interests. The word "forget"
cannot denote absolute forgetfulness, or that she was to cast off all
affection for those who had trained her up; but the meaning is, that she
was not to pine after them; that she was not to be dissatisfied with her
new home and her new relations; that she was not to carry the
institutions of her native country with her; that she was not to make
use of her new position to promote the ends of her native country if
they were adverse to, or hostile to, the interests of her husband and
his country.

As applied to a bride now, the advice would mean that she is not to pine
for her old home; that she is not to make complaining and unfavorable
comparison between that and her new home; that she is not to divert her
husband from his plans, and the proper pursuits of his life, by
endeavoring to induce him to forsake his friends, and to abandon his
position, in order that she may be restored to the society of her
earlier friends; that she is not to introduce habits, customs,
amusements, modes of living into her husband's arrangements, derived
from her former habits and modes of life, which would interfere with
what is the proper economy of his house, and which would inconsistent
with his principles, and with his means of living. When she marries, she
should make up her mind, while she cherishes a proper regard for her old
friends, and a proper memory of her past life, to identify her interests
with his; to go where he goes; to live as he lives; and to die, if such
be the will of God, where he dies, and to be buried by his side.

As applied to the Church - the bride of the Lamb - the idea here is that
which we find so often enforced in the New Testament, that they who
become the followers of the Saviour must be willing to forsake all for
him, and to identify themselves with him and his cause. See the notes at
[Mat 10:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#037); notes at [Luk
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#026). We are to forsake the world,
and devote ourselves to him; we are to break away from all worldly
attachments, and to consecrate all to him; we are to bid adieu to
worldly companions as our chosen friends, and make the friends of Christ
our friends: we are not to pine after the world, to seek to return to
it, to pant for its pleasures; we are not to take advantage of our
position in the church to promote the objects which we had pursued
before we entered it; we are not to introduce the customs, the habits,
the plans which we before pursued, "into" the church. We are in all
things to become identified with him to whom we have become "espoused"
[Co2 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002); we are to live with him; to
go with him; to die with him; to be his forever.

And thy father's house - The home of thy childhood; the house where thy
father dwells. The strongest earthly ties are to be made subservient to
a higher and stronger tie, if we would become true followers of the
Saviour. See [Luk 9:59-62](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#059).

[Psalms 45:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 45:11</span></span>

So shall the king greatly desire thy beauty - That is, in consequence of
your love to him, and your entire devotion of yourself to him. The word
"desire" here is equivalent to having pleasure in; as meaning that his
affliction would thus be fixed on her. In this way - by forgetting her
own home, and devoting herself to him - she would secure his affection.
In the married life, mere "beauty" will not secure permanently the love
of a husband. The heart, as given to him, and as faithful to him, will
alone secure his love. In like manner, it is nothing but sincere
affection - true love on the part of the professed friends of the
Saviour - the forgetting and forsaking of all else - that will secure
his love, or make the church to him an object of desire.

For he is thy Lord - That is, as a husband he sustains this relation to
thee; or, this appellation may be given to him. In what sense this is
true in respect to a husband, see the notes at [Pe1
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#006); notes at [Co1
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003). In respect to the Saviour, the
dominion implied in the word "Lord" is absolute and entire.

And worship thou him - That is, as applicable to a bride, Show him
respect, honor, reverence. See the notes at [Eph
5:33](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#033). The word means properly to bow
down; then, to show respect, as to a superior; and then, to show proper
respect to God, to wit, by worshipping or adoring him. See the notes at
[Mat 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#011); see [Mat
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#002); [Mat
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#033); [Mat
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#025); [Mat
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#026); [Mat
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#009); [Rev
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010); [Rev
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#009); compare the notes at [Heb
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006).

[Psalms 45:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 45:12</span></span>

And the daughter of Tyre shall be there with a gift - On the situation
of Tyre, and its ancient splendor, see the notes at [Mat
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#021); the introduction to Isa. 23;
and the notes at that chapter. In the time of the psalmist it was
probably the most wealthy and luxurious commercial town then existing;
and it is referred to here as meaning that persons of highest rank, and
of the greatest riches, and those who were surrounded most by affluence
and luxury, would come to honor the king. Even the daughter of the
magnificent prince of Tyre would deem it an honor to be present with a
gift becoming her exalted station, and properly representing the wealth
of a king of so much magnificence. This is the imagery. As applied to
the Messiah, it is a description of the honor which would be shown to
"him" by those of highest rank and largest wealth. Compare [Isa
60:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#005), note; [Isa
60:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#009), note; [Isa
60:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#011), note; [Isa
60:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#013) note.

Even the rich among the people - Rich men scattered among the people.
Compare the notes at [Psa 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#029).

Shall entreat thy favor - Margin, as in Hebrew, "thy face." Shall desire
thy smile; the light of thy countenance; thy friendship. The word
rendered "entreat" - חלה châlâh - means properly to be rubbed; then, to
be polished; and then, in the form used here (Piel) to rub, or stroke
the face of anyone; to soothe or caress; to flatter, to court; and the
idea is literally that of one who caresses or soothes, or seeks to
conciliate. The sense here is, "the richest of the nations shall make
court to thee with gifts." Gesenius, Lexicon. Ultimately, this will be
true in regard to the Messiah. Compare as above, Isa. 60. The wealth of
the world will yet be laid at his feet, and, placed at his disposal. The
effect of true conversion is always to make people willing to consecrate
to the Saviour all that they possess.

[Psalms 45:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 45:13</span></span>

The king's daughter - This evidently refers to the bride, the daughter
of the foreign king. The verse contains a description of her beauty -
her splendor of attire - before she is brought to the king, her future
husband. She is represented here as in the palace or home of her father,
before she is conducted forth to be given to her future husband in
marriage. Is all "glorious." Is all splendor or beauty; is altogether
splendor. There is nothing that is not splendid, rich, magnificent in
her appearance, or in her apparel. As seen in [Psa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009), she is clad in gold; she is
surrounded by honorable women - the daughters of kings [Psa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009), and encompassed with the rich,
[Psa 45:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012). As seen here, she is in
her father's house, adorned for the marriage, and to be brought to the
king, her future husband, attired in all that could give grace and
beauty to her person. The allusion here, as referring to the church -
the "bride of the Lamb" - "may be" to that church considered as
redeemed, and about to be received to heaven, to dwell with its Husband
and Saviour. Compare the notes at [Rev
19:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#007); notes at [Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002), notes at [Rev
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009).

Within - This does not refer to herself, as if she was not merely
splendid in her attire, but holy and pure - glorious and lovely - in
"heart;" it refers to her as seen while yet "within" the palace or home
of her father, in her own dwelling. The Hebrew word - פנימה penı̂ymâh -
means properly, "at or by the inner wall of a house, room, or court;
that is, opposite to or in front of the door, and of those entering."
Gesenius, "Lexicon" As seen in her dwelling - within the palace - in the
most honored place - she is arrayed in gorgeous apparel, and adorned as
becomes a king's daughter about to be married.

Her clothing is of wrought gold - Gold embroidery. See [Psa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009). That is, she is arrayed in the
richest apparel.

[Psalms 45:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 45:14</span></span>

She shall be brought unto the king - She shall be conducted to the king
in the marriage procession, and be presented to him, clad in this
magnificent raiment. The entire imagery is that of an Oriental marriage
procession, where the bride is conducted forth to her future husband,
attended by her virgin companions, or (as we should say) "bridesmaids."

In raiment of needlework - The word used here means properly "something
variegated" or "versicolored," and would here denote a garment of divers
colors, or "versicolored raiment." The word - רקמה riqmâh - occurs in
the following places: [Jdg 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#030),
twice, where (as here) it is rendered "needlework;" [Ch1
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#002); [Eze
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#003), rendered "divers colors;" and
[Eze 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#010), [Eze
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#013), [Eze
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#018); [Eze
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#016); [Eze
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#007), [Eze
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#016), [Eze
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#024), where it is rendered "broidered
work." It has reference probably to embroidery or needlework, though the
particular idea is rather that of the variegated "appearance" of the
garment than to the manner in which it is made.

The virgins her companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee -
literally, "virgins after her, her companions, brought unto thee." That
is, they will be brought to the king. They will come in the same state
as the queen herself; they, her companions, will be of so illustrious
rank and birth, and apparelled with so much richness, that even "they"
will be regarded as worthy to be treated as queens, or in the manner of
queens. The design of the whole is to show the rank, the dignity, the
splendor of the bride; herself gorgeously apparelled, and attended with
companions so exalted as to he worthy of being treated as queens
themselves. If this is to be regarded as applicable to the church, "the
Lamb's wife" [Rev 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009), it is designed
to describe that church as beautiful and glorious, and as worthy of the
affection of its Saviour. Compare [Eph
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027).

[Psalms 45:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 45:15</span></span>

With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought - They shall come
forth, attending the bride, with music and songs; the procession will be
one of hilarity and joy.

They shall enter into the king's palace - That is, Moving from the
palace of the royal father of the bride, or from her home, they will
enter the palace of her husband, her future home. If this is designed to
refer to the church, it is a beautiful description of what will occur
when the church redeemed shall enter heaven, the home - the palace - the
glorious abode - of the great king its Saviour, and of the joy that will
attend its triumphant admission into those everlasting abodes. Compare
the notes at Rev. 21.

[Psalms 45:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 45:16</span></span>

Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children - Instead of thy fame - thy
celebrity - thy distinction - being derived from thine illustrious
predecessors, it will be derived hereafter rather from thy sons; from
the fact that they will be made princes and rulers in the earth. In our
translation, this would seem to be an address to the bridal-queen, as if
to console her for leaving the home of her illustrious ancestors, by the
assurance that she would have children of her own, who would be still
more illustrious. The connection, however, and the original; at least,
in the Masoretic pointing, demands that this should be understood as an
address to the king himself - the main subject in the poem, as in [Psa
45:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#002). The idea is, that he would
derive his dignity and honor ultimately, not so much from his ancestors
as his descendants; that those who would be born unto him would be more
illustrious, and would have a wider dominion, than any who had gone
before him in the line in which he was descended. It is not easy or
practicable to apply this to Solomon, or to any other Hebrew prince; it
is not difficult to apply it to the Messiah, and to the fact that those
who would be descended spiritually from him, and who would ultimately be
regarded as deriving true rank and honor from him, would far surpass in
dignity all those who, in the line of kings, had been his predecessors.

Whom thou mayest make princes in all the earth - Not merely assigning to
them provinces, to be governed as a part of the, empire, but in all
lands, or where thy dominion shall be acknowledged all over the world.
The image here is derived, undoubtedly, from the custom prevailing among
kings of assigning portions of an empire as provinces to their sons. The
meaning, however, considered as referring to the Messiah, is, that his
luster and dignity on earth would not be derived from a distinguished
earthly ancestry, or from an illustrious line of kings from whom he was
descended, but from the fact that those who would derive their authority
from him would yet possess the world, and that this their authority
under him would extend to all lands. Compare the notes at [Dan
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014), notes at [Dan
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027).

[Psalms 45:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 45:17</span></span>

I will make thy name to be remembered in all generations - The psalmist
here evidently speaks as an inspired man, and the idea is that his thus
singing the praises of the "king" - the Messiah - would be among the
means of causing His name to be celebrated in all future ages. This song
would go down to future times, and would serve to keep up the true
knowledge of the Messiah in the far distant ages of the world. No one
can doubt that this has been thus far accomplished; no one has any
reason to doubt that this psalm "will be" among the means of keeping up
the true knowledge of the Messiah, and of securing the remembrance of
him upon the earth in all future periods of the world's history. This
psalm has been on million of lips, in praise of the Messiah; it will be
on hundreds of million more in future times, as expressive of tender
love for the Redeemer.

Therefore shall the people praise thee forever and ever - Thy praise
will never cease to be celebrated. The time will never come on earth
when that praise will die away; and in all the eternity beyond the
termination of this world's history there never will arrive a period
when thy name will not be honored, and when thy praises shall cease to
be sung. Compare the notes at [Rev
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#010); notes at [Rev
5:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009). Happy are they who join in
that song on earth; happy they who will unite in it in the heavenly
world!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 46](psa046)

</div>
