<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa056)  [Next](psa058) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 57](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 57:0</span></span>

This is another psalm which purports to be a psalm of David. The
propriety of ascribing it to him cannot be called in question. It is
addressed to "the chief Musician" (see the notes to Introduction of [Psa
4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001)). Though relating to an
individual case, and to the particular trials of an individual, yet it
had much in it that would be appropriate to the condition of others in
similar circumstances, and it contained, moreover, such general
sentiments on the subject of religion, that it would be useful to the
people of God in all ages. The expression in the title, "Al-taschith,"
rendered in the margin, "Destroy not," and by the Septuagint, μή
διαφθείρης mē diaphtheirēs (destroy not), and in the same manner in the
Latin Vulgate, occurs also in the titles of the two following psalms,
and of the seventy-fifth. It is regarded by some as a musical expression
- and by others as the first words of some well-known poem or hymn, in
order to show that this psalm was to be set to the music which was
employed in using that poem; or, as we should say, that the "tune"
appropriate to that was also appropriate to this, so that the words
would at once suggest the tune, in the same manner as the Latin
designations De Profundis, Miserere, Non Nobis Domine, Te Deum, etc.,
indicate well-known tunes as pieces of music - the tunes to which the
hymns beginning with those words are always sung.

The author of the Chaldee Paraphrase regards this psalm as belonging to
that period of David's history when he was under a constant necessity of
using language of this nature, or of saying "Destroy not," and as
therefore suited to all similar emergencies. The language seems to be
derived from the prayer of Moses, [Deu
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#026); "I prayed therefore unto the
Lord, and said, O Lord God, destroy not thy people," etc. This very
expression is found in [Sa1 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#009), in a
command which David addressed to his followers, and it "may" have been a
common expression with him. On the meaning of the word "Michtam" in the
title, see the notes at the Introduction to [Psa
16:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001). It is found in the three
following psalms - in the two former of them, in connection with the
phrase "Al-taschith, showing that probably those psalms had reference to
the same period of David's life.

When he fled from Saul in the cave - Possibly the cave of Adullam [Sa1
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#001), or that of En-gedi [Sa1
24:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#001). Or, the word may be used in a
"general" sense as referring not to any "particular" cave, but to that
period of his life when he was compelled to flee from one place to
another for safety, and when his home was "often" in caves.

The psalm consists of the following parts:

I. An earnest prayer of the suffering and persecuted man, with a full
expression of confidence that God would hear him, [Psa
57:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001).

II\. A description of his enemies, as people that resembled lions;
people, whose souls were inflamed and infuriated; people, whose teeth
were like spears and arrows, [Psa
57:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004).

III\. The expression of a desire that God might be exalted and honored,
or that all these events might result in his honor and glory, [Psa
57:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#005).

IV\. A further description of the purposes of his enemies, as people who
had prepared a net to take him, or had digged a pit into which he might
fall, but which he felt assured was a pit into which they themselves
would fall, [Psa 57:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#006).

V. A joyful and exulting expression of confidence in God; an assurance
that he would interpose for him; a determination to praise and honor
him; a desire that God might be exalted above the heaven, and that his
glory might fill all the earth - forgetting his own particular troubles,
and pouring out the desire of his heart that "God" might be honored
whatever might occur to "him."

[Psalms 57:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 57:1</span></span>

Be merciful unto me, O God - The same beginning as the former psalm - a
cry for mercy; an overwhelming sense of trouble and danger leading him
to come at once to the throne of God for help. See the notes at [Psa
56:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001).

For my soul trusteth in thee - See the notes at [Psa
56:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#003). He had nowhere else to go; there
was no one on whom he could rely but God.

Yea, in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge - Under the
protection or covering of his wings - as young birds seek protection
under the wings of the parent bird. See the notes at [Psa
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008). Compare [Psa
36:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#007).

Until these calamities be overpast - Compare [Job
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#013), note; [Psa
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#013), note; also at [Isa
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#020), note. He believed that these
calamities "would" pass away, or would cease; that a time would come
when he would not thus be driven from place to place. At present he knew
that he was in danger, and he desired the divine protection, for under
"that" protection he would be safe.

[Psalms 57:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 57:2</span></span>

I will cry unto God most high - The idea is - God is exalted above all
creatures; all events are "under" him, and he can control them. The
appeal was not to man, however exalted; not to an angel, however far he
may be above man; it was an appeal made at once to the Supreme Being,
the God to whom all worlds and all creatures are subject, and under
whose protection, therefore, he must be safe.

Unto God that performeth all things for me - The word used here, and
rendered "performeth" - גמר gâmar - means properly to bring to an end;
to complete; to perfect. The idea here is, that it is the character of
God, that he "completes" or "perfects," or brings to a happy issue all
his plans. The psalmist had had experience of that in the past. God had
done this in former trials; he felt assured that God would do it in
this; and he, therefore, came to God with a confident belief that all
would be safe in his hands.

[Psalms 57:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 57:3</span></span>

He shall send from heaven - That is, from himself; or, he will interpose
to save me. The psalmist does not say "how" he expected this
interposition - whether by an angel, by a miracle, by tempest or storm,
but he felt that help was to come from God alone, and he was sure that
it would come.

And save me from the reproach ... - This would be more correctly
rendered, "He shall save me; he shall reproach him that would swallow me
up." So it is rendered in the margin. On the word rendered "would
swallow me up," see the notes at [Psa
56:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001). The idea here is, that God would
"rebuke" or "reproach," to wit, by overthrowing him that sought to
devour or destroy him. God had interposed formerly in his behalf [Psa
57:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#002), and he felt assured that he
would do it again.

Selah - This seems here to be a mere musical pause. It has no connection
with the sense. See the notes at [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002).

God shall send forth his mercy - In saving me. He will "manifest" his
mercy.

And his truth - His fidelity to his promise; his faithfulness to those
who put their trust in him. He will show himself "true" to all the
promises which he has made. Compare [Psa
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#011).

[Psalms 57:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 57:4</span></span>

My soul is among lions - That is, among people who resemble lions; men,
fierce, savage, ferocious.

And I lie even among them that are set on fire - We have a term of
similar import in common use now, when we say that one is "inflamed"
with passion, referring to one who is infuriated and enraged. So we
speak of "burning" with rage or wrath - an expression derived, perhaps,
from the inflamed "appearance" of a man in anger. The idea here is not
that he "would" lie down calmly among those persons, as Prof. Alexander
suggests, but that he actually "did" thus lie down. When he laid himself
down at night, when he sought repose in sleep, he was surrounded by such
persons, and seemed to be sleeping in the midst of them.

Even the sons of men - Yet they are not wild beasts, but "men" who seem
to have the ferocious nature of wild beasts. The phrase, "sons of men,"
is often used to denote men themselves.

Whose teeth are spears and arrows - Spears and arrows in their hands are
what the teeth of wild beasts are.

And their tongue a sharp sword - The mention of the tongue here has
reference, probably, to the abuse and slander to which he was exposed,
and which was like a sharp sword that pierced even to the seat of life.
See the notes at [Psa 55:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#021).

[Psalms 57:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 57:5</span></span>

Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens - Compare [Psa
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001). The language here is that of a
man who in trouble lifts his thoughts to God; who feels that God reigns;
who is assured in his own soul that all things are under his hand; and
who is desirous that God should be magnified whatever may become of
himself. His prime and leading wish is not for himself, for his own
safety, for his own deliverance from danger; it is that "God" may be
honored - that the name of God may be glorified - that God may be
regarded as supreme over all things - that God may be exalted in the
highest possible degree - an idea expressed in the prayer that he may be
exalted "above the heavens."

Let thy glory be above all the earth - The honor of thy name; thy
praise. Let it be regarded, and be in fact, "above" all that pertains to
this lower world; let everything on earth, or that pertains to earth, be
subordinate to thee, or be surrendered for thee. This was the comfort
which David found in trouble. And this "is" the only true source of
consolation. The welfare of the universe depends on God; and that God
should be true, and just, and good, and worthy of confidence and love -
that he should reign, - that his law should be obeyed - that his plans
should be accomplished, - is of more importance to the universe than
anything that merely pertains to us; than the success of any of our own
plans; than our health, our prosperity, or our life.

[Psalms 57:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 57:6</span></span>

They have prepared a net for my steps - A net for my goings; or, into
which I may fall. See the notes at [Psa
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015).

My soul is bowed down - The Septuagint, the Vulgate, and Luther render
this in the plural, and in the active form: "They have bowed down my
soul;" that is, they have caused my soul to be bowed down. The Hebrew
may be correctly rendered, "he pressed down my soul," - referring to his
enemies, and speaking of them in the singular number.

They have digged a pit before me ... - See [Psa
7:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015), notes; [Psa
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015), note; [Job
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013), note.

[Psalms 57:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 57:7</span></span>

My heart is fixed, O God - Margin, as in Hebrew, "prepared." Compare the
notes at [Psa 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010). The word "suited"
or "prepared" accurately expresses the sense of the Hebrew, and it is so
rendered in the Septuagint, (ἑτοίμη hetoimē); in the Vulgate, "paratum;"
and by Luther, "bereit." The word is used, however, in the sense of
"standing erect," [Psa 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#007); to
"establish" or "strengthen," [Psa
89:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#004); [Psa
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#017); and hence, to be erect; to be
firm, steady, constant, fixed. This seems to be the meaning here, as it
is expressed in our common version. His heart was firm and decided. He
did not waver in his purpose, or lean now to one side and then to the
other; he was not "swayed" or "moved" by the events that had occurred.
He felt conscious of standing firm in the midst of all his troubles. He
confided in God. He did not doubt his justice, his goodness, his mercy;
and, even in his trials, he was ready to praise him, and was "resolved"
to praise him. The repetition of the word "fixed" gives emphasis and
intensity to the expression, and is designed to show in the strongest
manner that his heart, his purpose, his confidence in God, did not waver
in the slightest degree.

I will sing and give praise - My heart shall confide in thee; my lips
shall utter the language of praise. In all his troubles God was his
refuge; in all, he found occasion for praise. So it should be the fixed
and settled purpose of our hearts that we will at all times confide in
God, and that in every situation in life we will render him praise.

[Psalms 57:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 57:8</span></span>

Awake up, my glory - By the word "glory" here some understand the
tongue; others understand the soul itself, as the glory of man. The
"word" properly refers to that which is weighty, or important; then,
anything valuable, splendid, magnificent. Here it seems to refer to all
that David regarded as glorious and honorable in himself - his noblest
powers of soul - all in him that "could" be employed in the praise of
God. The occasion was one on which it was proper to call all his powers
into exercise; all that was noble in him as a man. The words "awake up"
are equivalent to "arouse;" a solemn appeal to put forth all the powers
of the soul.

Awake, psaltery and harp - In regard to these instruments, see the notes
at [Isa 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012). The instrument denoted
by the word "psaltery" - נבל nebel - was a stringed instrument, usually
with twelve strings, and played with the fingers. See the notes at [Psa
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#002). The "harp" or "lyre" - כנור
kinnôr - was also a stringed instrument, usually consisting of ten
strings. Josephus says that it was struck or played with a key. From
[Sa1 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#023); [Sa1
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#010); [Sa1
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#009), it appears, however, that it was
sometimes played with the fingers.

I myself will awake early - That is, I will awake early in the morning
to praise God; I will arouse myself from slumber to do this; I will
devote the first moments - the early morning - to his worship. These
words do not imply that this was an evening psalm, and that he would
awake on the morrow - the next day - to praise God; but they refer to
what he intended should be his general habit - that he would devote the
early morning (arousing himself for that purpose) to the praise of God.
No time in the day is more appropriate for worship than the early
morning; no object is more worthy to rouse us from our slumbers than a
desire to praise God; in no way can the day be more appropriately begun
than by prayer and praise; and nothing will conduce more to keep up the
flame of piety - the life of religion in the soul - than the habit of
devoting the early morning to the worship of God; to prayer; to
meditation; to praise.

[Psalms 57:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 57:9</span></span>

I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people - So great a deliverance as
he here hoped for, would make it proper that he should celebrate the
praise of God in the most public manner; that he should make his
goodness known as far as possible among the nations. See the notes at
[Psa 18:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#049).

[Psalms 57:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 57:10</span></span>

For thy mercy is great unto the heavens ... - See this explained in the
notes at [Psa 36:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#005).

[Psalms 57:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 57:11</span></span>

Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens - See the notes at [Psa
57:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#005). The sentiment here is repeated
as being that on which the mind of the psalmist was intensely fixed;
that which he most earnestly desired; that which was the crowning aim
and desire of his life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 58](psa058)

</div>
