<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa030)  [Next](psa032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 31:0</span></span>

This psalm is addressed to "the chief Musician," and purports to be a
psalm of David. On the meaning of the phrase "To the chief Musician,"
see the notes at the title to [Psa
4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001). There can be no doubt that the
inscription which ascribes it to David is correct, and that he was the
author. The occasion, however, on which it was composed is unknown, and
cannot now be ascertained. Most of the Jewish and many Christian
interpreters have supposed that it was written when David was in the
wilderness of Maon, and when, having been betrayed (as to the place of
his retreat) by the Ziphites, he was hotly pursued by Saul and his host,
[Sa1 23:19-26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#019). There is, however, no
particular reason for referring it to this period of his life, for there
were many occasions to which it would be equally applicable.

Its general purpose is to inspire confidence in God in other hearts -
from the experience of the psalmist - from that manifested favor by
which he had been brought through his troubles. See [Psa
31:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#023). The psalm refers to the
dangers which surrounded its author at the time referred to; his fears
and apprehensions in those dangers; his calm confidence in God amid his
dangers; the deliverance from trouble which was vouchsafed to him; his
joy and gratitude for deliverance; and the lessons which others might
learn in their trials from the divine dealings toward him in his. That
the psalmist was in trouble or danger when he penned this psalm there
can be no reason to doubt; that he prayed earnestly at that time for
deliverance is clear; but it is also plain that in the psalm he refers
to former troubles, and to the deliverance which God had granted to him
in those troubles, and that he seeks and derives consolation and
assurance from the dealings of God with him then. In some parts of the
psalm he refers to his present afflictions; in other parts to the trials
of other days, and to his deliverances in those trials; in the entire
psalm he inculcates the duty of confiding in God, from his own
experience of His mercy, and from his own reliance upon Him.

The contents of the psalm are as follows:

I. Prayer to God for deliverance from his sufferings and his enemies, on
the ground of his confidence in Him, and his previous experience of His
mercy, [Psa 31:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001).

II\. Description of his troubles and of the calamities under which he
was oppressed; or an enumeration of his present distresses, [Psa
31:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#009). He says that he is in
trouble, and that his eye is consumed with grief, [Psa
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#009); that his life is spent with
grief, and his years with sighing, that his strength failed, and that
his bones were consumed, [Psa 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#010);
that he is a reproach among his neighbors and an object of dread to his
acquaintances, or that they fled from him, he was so abject, forsaken,
and afflicted, [Psa 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#011); that he was
forsaken and forgotten like a dead man who had passed away from the
recollection of mankind, [Psa 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#012);
that he was slandered, and that people conspired together to take away
his life, [Psa 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#013).

III\. Calm confidence in God in these times of trouble; or a calm
committing of all into His hands, under an assurance which he felt that
all would be well, [Psa 31:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#014). He
says that he trusted in God, [Psa
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#014); and that his times were in the
hand of God, [Psa 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#015); he prays that
God would deliver him, [Psa 31:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#015);
he finds comfort and peace in the assurance of the divine goodness and
mercy, [Psa 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019); and in the
assurance that God would hide them that trusted in Him from the pride of
man, and would keep them safely in His pavilion, [Psa
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020).

IV\. Thanks for deliverance, [Psa
31:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#021). He seems to have found the
deliverance, even while he prayed, or to have had such an assurance of
it that he could speak of it as if it were already his. He felt that he
had been hasty in supposing that he would be cut off; and seems to have
reproached himself for even a momentary doubt in regard to the goodness
of God, [Psa 31:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#022).

V. The lesson furnished to others by his experience, [Psa
31:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#023). It is a lesson of
encouragement to all in similar circumstances, prompting them to be of
good courage; to be cheered by his example and experience; never to
despond; never to cease to trust God. Because He had found God to be a
refuge and strength, he calls upon all others to believe that they would
also find him such if they likewise trusted in Him.

[Psalms 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 31:1</span></span>

In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust - This is the ground of the petitions
which follow; or the reason why the psalmist thus appeals to God. It was
his firm confidence in Him; in His character; in His promises; in His
ability to deliver Him in the time of danger. Compare the notes at [Psa
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#001).

Let me never be ashamed - That is, let me never have occasion to be
ashamed for having put this confidence in Thee. Let Thy dealings toward
me be such as to show that my confidence was well founded. The word is
not used here in the sense of being unwilling to confess his faith in
God, or his love for Him, as it is often now (compare [Rom
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016); [Rom
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005); [Ti2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012)), but in the sense of being so
"disappointed" as to make one ashamed that he had thus relied on that
which was unworthy of confidence. See the notes at [Job
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#020); compare also [Isa
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#005); [Jer
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#026); [Jer
14:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#003). The psalmist prays that God
would interpose in his behalf in answer to his prayers, and that he
would show that He was worthy of the confidence which he had reposed in
him, or that He was a God who might be trusted in the time of trial; in
other words, that he might not be subjected to the reproach of the
wicked for having in his troubles relied upon such a God.

Deliver me in thy righteousness - In the manifestation of Thy righteous
character; in the exhibition of that character as righteous; as doing
justice between man and man; as pronouncing a just sentence between me
and my enemies.

[Psalms 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 31:2</span></span>

Bow down thine ear to me - As He does who inclines His ear toward one
whom He is willing to hear, or whom He is desirous of hearing. See the
notes at [Psa 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#006).

Deliver me speedily - Without delay. Or, hasten to deliver me. It is
right to pray to be delivered from all evil; equally right to pray to be
delivered immediately.

Be thou my strong rock - Margin: "to me for a rock of strength." See
[Psa 18:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#001), note; [Psa
18:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#046), note.

For an house of defense to save me - A fortified house; a house made
safe and strong. It is equivalent to praying that he might have a secure
abode or dwelling-place.

[Psalms 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 31:3</span></span>

For thou art my rock and my fortress - See the notes at [Psa
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002).

Therefore for thy name's sake - For the sake of thine own honor, or for
the glory of thy name. See the notes at [Psa
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#003). That is, since thou art my rock
and my defense - since I put my trust in thee - show, by leading and
guiding me, that my trust is well founded, or that this is Thy
character, and that Thou wilt be true and faithful to those who commit
their all to thee. See the notes at [Psa
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001).

[Psalms 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 31:4</span></span>

Pull me out of the net - See the notes at [Psa
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015).

That they have laid privily for me - That my enemies have laid for me.
The phrase "laid privily" refers to the custom of "hiding" or
"concealing" a net or gin, so that the wild beast that was to be taken
could not see it, or would fall into it unawares. Thus, his enemies
designed to overcome him, by springing a net upon him at a moment when
he was not aware of it, and at a place where he did not suspect it.

For thou art my strength - My stronghold. My hope of defense is in thee,
and thee alone.

[Psalms 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 31:5</span></span>

Into thine hand I commit my spirit - The Saviour used this expression
when on the cross, and when about to die: [Luk
23:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046). But this does not prove that
the psalm had originally a reference to him, or that he meant to
intimate that the words originally were a prophecy. The language was
appropriate for him, as it is for all others in the hour of death; and
his use of the words furnished the highest illustration of their being
appropriate in that hour. The act of the psalmist was an act of strong
confidence in God in the midst of dangers and troubles; the act of the
Saviour was of the same nature, commending his spirit to God in the
solemn hour of death. The same act of faith is proper for all the people
of God, alike in trouble and in death. Compare [Act
7:59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#059). The word "spirit" may mean
either "life," considered as the animating principle, equivalent to the
word "myself;" or it may mean more specifically the "soul," as
distinguished from the body. The sense is not materially varied by
either interpretation.

Thou hast redeemed me - This was the ground or reason why the "psalmist"
commended himself to God; this reason was not urged, and could not have
been by the Saviour, in his dying moments. He committed his departing
spirit to God as his Father, and in virtue of the work which he had been
appointed to do, and which he was now about finishing, as a Redeemer; we
commit our souls to Him in virtue of having been redeemed. This is
proper for us:

\(a\) because he has redeemed us;

\(b\) because we have been redeemed for him, and we may ask Him to take
His own;

\(c\) because this is a ground of safety, for if we have been redeemed,
we may be certain that God will keep us; and

\(d\) because this is the only ground of our security in reference to
the future world.

What "David" may have understood by this word it may not be easy to
determine with certainty; but there is no reason to doubt that he may
have used it as expressive of the idea that he had been recovered from
the ruin of the fall, and from the dominion of sin, and had been made a
child of God. Nor do we need to doubt that he had such views of the way
of salvation that he would feel that he was redeemed only by an
atonement, or by the shedding of blood for his sins. To all who are
Christians it is enough to authorize them to use this language in the
midst of troubles and dangers, and in the hour of death, that they have
been redeemed by the blood of the Saviour; to none of us is there any
other safe ground of trust and confidence in the hour of death than the
fact that Christ has died for sin, and that we have evidence that we are
interested in his blood.

O Lord God of truth - True to thy promises and to thy
covenant-engagements. As thou hast promised life and salvation to those
who are redeemed, they may safely confide in thee. See the notes at [Co2
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020).

[Psalms 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 31:6</span></span>

I have hated them that regard lying vanities - This is evidently stated
as a reason for the prayer offered in the previous verses. It is a
reference by the psalmist to his own past life; to his general aim and
conduct. The meaning is, that he had been a friend of God; that he had
separated himself from wicked men; and he now prays in return for His
protection and interposition. The sentiment is similar to that which
occurs in [Psa 26:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#003). See the notes
at that passage. The word rendered "regard" here means to observe, to
keep, to attend upon; and the reference is to those who show honor to
what is here called "lying vanities;" that is, those who attend upon
them, or who show them favor. The "lying vanities" are probably "idols,"
and the allusion is to those who attended on the worship of idols as
distinguished from those who worshipped the true God. Idols are often
represented as false - as vain, or vanity, - as a lie - in
contradistinction from that which is true and real. See the notes at
[Co1 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004). There is special emphasis in
the language used here as denoting the "utter" worthlessness and vanity
of idols. The language means "vanities of emptiness;" denoting that they
were "utterly" vain and worthless.

But I trust in the Lord - In Yahweh, the true God, as distinguished from
idols.

[Psalms 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 31:7</span></span>

I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy - I will triumph and joy in thy
mercy; that is, in the mercy which he had already experienced, and in
that which he still hoped to enjoy. He had had abundant proofs of that
mercy; he hoped for still further proofs of it; and he says that he
would find his joy in that, and not in what idols could give.

For thou hast considered my trouble - In times past and now. He felt
assured that his prayer would be regarded, and that God would relieve
and deliver him.

Thou hast known my soul in adversities - In the troubles that have come
upon me. That is, God had seen and known all the feelings of his heart
in the time of adversity; his sorrow and anxiety; his hope and trust;
his uncomplaining spirit; his feeling of entire dependence on God, and
his belief that He would interpose to save him. God had not turned away
from him, but had shown that he regarded with interest all his feelings,
his desires, his hopes. It is much, in the time of trouble, to know that
all our feelings are understood by God, that He sees all our sorrows,
and that He will not be regardless of them. There are no states of mind
more interesting than those which occur in adversities; there is no one
who can fully understand the soul in adversities but God; there is no
one but God who can entirely meet the needs of the soul in such seasons.

[Psalms 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 31:8</span></span>

And hast not shut me up into the hand of the enemy - Hast not delivered
me into his hand, or into his power. See the margin [Sa1
17:46](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#046); [Sa1
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#018); [Sa1
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#008).

Thou hast set my feet in a large room - In a large place. Thou hast made
me free, or set me at liberty. See [Psa
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001), note; [Psa
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#019), note; [Psa
18:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#036), note.

[Psalms 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 31:9</span></span>

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am in trouble - The nature and sources
of his trouble are specified in the verses following. He seems to have
regarded all his trouble as the result of sin, either the sin of his
heart, of which he alone was conscious, or of some open act of sin, that
had been the means of bringing this affliction upon him, [Psa
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#010). As a consequence of this, he
says that he was subjected to the reproach of his enemies, and shunned
by his neighbors and his acquaintances; that he was forgotten by them
like a dead man out of mind; that he was exposed to the slander of
others, and that they conspired against his life, [Psa
31:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#011). In view of all this he calls
earnestly upon God to save him in his troubles, and to be his helper and
friend.

Mine eye is consumed with grief - That is, with weeping. See the notes
at [Psa 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#007).

Yea, my soul - That is, my spirit, my life, my mind. My powers are
weakened and exhausted by excessive grief.

And my belly - My bowels: regarded as the seat of the affections. See
the notes at [Isa 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#011); compare [Psa
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#014). The effect of his grief was to
exhaust his strength, and to make his heart sink within him.

[Psalms 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 31:10</span></span>

For my life is spent with grief - The word here rendered "spent" does
not mean merely "passed," as it is commonly now used, as when we say we
"spent" our time at such a place, or in such a manner, but in the more
proper meaning of the word, as denoting "consumed, wasted away," or
"destroyed." See the word כלה kâlâh as used in [Jer
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#004); [Lam
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#011); [Psa
84:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#002) (Heb. 3); [Psa
143:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#007); [Psa
69:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#003) Heb. 4; [Job
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#020).

And my years with sighing - That is, my years are wasted or consumed
with sighing. Instead of being devoted to active toil and to useful
effort, they are exhausted or wasted away with a grief which wholly
occupies and preys upon me.

My strength faileth because of mine iniquity - Because of the trouble
that has come upon me for my sin. He regarded all this trouble - from
whatever quarter it came, whether directly from the hand of God, or from
man - as the fruit of "sin." Whether he refers to any particular sin as
the cause of this trouble, or to the sin of his nature as the source of
all evil, it is impossible now to determine. Since, however, no
particular sin is specified, it seems most probable that the reference
is to the sin of his heart - to his corrupt nature. It is common, and it
is not improper, when we are afflicted, to regard all our trials as
fruits of sin; as coming upon us as the result of the fall, and as an
evidence that we are depraved. It is certain that there is no suffering
in heaven, and that there never would be any in a perfectly holy world.
It is equally certain that all the woes of earth are the consequence of
man's apostasy; and it is proper, therefore, when we are afflicted, even
though we cannot trace the affliction to any "particular" offence, to
trace it all to the existence of evil, and to regard it as among the
proofs of the divine displeasure against sin.

And my bones are consumed - That is, are decayed, worn out, or wasted
away. Even the solid framework of my body gives way under excessive
grief, and all my strength is gone. See [Psa
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#003); [Psa
102:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#003).

[Psalms 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 31:11</span></span>

I was a reproach among all mine enemies - That is, he was subjected to
their reproaches, or was calumniated and reviled by them. See the notes
at [Psa 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#006).

But especially among my neighbors - I was reproached by none more than
by my neighbors. They showed special distrust of me, and manifested
special unkindness, even more than my enemies did. They turned away from
me. They abandoned me. They would not associate with me. They regarded
me as a disgrace to them, and forsook me. Compare [Job
19:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#013), and the notes at that
passage.

And a fear to mine acquaintance - An object of dread or terror, so that
they fled from me.

They that did see me without - In the streets, or in public - out of my
own house. Not only those in my own dwelling - the members of my family
- regarded me in this manner, but passers in the streets - those whom I
accidentally met - turned from me and fled in disgust and horror. It is
not possible now to determine at what time in the life of the psalmist
this occurred, or to ascertain the exact circumstances. There were,
doubtless, times when with the saddest feelings he could say that all
this was true of him. His troubles in the time of his persecutions by
Saul, and still more probably his trials in the time when Absalom
rebelled against him, and when he was driven away from his throne and
his capital, would furnish an occasion when this would be true. If the
latter was the occasion, then we can see how naturally he would connect
all this with his "iniquity," and regard it as the consequence of his
sin in the matter of Uriah - a sin which would probably be always in his
recollection, and which he would ever onward regard as lying at the
foundation of all his afflictions.

[Psalms 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 31:12</span></span>

I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind - Like the man who is dead, and
who has passed away from the recollection of mankind. Compare [Psa
88:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#004). The Hebrew is, "as a dead man
from the heart;" that is, from the memory or recollection of men, so as
to be no more remembered; no more regarded. The expression is nearly the
same in meaning as our common English proverb: "out of sight, out of
mind." The allusion is to the fact that a man who is dead is soon
forgotten. He is missed at first by a few friends, while the rest of the
world knows little about him, or cares little for him. He is no longer
seen where he has been accustomed to be seen, at the place of business,
in the social circle, in the scenes of amusement, in the streets, or in
public assemblies. For a short period a vacancy is created which
attracts attention and causes regret. But the world moves on. Another
comes to fill his place, and soon his absence ceases to be a subject of
remark, or a cause of regret; the world says little about him, and soon
he altogether ceases to be remembered. At no distant time the rude board
with his name written on it, or the marble sculptured with all the skill
of art, falls down. The passing traveler casts an eye upon the "name" of
him who slept his last sleep there, and neither knows nor cares who he
was.

"The gay will laugh

When thou art gone, the solemn brood of care

Plod on, and each one as before will chase

His favorite phantom"

\- Bryant

"On my grassy grave

The men of future times will careless tread,

And read my name upon the sculptured stone;

Nor will the sound, familiar to their ears,

Recall my vanish'd memory."

\- Henry Kirke White

It is sad to reflect that this is to be our lot; but so it is. It would
cast a most gloomy shade over life if this was to be the end of man, and
if he passed from existence as soon as he passes from the recollection
of the living. The idea of the psalmist here is, that, in the
circumstances to which he referred, he had been forgotten by mankind,
and he uses the most striking image which could be employed to convey
that idea.

I am like a broken vessel - Margin, as in Hebrew, "like a vessel that
perisheth." That is, like a vessel made of clay - a piece of pottery -
that is easily broken and rendered worthless. This is a favorite
comparison with Jeremiah. See [Jer
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#028); [Jer
48:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#038); [Lam
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#002). Compare also [Psa
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009); [Isa
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#014); [Hos
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#008).

[Psalms 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 31:13</span></span>

For I have heard the slander of many - The reproach; the false
accusations; the unjust aspersions. We are here more definitely informed
as to another of the sources of the trouble that came upon him. It was
"slander." He had already referred to "two" sources of trouble; one [Psa
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#011) that he was "reproached" by his
friends and neighbors, and that his society was shunned by them; a
second, that he was "forgotten" by those who ought to have remembered
him, and that they treated him as though he were dead, [Psa
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#012). The third is referred to now;
to wit, that he was the subject of "slander," or of false reports. What
was the "nature" of those false charges we are not informed. But it is
not needful that we should know precisely what they were. It is enough,
in order to see the depth and aggravation of his trouble, to know that
he "was" exposed to this; and that, to all that he had to endure from
other sources, there was this added - that his name was reproached and
cast out as evil - that he was subjected to "slander,"

"Whose edge is sharper than the sword; whose tongue

Outvenoms all the worms of Nile; whose breath

Rides on the posting winds; and doth belie

All corners of the world."

Cymbeline, Act iii., Sc. iv.

Fear was on every side - From the causes already specified. He knew not
whom to trust. He seemed to have no friend. He was afraid, therefore, of
every one that he met.

While they took counsel together against me - See the notes at [Psa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002). They entered into a conspiracy or
combination.

They devised to take away my life - They devised measures, or they laid
a plot, thus to kill me. These are the grounds of the earnest prayer
which he urges in [Psa 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#009) : "Have
mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am in trouble."

[Psalms 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 31:14</span></span>

But I trust in thee, O Lord - In these times of trial - when [Psa
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#009) his eye was consumed with grief;
when [Psa 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#010) his years were spent
with sighing, his strength failed, and his bones were consumed; when
[Psa 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#011) he was a reproach among his
neighbors, and dreaded by his acquaintances; when [Psa
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#012) he was forgotten as a dead man;
and when [Psa 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#013) he was surrounded
with causes of alarm. Then he trusted in God. His confidence did not
fail. He believed that God was his Father and Friend; that He was on the
throne; that He could protect and defend him; and he left himself and
his cause with Him. In such circumstances as these there is no other
sure refuge but God; at such times the strength of faith is shown, and
then is seen pre-eminently the power and value of religion.

I said, Thou art my God - Thou art all that is implied in the name
"God;" and thou art mine. He felt assured that God would not forsake
him, though men did; that he might confide in Him, though his earthly
friends all turned away. There is always one (God) who will not leave or
forsake us; and the friendship and favor of that One is of more value to
us than that of all other beings in the universe combined.

[Psalms 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 31:15</span></span>

My times are in thy hand - That is, I said this in my trouble; when my
friends forsook me, and when my enemies came around me and threatened my
life. The meaning is, that all that pertained to him was under the
control and at the disposal of God. He would "live" as long as God
should please. It was His to give life; His to preserve it; His to take
it away. All in relation to life - its origin - its continuance - its
changes - its seasons - childhood, youth, middle age, old age - all was
in the hand of God. No one, therefore, could take his life before the
time that had been appointed by God, and he might calmly commit the
whole to him. This we may feel in all seasons of life and in all times
of danger; of sickness; of feebleness. We shall live as long as God has
appointed; we shall pass through such changes as he directs; we shall
die when and where and how he chooses. In the faithful discharge of our
duty, therefore, we may commit all these things to him, and leave all at
his disposal.

Deliver me from the hand of mine enemies - That is, since all these
things are under thy control; since thou hast power over my life and
over all that pertains to me, I pray that thy power may be exerted in my
behalf, and that my life may be rescued from danger. This was his prayer
in the midst of his troubles, and this prayer was heard.

[Psalms 31:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 31:16</span></span>

Make thy face to shine upon thy servant - That is, show me thy favor, or
be kind and merciful to me. See the notes at [Psa
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#006).

Save me for thy mercies' sake - On account of thy mercy; or that thy
mercy may be manifested. This is always a just ground of appeal to God
by a sinner or a sufferer, that God would make our sins and trials an
"occasion" for displaying his own character. There are, indeed, other
grounds of appeal; but there is no one that is more pure or exalted than
this.

[Psalms 31:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 31:17</span></span>

Let me not be ashamed, O Lord, for I have called upon thee - That is, I
have reposed entire confidence in thee, and in thy promises, in the time
of trial; let now the result be such as to show that I had reason thus
to trust in thee; that thy character is such that the persecuted and the
afflicted may always find thee to be a safe and secure refuge. In other
words, Let me not be disappointed, and thus be made "ashamed" before
men, as if I had put my trust where no relief was to be found, or where
there was nothing to authorize an act of unreserved confidence. See the
notes at [Psa 25:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#002).

Let the wicked be ashamed - Let them be disappointed in that on which
they had put their trust; let it be seen that they, in their wicked
plans, had no safe ground of confidence. They rely on their strength;
their skill; their courage; their resources; and not on God. Let it now
be seen that these things constitute no safe ground of trust, and let
not others be encouraged to follow their example by any success that
shall attend them in their designs.

And let them be silent in the grave - Margin, "let them be cut off for
the grave." Hebrew: "for Sheol." The more correct translation is that
which is in the text, "Let them be silent." That is, let them go down to
the grave - to "Sheol" - to the "underworld" - to the "land of silence."
On the meaning of the word used here - "Sheol," the grave - see the
notes at [Isa 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#009); compare the notes
at [Job 10:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#021); and the notes at
[Psa 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010). This is represented as a
land of "silence." This idea is derived from "the grave," where the dead
repose in silence; and the meaning here is, let them be cut off and
consigned to that land of silence. It is a prayer that the wicked may
not triumph.

[Psalms 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 31:18</span></span>

Let the lying lips be put to silence - See the notes at [Psa
12:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002). The lips which speak lies. The
reference here is especially to those who had spoken in this manner
against the psalmist himself, though he makes the language general, or
prays in general that God would silence all liars: a prayer certainly in
which all persons may properly join.

Which speak grievous things - Margin, "a hard thing." The Hebrew word -
עתק ‛âthâq - means "bold, impudent, wicked." Gesenius, Lexicon. The
phrase here means, therefore, to speak wickedly, or to speak in a bold,
reckless, impudent manner; that is, without regard to the truth of what
is said.

Proudly and contemptuously - Hebrew, in pride and contempt: that is, in
a manner which shows that they are proud of themselves and despise
others. Slander always perhaps implies this. People are secretly proud
of themselves; or they "desire" to cherish an exalted opinion of
themselves, and to have others entertain the same opinion of them; and
hence, if they cannot exalt themselves by their own merit, as they wish,
they endeavor to humble others below their real merit, and to a level
lower than themselves, by detraction.

[Psalms 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 31:19</span></span>

Oh how great is thy goodness - That is, in view of the divine protection
and favor in such cases, or when thus assailed. The psalmist seems to
have felt that it was an inexpressible privilege thus to be permitted to
appeal to God with the assurance of the divine protection. In few
circumstances do people feel more grateful for the opportunity of
appealing to God than when they are reviled and calumniated. As there is
nothing which we feel more keenly than calumny and reproach, so there
can be no circumstances when we more appreciate the privilege of having
such a Refuge and Friend as God.

Which thou hast laid up - Which thou hast "treasured" up, for so the
Hebrew word means. That is, goodness and mercy had been, as it were,
"treasured up" for such an emergency - as a man treasures up food in
autumn for the wants of winter, or wealth for the wants of old age. The
goodness of God is thus a treasure garnered up for the needs of His
people - a treasure always accessible; a treasure that can never be
exhausted.

For them that fear thee - Or "reverence" thee - fear or reverence being
often used to denote friendship with God, or religion. See the notes at
[Psa 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#007).

Which thou hast wrought for them - Which thou hast "made" for them
(Hebrew); or, which thou hast secured as if by labor; that is, by plan
and arrangement. It was not by chance that that goodness had been
provided; God had done it in a manner resembling the act of a man who
lays up treasure for his future use by plan and by toil. The idea is,
that all this was the "work" of a benevolent God; a God who had
carefully anticipated the wants of his people.

For them that trust in thee - who rely upon Thee in trouble, in danger,
and in want; who feel that their only reliance is upon Thee, and who do
actually trust in Thee.

Before the sons of men - That is, Thou hast performed this in the
presence of the sons of men, or in the presence of mankind. God had not
only laid it up in secret, making provision for the wants of His people,
but he had worked out this deliverance before people, or had shown His
goodness to them openly. The acts of benevolence or goodness in the case
were - "first," that he had "treasured up" the resources of His goodness
by previous arrangement, or by anticipation, for them; and "second,"
that he had "wrought out" deliverance, or had "manifested" his goodness
by interposing to save, and by doing it openly that it might be seen by
mankind.

[Psalms 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 31:20</span></span>

Thou shalt hide them in the secret of thy presence - See the notes at
[Psa 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#005). The phrase "secret of thy
presence" means thy "secret presence." The Hebrew is: "the secret of thy
face;" and the idea is, that He would hide them, or withdraw them from
public view, or from the view of their enemies, into the very place
where He Himself dwelt, so that they would be before Him and near Him;
so that His eye would be upon them, and that they would be certain of
His protection. The language here is the same as in [Psa
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#005), except that the word "face" or
"presence" is used here instead of the word "tabernacle." The idea is
the same.

From the pride of man - The Hebrew word here rendered "pride" - רכס
rôkes - means properly "league" or "conspiracy;" then, "snares" or
"plots." It occurs nowhere else in the Scriptures, though the
corresponding verb - רכס râkas - occurs twice, meaning to "bind on" or
"to," [Exo 28:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#028); [Exo
39:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#021). The word here means "league" or
"conspiracy," and the idea is, that when the wicked form a conspiracy,
or enter into a league against the righteous, God will take them, as it
were, into His own immediate presence, and will protect them.

Thou shalt keep them secretly - Thou wilt "hide" them as with Thyself.

In a pavilion - In Thy tent, or dwelling-place. See the notes at [Psa
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#005).

From the strife of tongues - Slander; reproach; calumny. This does not
mean the strife of tongues among themselves, or their contentions with
each other, but the united clamors of the whole against Himself. God
would guard the righteous from their reproaches, or their efforts to
ruin them by slander. Compare [Psa
37:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#005).

[Psalms 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 31:21</span></span>

Blessed be the Lord - An expression of thanksgiving for the evidence
that God had heard him in his troubles, and had answered him.

For he hath showed me his marvelous kindness - literally, "He has made
his mercy wonderful;" that is, he has showed me such mercy as to be an
object of admiration and astonishment. It was not ordinary kindness,
such as is shown to people every day; it was so uncommon - so far beyond
all expectation - so separate from second causes and the agency of man -
so marked in its character - as to fill the mind with wonder.

In a strong city - Margin, "fenced city." This may mean either that he
had thus placed him literally in a strongly fortified city where he was
safe from the fear of his enemies; or, that he had interposed in his
behalf, and had given him protection as if he had brought him into such
a strongly fortified place. Jarchi supposes that the city of "Keilah"
[Sa1 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#007) is here intended. But this
is improbable. All that the passage necessarily implies is, that God had
given him protection as if he had been placed in a strongly fortified
town where he would be safe from danger.

[Psalms 31:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 31:22</span></span>

For I said in my haste - In my fear; my apprehension. The word rendered
"haste" means properly that terror or alarm which causes one to flee, or
to endeavor to escape. It is not "haste" in the sense of an opinion
formed too quickly, or formed rashly; it is "haste" in the sense of
terror leading to sudden flight, or an effort to escape. See an
illustration of this idea in the case of David himself, in [Sa1
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#026).

I am cut off - That is, I shall certainly be cut off or destroyed.

From before thine eyes - Either, in thy very presence; or, so that I
shall not be admitted into thy presence. I shall be cut down, and
suffered no more to come before thee to worship thee. Compare the notes
at [Psa 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005).

Nevertheless thou heardest ... - Contrary to my apprehensions, I was
heard and delivered. God's mercy went beyond the psalmist's faith - as
it often does to His people now, far beyond what they hope for; far
beyond what they even pray for; far beyond what they believe to be
possible; so far beyond all this, as to make the result, as in the case
of David [Psa 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#021), a matter of
wonder and astonishment.

[Psalms 31:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 31:23</span></span>

O love the Lord, all ye his saints - This is the "application" of all
the truths suggested in the psalm. The experience of the psalmist had
shown the wisdom of trusting in God in times of danger and trouble, and
had laid the foundation for a proper exhortation to others to imitate
his example; an argument why all the people of God should love him, and
should be of good courage. The reason here assigned for their loving the
Lord is, that he preserves those who are faithful to him, and "rewards
the proud doer." This is a reason for loving God, or for putting our
trust in him, though the psalmist does not say that this is the only
reason for doing it. The meaning here is, that the dealings of God
toward the psalmist had established this truth in regard to the
character of God, that he does preserve the faithful, and does punish
the proud, and that this fact constitutes a reason why all his people
should confide in him.

For the Lord preserveth the faithful - The faithful; those who put their
trust in him; those who do not give up in despondency and despair in
time of danger and trouble; those who do not forsake him even though for
a time he seems to forsake them. What God looks for mainly in his people
is confidence; faithfulness; trust; fidelity.

And plentifully rewardeth - "Abundantly" rewards. Literally, "in
plenty." That is, his punishment does not fall short of the desert of
the wicked man. It is ample or full. He does full justice.

The proud doer - "The man working pride." The reference is to the man
who is confident in himself; who seeks to aggrandize himself, and who in
doing this is regardless of the rights of others.

[Psalms 31:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 31:24</span></span>

Be of good courage - See a similar exhortation at the close of a psalm,
in [Psa 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#014). Compare the notes at
that verse. As the result of all his own experience of the goodness of
God, and of His gracious interposition in the time of danger, the
psalmist exhorts others to be encouraged, and to feel assured that God
would not leave or forsake them.

And he shall strengthen your heart - He will animate you; he will enable
you to meet trial and opposition; he will keep you from becoming faint
and disheartened.

All ye that hope in the Lord - All that put their trust in him, or all
whose expectation is from him. It is a characteristic of true piety that
all hope centers in God, or that the soul feels that there is no other
ground of hope.

\(a\) The truly pious man despairs of success in anything else, or from
any other quarter, for he feels that God alone can give success.

\(b\) He does hope in God - in reference to all that is needful for
himself as an individual; all that will be for the good of his family;
all that will tend to bless the world; all that he desires in heaven.
Hope in God cheers him, sustains him, comforts him; makes life happy and
prosperous; and makes death calm, serene, triumphant.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 32](psa032)

</div>
