<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa023)  [Next](psa025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 24:0</span></span>

There is no reason to doubt that the title of this psalm, which ascribes
it to David, is correct. A portion of the psalm [Psa
24:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#003) has a strong resemblance to
[Psa 15:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001), and doubtless was
composed by the same author.

The occasion on which the psalm was composed is not designated; but from
its contents it was evidently on some public occasion of great
solemnity; probably on the removal of the ark of the covenant into its
appointed place in Jerusalem, where it was to abide permanently; a
solemn entrance of Yahweh, as it were, into the place of his permanent
abode, [Psa 24:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007). This could not
have been the temple, because:

\(a\) that was not erected in the time of David; and

\(b\) the description [Psa 24:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007) is
rather that of entering into a "city" than into a temple or a place of
public worship, for the psalmist calls upon the "gates" to lift up their
heads - an expression more suitable to a city than to the doors of a
tabernacle or a temple.

According to this view, no occasion seems more appropriate than that of
removing the ark from the house of Obed-edom to "the city of David," or
to Jerusalem, as described in [Sa2
6:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#012). David indeed placed the ark
"in the midst of the tabernacle which he had pitched for it" on Mount
Zion [Sa2 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#017), but the particular
reference of the psalm would rather seem to be to the entrance of the
ark into the city than into the tabernacle. It was probably designed to
be sung as the procession approached the city where the ark was destined
to remain. The occasion of thus taking up the ark into the holy hill
where it was to abide seems to have suggested the inquiry, who would be
suited to ascend the holy hill where God abides, and to stand in his
presence, [Psa 24:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#003).

The psalm properly consists of three parts:

I. An ascription of praise to God as the Maker and Upholder of all
things, [Psa 24:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001). He is represented
as the Proprietor of the whole earth, and as having a right to all that
there is in the world, since He has made the earth and all which it
contains. This universal claim, this recognition of Him as Lord of all,
would be especially appropriate in bringing up the symbol of his
existence and His power, and establishing his worship in the capital of
the nation.

II\. An inquiry, who would ascend into the hill of the Lord, and stand
in His holy place; who could be regarded as worthy to engage in His
worship, and to be considered as his friend? [Psa
24:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#003). This part of the psalm accords
in the main with [Psa 15:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001); and the
inquiry and the answer would be especially appropriate on an occasion
such as that upon which the psalm appears to have been composed. In
asserting God's claim to universal dominion [Psa
24:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001), and in introducing the symbols
of His power into the place where he was to be recognized and adored
[Psa 24:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007), nothing could be more
suitable than the question who would be regarded as qualified to worship
before Him; that is, who would be regarded as His friends. The essential
thing here asserted to be requisite, as in [Psa
15:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001), is purity of heart and life -
things essential to the evidence of piety under every dispensation,
patriarchal, Mosaic, Christian.

III\. A responsive song on the entrance of the procession with the ark
into the city, [Psa 24:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007). This
consists of two strophes, to be sung, it would seem most probable, by
responsive choirs:

First strophe, [Psa 24:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007).

\(a\) The call upon the gates to lift up their heads, that the King of
glory might come in.

\(b\) The response: Who is this King of glory?

\(c\) The answer: Yahweh, mighty in battle.

Second strophe, [Psa 24:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#009).

\(a\) The call upon the gates to lift up their heads, that the King of
glory might come in.

\(b\) The response: Who is this King of glory?

\(c\) The answer: Yahweh of hosts.

[Psalms 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 24:1</span></span>

The earth is the Lord's - The whole world belongs to God. He is the
Creator of the earth, and therefore, its Proprietor; or, in other words,
"the property vests in him." It belongs to Him in a sense somewhat
similar to our right of property in anything that is the production of
our hands, or of our labor or skill. We claim that as our own. We feel
that we have a right to use it, or to dispose of it, as we choose. No
other person has a right to take it from us, or to dictate to us how we
shall employ it. Thus, God, in the highest possible sense, has a right
to the earth, and to all which it produces, as being all of it the
creation of His hands, and the fruit of His culture and skill. He has a
right to dispose of it as He pleases; by fire, or flood, or tempest; and
He has an equal right to direct man in what way He shall employ that
portion of the productions of the earth which may be entrusted to Him.
All the right which any person has to any portion of the earth's
surface, or to what is treasured up in the earth, or to what it is made
to produce, is subordinate to the claims of God, and all should be
yielded up at His bidding, whether He comes and claims it to be employed
in His service, or whether He comes and sweeps it away by fire or flood;
by the locust, or by the palmer-worm.

And the fulness thereof - All which it contains; everything which goes
to "fill up" the world: animals, minerals, vegetables, people. All
belong to God, and He has a right to claim them for His service, and to
dispose of them as He pleases. This very language, so noble, so true,
and so suitable to be made conspicuous in the eyes of human beings, I
saw inscribed in a place where it seemed to be most appropriate, and
most adapted to arrest and direct the thoughts of men - on the front of
the Royal Exchange in London. It was well to remind the great merchants
of the largest commercial city in the world of the truth which it
contains; it does much to describe the character of the British nation
that it should be inscribed in a place so conspicuous, and, as it were,
on the wealth of that great capital.

The world - The word used here - תבל têbêl - is a poetic word, referring
to the earth considered as fertile and inhabited - the "habitable"
globe; the same as the Greek, οἰκουμένη oikoumenē.

And they that dwell therein - All the inhabitants of the earth,
embracing men and animals of all kinds. Compare [Psa
50:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#010). God has a claim on people -
upon their services, upon their talents, upon all that they can acquire
by labor and skill; He has a right to all that fly in the air, or that
walk the earth, or that swim in the sea. On the occasion on which it is
supposed that this psalm was written, in bringing up the ark of God, and
placing it in the tabernacle provided for it in the capital of the
nation, no sentiment could be more appropriate than that which would
recognize the universal supremacy of God.

[Psalms 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 24:2</span></span>

For he hath founded it upon the seas - That is, the earth, or the
habitable world. The ground of the claim to the earth and all that it
contains, which is here asserted, is the fact that God had created it,
or "founded" it. The language used here - "he hath founded it," that is,
he has laid the foundation of it, "upon the seas" and "the floods" - is
in accordance with the usual mode of speaking of the earth in the
Scriptures as laid upon a foundation - as a house is raised on a firm
foundation. See the notes at [Job
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#006). As the earth appeared to be
surrounded by water, it was natural to speak of it as "founded" also
upon the waters. There is probably an allusion here to the statement in
[Gen 1:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009), where the waters are said
to have been so gathered together that the dry land appeared. Above all
the waters the earth was established, so as to become the abode of
plants, animals, and man.

And established it upon the floods - The streams; the torrents. The
earth has been elevated above them, so as to be a residence for animals
and for men. The essential thought is, that this earth has become what
it is by the fact that God has founded it; and, therefore, what it
produces belongs of right to Him.

[Psalms 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 24:3</span></span>

Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? - Mount Zion; called the
hill of the Lord, because it was the place designated for His worship,
or the place of His abode. See the notes at [Psa
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001). The idea here is, "Who shall
ascend there with a view of abiding there? Who is worthy to dwell
there?" The question is equivalent to asking, What constitutes true
religion? What is required for the acceptable worship of God? What will
prepare a person for heaven?

Or who shall stand in his holy place? - In the tabernacle, or in the
place where he is worshipped. Compare the notes at [Psa
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005). Who is worthy to stand before
God? Who has the qualifications requisite to constitute the evidence of
his friendship?

[Psalms 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 24:4</span></span>

He that hath clean hands - In the parallel passage in [Psa
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#002), the answer to the question is,
"He that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness." The sentiment is
substantially the same there as in the passage before us. The meaning
is, that he who would be recognized as a friend and worshipper of Yahweh
must be an upright man; a person not living in the practice of iniquity,
but striving always to do that which is right. The "hands" are the
instruments by which we accomplish anything; and hence, to have clean
hands is equivalent to being upright. See [Job
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#009); [Isa
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015); [Isa
59:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#003); [Act
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023); [Psa
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#010). The margin here, as the Hebrew,
is "the clean of hands."

And a pure heart - Not merely the one whose external conduct is upright,
but whose heart is pure. The great principle is here stated which enters
always into true religion, that it does not consist in outward
conformity to law, or to the mere performance of rites and ceremonies,
or to external morality, but that it controls the heart, and produces
purity of motive and of thought.

Who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity - Unto that which is "vain,"
or which is "false." This expression might refer to one who had not
devoted himself to the worship of an idol - regarded as vain, or as
nothing [Co1 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006); [Isa
41:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#024); [Psa
115:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#004); or to one who had not
embraced that which is false and vain in opinion; or to one who had not
sworn falsely, or taken the name of God in vain, [Exo
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#007). The probable meaning is, that he
has not set his heart on vain things, or that which is false. He has
sought after substantial truth, alike in the object of worship, in that
which he professes to believe, and in the statements and promises which
he makes to others. He aims to secure that which is true and real. He is
in no sense "carried away" with that which is unreal and false.

Nor sworn deceitfully - This is one form of that which had been just
specified - his love of truth. The idea here is, that he has not
affirmed under the solemnities of an oath, that which was false; and
that he has not, under similar solemnities, promised what he has not
performed. He is a sincere man; a man seeking after the true and the
real, and not running after shadows and falsehood; a man true to God and
to his fellow-creatures; a man whose statements are in accordance with
facts, and whose promises may be always relied on. In the parallel
passage, in [Psa 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#002), the statement
is, "he that speaketh the truth in his heart." See the notes at that
passage.

[Psalms 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 24:5</span></span>

He shall receive the blessing from the Lord - literally, "He shall bear
away a blessing from Yahweh." The blessing here referred to means His
favor and friendship. He shall be recognized and treated as His. In
other words, God bestows His favor on those who possess the character
here referred to.

And righteousness from the God of his salvation - He shall be regarded
and treated as righteous. Or, he shall obtain the divine approval as a
righteous person. The idea of the psalmist would seem to be, not that he
would obtain this as if it were a gift, but that he would obtain the
divine "approval" of his character as righteous; he would be recognized
and dealt with as a righteous man. He would come to God with "clean
hands and a pure heart" [Psa 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#004), and
would be welcomed and treated as a friend of God. The wicked and the
impure could not hope to obtain this; but he who was thus righteous
would be treated according to his real character, and would meet with
the assurances of the divine favor. It is as true now as it was in the
days of the psalmist, that it is only the man who is in fact upright and
holy that can obtain the evidences of the divine approval. God will not
regard one who is living in wickedness as a righteous man, nor will he
admit such a man to His favor here, or to His dwelling-place hereafter.

[Psalms 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 24:6</span></span>

This is the generation of them that seek him - This describes the race
of those who seek Him; or, this is their character. The word
"generation" here is used evidently in the sense of "race, people, or
persons." This is the character or description of the "persons" who seek
His favor; or, this is the character of His true friends. The phrase "to
seek God" is often used as descriptive of true piety: [Psa
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#010); [Psa
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002); [Psa
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001); [Pro
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#017); [Mat
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033); [Mat
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007). It indicates an earnest desire to
know Him and to obtain His favor. It denotes also humility of mind, and
a sense of dependence on God.

That seek thy face, O Jacob - Margin, O "God of" Jacob. DeWette
understands this as meaning that they would seek the face of God among
His people; or that they who belonged to the race of Jacob, and who were
sincere, thus sought the face of God. There is supposed to be, according
to this interpretation, a distinction between the true and the false
Israel; between those who professed to be the people of God and those
who really were His people (compare [Rom
9:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)). It seems to me that the word
is not used here as it is in the margin to denote the "God of Jacob,"
which would be a harsh and an unusual construction, but that it is in
apposition with the preceding words, as denoting what constituted the
true Jacob, or the true people of God. "This is the generation of them
that seek him; this is the true Jacob, that seek thy face, O Lord." That
is, this is the characteristic of all who properly belong to the race of
Jacob, or who properly belong to God as his true people. The sense,
however, is not materially affected if we adopt the reading in the
margin.

[Psalms 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 24:7</span></span>

Lift up your heads, O ye gates - Either the gates of the city, or of the
house erected for the worship of God; most probably, as has been
remarked, the former. This may be supposed to have been uttered as the
procession approached the city where the ark was to abide, as a summons
to admit the King of glory to a permanent residence there. It would seem
not improbable that the gates of the city were originally made in the
form of a portcullis, as the gates of the old castles in the feudal ages
were, not to "open," but to be "lifted up" by weights and pullies. In
some of the old ruins of castles in Palestine there are still to be seen
deep grooves in the "posts" of the gateway, showing that the door did
not open and shut, but that it was drawn up or let down. (The Land and
the Book, vol. i. p. 376. One such I saw at Carisbrooke Castle on the
Isle of Wight; and they were common in the castles erected in the Middle
Ages.) There were some advantages in this, as they could be suddenly
"let down" on an enemy about to enter, when it would be difficult to
close them if they were made to open as doors and gates are commonly
made. Thus understood, the "heads" of the gates would be the top,
perhaps ornamented in some such way as to suggest the idea of a "head,"
and the command was that these should be elevated to admit the ark of
God to pass.

And be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors - The doors of a city or
sanctuary that was now to be the permanent place of the worship of God.
The ark was to be fixed and settled there. It was no longer to be moved
from place to place. It had found a final home. The idea in the word
"everlasting" is that of permanence. The place where the ark was to
abide was to be the enduring place of worship; or was to endure as long
as the worship of God in that form should continue. There is no evidence
that the author of the psalm supposed that those doors would be
literally eternal, but the language is such as we use when we say of
anything that it is permanent and abiding.

And the King of glory shall come in - The glorious King. The allusion is
to God as a King. On the cover of the ark, or the mercy-seat, the symbol
of the divine presence - the Shekinah - rested; and hence, it was
natural to say that God would enter through those gates. In other words,
the cover of the ark was regarded as his abode - His seat - His throne;
and, as thus occupying the mercy-seat, He was about to enter the place
of His permanent abode. Compare [Exo
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#017), [Exo
25:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#020), [Exo
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022).

[Psalms 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 24:8</span></span>

Who is this King of glory? - This is probably the response of a portion
of the choir of singers. The answer is found in the other part of the
verse.

The Lord strong and mighty - Yahweh, strong and mighty - describing Him
by His most exalted attributes as a God of power. This is in accordance
with the idea in [Psa 24:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001), where He
is represented as the Creator and the Proprietor of all the earth.
Perhaps, also, there is an allusion to the fact that He is mighty, as
distinguished from idols which have no power.

The Lord mighty in battle - Who displays His power eminently in
overthrowing hostile armies; perhaps in allusion to the victories which
had been won when His people were animated in war by the presence of the
ark in the midst of their armies, and when the victory could be properly
traced to the fact that the ark, the symbol of the divine presence, was
with them, and when, therefore, the victory would be properly ascribed
to Yahweh himself.

[Psalms 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 24:9</span></span>

Lift up your heads ... - The repetition here is designed to give force
and emphasis to what is uttered. The response in [Psa
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#005) is slightly varied from the
response in [Psa 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#008); but the same
general sentiment is expressed. The design is to announce in a solemn
manner that the symbol of the divine presence and majesty was about to
be introduced into the place of its permanent abode, and that this was
an event worthy to be celebrated; that even the gates of the city should
voluntarily open themselves to admit the great and glorious King who was
to reign there forever.

[Psalms 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 24:10</span></span>

Who is this King of glory? - See the notes at [Psa
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#008).

The Lord of hosts, he is the King of glory - On the meaning of the
phrase, "the Lord of hosts," see the notes at [Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009). The essential idea is, that God
rules over the universe of worlds considered as marshalled in order, or
arrayed as hosts or armies are for battle. All are under His command.
The stars in the sky, that seem to be marshalled and led forth in such
perfect and beautiful order - the inhabitants of heaven in their
different orders and ranks - all these acknowledge Him, and submit to
Him as the supreme God. In the close of the psalm, therefore, there is
an exact accordance with the thought in the beginning, that God is the
Sovereign Ruler of the universe, and that He should everywhere be
recognized and regarded as such. The entrance of the ark of the covenant
into the place provided for it as a permanent residence was a fit
occasion to proclaim this thought; and this is proclaimed in the psalm
in a manner befitting so solemn an occasion and so sublime a truth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 25](psa025)

</div>
