<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa007)  [Next](psa009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 8:0</span></span>

Section 1. "The author of the psalm." This is another psalm purporting
to have been written by David, and there is nothing in it that lead's us
to think otherwise.

Section 2. "The title to the psalm." The psalm is addressed To the chief
Musician upon Gittith. In regard to the meanin of the phrase "chief
Musician," see the notes at the introduction to [Psa
4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001). The word Gittith - גתית
gittı̂yth - occurs but in two other places, also in the titles to the
psalms, [Psa 81:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#001); [Psa
84:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#001). It is supposed to refer to a
musical instrument so called, either as being common among the Gittites
(from גתי gittı̂y), Gittites, or an inhabitant of Gath. See [Sa2
6:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#010); [Sa2
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#018)), among whom David for some time
resided; or as being derived from גת gath - a wine-press, as denoting an
instrument that was used by those accustomed to tread the wine-vat, and
intended to accompany the songs of the vintage. The former is the more
probable derivation, as it is known that David dwelt for some time among
that people, and it is not at all improbable that an instrument of music
in use among them should have become common among the Hebrews. Nothing
is known, however, as to whether it was a stringed instrument or a wind
instrument. Compare, however, Ugolin, Thes. Sac. Ant. xxxii. 487. All
that can be ascertained, with any degree of probability about this
instrument, is, that as each of the psalms to which this title is
prefixed is of a cheerful or joyous nature, would seem that this
instrument was adapted to music of this kind, rather than to that which
was pensive or serious. This idea also would agree well with the
supposition that it denotes an instrument that was employed by those
connected with the vintage. Compare [Isa
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#010).

Section 3. "Occasion on which the psalm was composed." Of this nothing
is specified in the psalm itself, and it is impossible now to ascertain
it. Aben Ezra, and some others, have supposed that it was written when
David brought up the ark to the house of Obed-edom the Gittite, as
mentioned in [Ch1 13:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#012). But there
is nothing in the psalm adapted to such an occasion. Rudinger supposes
that it was composed in the joy of taking possession of Mount Zion.
Others have supposed that it was on occasion of the victory of David
over Goliath of Gath; but there is nothing in it adapted to the
celebration of such a victory.

If we may judge from the psalm itself, it would seem probable that it
was composed by night in the contemplation of the starry heavens -
naturally suggesting, in view of the vastness and beauty of the
celestial luminaries, the littleness of man. This also filled the mind
of the psalmist with wonder that the God who marshals all these hosts
should condescend to regard the condition and wants of a being so feeble
and frail as man, and should have exalted him as he has done over his
works. That it was composed or suggested in the night seems probable,
from [Psa 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003), where the psalmist
represents himself as surveying or "considering" the "heavens, the work"
of the divine "fingers," and as making the "moon and the stars" the
subject of his contemplation, but not mentioning the sun. In such
contemplations, when looking on the vastness and grandeur, the beauty
and order, of the heavenly hosts, it was not unnatural for the writer to
think of his own comparative littleness, and then the comparative
littleness of man everywhere. No time is more favorable for suggesting
such thoughts than the still night, when the stars are shining clearly
in the heavens, and when the moon is moving on in the silent majesty of
its course. It would seem also, from [Psa
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002), to be probable that the immediate
occasion of this expression of admiration of the name and character of
God was some act of condescension on his part in which he had bestowed
signal favor on the writer - as if he had ordained strength out of the
mouth of babes and sucklings - from even the most feeble and helpless.
Perhaps it was in view of some favor bestowed on David himself; and his
soul is overwhelmed with a sense of the condescension of God in noticing
one so weak and feeble and helpless as he was. From the contemplation of
this, the thought is naturally turned to the honor which God had
everywhere bestowed upon man.

The psalm, though one part of it is applied by the apostle Paul to
Christ [Heb 2:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#006), does not appear
originally to have had any designed reference to the Messiah, though the
apostle shows that its language had a complete fulfillment in him, and
in him alone. See the notes at that passage. The psalm is complete in
itself, as applicable to man as he was originally created, and according
to the purposes of his creation; though it is true that the original
design will be carried out and completed only in the dominion which will
be granted to the Messiah, who, as a man, has illustrated in the highest
manner the original purpose of the creation of the race, and in whom
alone the original design will be fully carried out.

Section 4. "Contents of the psalm." The psalm embraces the following
points:

I. An admiring recognition of the excellence of the name of God (that
is, of God himself); of that excellence as manifested in all the earth,
[Psa 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001). The excellency referred to,
as the subsequent part of the psalm shows, is in his great
condescension, and in his conferring such honor on man - a being so
feeble as compared with himself, and so unworthy as compared with the
glory of the heavens.

II\. The immediate occasion of this reflection, or the cause which
suggested it, [Psa 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002). This seems to
have been some remarkable manifestation to one who was feeble and
helpless, as if God had ordained strength out of the mouth of babes and
sucklings. It is not improbable, as remarked above, that in this the
psalmist refers to himself as having been, though conscious of weakness
and helplessness, the means of overcoming the enemies of God, as if God
had ordained strength through him, or had endowed him with strength not
his own.

III\. The psalmist is led into admiration of the condescension of God in
bestowing such dignity and honor on man, [Psa
8:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003). This admiration is founded on
two things:

\(1\) That the God who had made the heavens, the moon and the stars,
should condescend to notice man or creatures so insignificant and
unworthy of notice, [Psa 8:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003).

\(2\) The actual honor conferred on man, in the rank which God had given
him in the dominion over his works here below; and in the wide extent of
that dominion over the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, and
the inhabitants of the seas, [Psa
8:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005).

IV\. The psalm concludes with a repetition of the sentiment in the first
verse - the reflection on the excellency of the divine name and majesty,
[Psa 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#009).

[Psalms 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 8:1</span></span>

O Lord - Hebrew, יהוה Yahweh. It is an address to God by his chosen and
special title, [Exo 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014). Compare the
notes at [Isa 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002).

Our Lord - The word used here - אדני 'âdônay - means properly master,
lord, ruler, owner, and is such a title as is given to an owner of land
or of slaves, to kings, or to rulers, and is applied to God as being the
ruler or governor of the universe. The meaning here is, that the
psalmist acknowledged Yahweh to be the rightful ruler, king, or master
of himself and of all others. He comes before him with the feeling that
Yahweh is the universal ruler - the king and proprietor of all things.

How excellent is thy name - How excellent or exalted art thou - the name
being often used to denote the person. The idea is," How glorious art
thou in thy manifested excellence or character."

In all the earth - In all parts of the world. That is, the manifestation
of his perfect character was not confined to any one country, but was
seen in all lands, and among all people. In every place his true
character was made known through His works; in every land there were
evidences of his wisdom, his greatness, his goodness, his condescension.

Who hast set thy glory above the heavens - The word used here, and
rendered "hast set," is in the imperative mood - תנה tenâh - give; and
it should probably have been so rendered here, "which thy glory give
thou;" that is, "which glory of thine, or implied in thy name, give or
place above the heavens." In other words, let it he exalted in the
highest degree, and to the highest place, even above the heavens on
which he was gazing, and which were in themselves so grand, [Psa
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003). It expresses the wish or prayer
of the writer that the name or praise of God, so manifest in the earth,
might be exalted in the highest possible degree - be more elevated than
the moon and the stars - exalted and adored in all worlds. In His name
there was such intrinsic grandeur that he desired that it might be
regarded as the highest object in the universe, and might blaze forth
above all worlds. On the grammatical construction of this word - תנה
tenâh - see an article by Prof. Stuart, in the Bibliotheca Sacra, vol.
ix. pp. 73-77. Prof. Stuart supposes that the word is not formed from
נתן nâthan - to give, as is the common explanation, but from תנה tânâh -
to give presents, to distribute gifts, [Hos
8:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#009), and that it should be
rendered, Thou who diffusest abroad thy glory over the heavens.

[Psalms 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 8:2</span></span>

Out of the mouth - This passage is quoted by the Saviour in [Mat
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#016), to vindicate the conduct of the
children in the temple crying, "Hosanna to the Son of David," against
the objections of the Pharisees and Scribes, and is perhaps alluded to
by him in [Mat 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025). It is not
affirmed, however, in either place, that it had an original reference to
the times of the Messiah, or that it was meant, as used by the psalmist,
to denote that children would be employed in the praise of God. The
language sufficiently expressed the idea which the Saviour meant to
convey; and the princip e or great truth involved in the psalm was
applicable to the use which he made of it. The language would, perhaps,
most naturally denote that infant children would give utterance to the
praises of God, as the word "mouth" is used; but still it is not quite
certain that the psalmist meant to convey that idea. It is probable, as
we shall see, that he meant to say, God had conferred great honor on men
- men so humble and weak that they might be compared to infants - by
making them the means of overthrowing his enemies, thus showing the
greatness of the divine condescension.

Babes - The word used here - עולל ‛ôlêl - means properly a boy or child,
and is usually connected with the word rendered sucklings, [Jer
44:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#007); [Lam
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#011). It is applied to a boy playing
in the streets, [Jer 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#011); [Jer
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#021); asking for bread, [Lam
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#004),; carried away captive, [Lam
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#005); borne in the arms, [Lam
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#020); and once to an unborn infant,
[Job 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#016). It refers here to a child,
or to one who is like a child; and the idea is that those to whom it is
applied were naturally unable to accomplish what was done by them, and
that God had honored them, and had shown his own condescension, by
making them the instruments of doing what they had done.

And sucklings - The word used here - יונק yôneq - means a suckling, or a
suckling child, a babe, [Deu 32:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#025). It
may be used literally, or employed to denote one who, in respect to
strength, may be compared with a babe. The latter is probably the use
made of it here.

Hast thou ordained strength - The word rendered ordained - יסד yâsad -
means to found, to lay the foundation of, as of a building, [Ezr
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#012); [Isa
54:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#011). Then it means to establish,
appoint, ordain, constitute, etc. The meaning here is, that in what is
referred to, there was, as it were, some basis or foundation for what is
called "strength;" that is, that what is here meant by "strength" rested
on that as a foundation - to wit, on what was done by babes and
sucklings. The word "strength" is rendered by the Septuagint as "praise"
- αἷνον ainon - and this is followed in the quotation in [Mat
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#016). The same rendering is adopted
in the Latin Vulgate and in the Syriac. The Hebrew word - עז ‛ôz -
properly means strength, might; and the idea here would seem to be, that
even from babes and sucklings - from those who were in themselves so
feeble - God had taken occasion to accomplish a work requiring great
power - to wit, in "stilling the enemy and the avenger;" that is, he had
made those who were so feeble the instruments of accomplishing so great
a work.

Because of thine enemies - In respect to thine enemies, or in order to
accomplish something in regard to them, namely, in stilling them, as is
immediately specified. The idea is, that there were those who rose up
against God, and opposed his government and plans, and that God, in
overcoming them, instead of putting forth his own power directly, had
condescended to employ those who were weak and feeble like little
children. Who these enemies were is not specified, but it is most
natural to suppose that the reference is to some of the foes of the
author of the psalm, who had been subdued by the prowess of his arm - by
strength imparted to him, though in himself feeble as an infant.

That thou mightest still - Mightest cause to rest, or to cease. The
original word - שׁבת shâbath - from which our word Sabbath is derived,
means to rest; to lie by; to sit down; to sit still; and in the Hiphil,
to cause to rest, or to cause to desist; to put an end to, [Eze
34:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#010); [Jos
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#025); [Psa
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#009); [Pro
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#018). Here it means to bring to an
end the purposes of the enemy and the avenger; or, to cause him to
desist from his designs.

The enemy - The enemy of the writer, regarded also as the enemy of God.

And the avenger - One who was endeavoring to take revenge, or who was
acting as if determined to avenge some imaginary or real wrong. This,
too, may refer either to some one who was seeking to revenge himself on
the author of the psalm, or who, with the spirit of revenge, stood up
against God, and had set himself against him.

In regard to the meaning of this verse, which I apprehend is the key to
the whole psalm, and which contains the original germ of the psalm, or
the thought which suggested the train of reflection in it, the following
remarks may be made:

\(a\) There is no evidence that it was designed to refer originally to
infants, or to children of any age, as stating anything which they would
do in contributing to the praise of God, or as defeating sceptics and
cavillers by "their instinctive recognition of God's being and glory,"
as is supposed by Calvin, DeWette, Prof. Alexander, and others. What is
said here to be done by "babes and sucklings" has reference to some
mighty enemy that had been overcome, not to anything which had been
effected by the influence of the recognition of God by little children.
It may be doubted, also, whether there is any such "instinctive
admiration of his works, even by the youngest children," as would be "a
strong defense against those who would question the being and glory" of
God, as is supposed by Prof. Alexander and others; and, at all events,
that is not the manifest thought in the passage.

\(b\) Nor does it refer merely to praise as proceeding from children, as
being that by which the effect referred to is accomplished. It is true
that this idea is in the translation by the Septuagint, and true that it
is so quoted in [Mat 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#016), and true,
also, that, as quoted by the Saviour, and as originally applied, it was
adapted to the end which the Saviour had in view - to silence the chief
priests and Scribes, who objected to the praises and hosannas of the
children in the temple, for the psalm, on any interpretation, originally
meant that God would accomplish good effects by those who were feeble
and weak as children, and this principle was applicable to the praises
of the children in the temple. But it does not appear that it originally
referred to praise, either of children or others. It was to some
manifested strength or prowess, by which some enemy, or some one who was
seeking revenge, was overcome by the instrumentality of those who might
be compared with children on account of their feebleness. From this the
psalmist takes occasion to make his reflections on the exalted honor
conferred in general on a creature so weak and feeble as man, especially
in the wide dominion granted him over the inferior creation.

\(c\) This was, not improbably, some enemy of the author of the psalm;
but who it was is not mentioned. David was often, however, in the course
of his life, in such circumstances as are here supposed. Might it not
refer to Goliath of Gath - a mighty giant, and a formidable enemy of the
people of God, overcome by David, quite a stripling - a child? Would not
the language of the psalm agree with that? Was it not true that he was
an "enemy" and an "avenger," or one socking revenge? and was it not true
that God had, from one who was a mere child, "ordained strength" to
subdue him?

\(d\) God had, then, condescended to honor one who was in himself weak
and feeble as a child - who had no power of himself to accomplish what
had been done.

\(e\) This was great condescension on the part of God; and especially
was it to be so regarded when the eye looked out - as the author of the
psalm appears to have done at the time of its composition - on the
starry heavens, and contemplated their greatness and grandeur. What
astonishing condescension was it that he who marshalled all those hosts
should bestow such honor on man!

\(f\) It was not, therefore, unnatural to reflect on the greatness of
the honor which God had actually bestowed on man, and the dignity to
which God had exalted him; and the psalmist is thus, from a particular
act of his condescension, led into the beautiful train of reflections on
the exalted dominion of man with which the psalm concludes. Thus
understood, the psalm has no orignal reference to the Messiah, but still
it contains the principle on which the apostle reasons in Heb. 2, for
the dignity of man is most seen in the Redeemer, and the actual
conferring of all the dignity and honor referred to in the psalm - the
actual and entire subjugation of the earth to man - will be found only
in the universal dominion conceded to Him. At the same time, however,
there is a foundation for all that the psalmist says in respect to the
honor originally conferred on man, and in his actual dominion over the
inferior creation.

[Psalms 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 8:3</span></span>

When I consider thy heavens - When I contemplate or look upon. They are
called his heavens because he made them - because he is the proprietor
of them - perhaps because they are his abode.

The work of thy fingers - Which thy fingers have made. The fingers are
the instruments by which we construct a piece of work - perhaps
indicating skill rather than strength; and hence so used in respect to
God, as it is by his skill that the heavens have been made.

The moon and the stars - Showing, as remarked above, that probably this
psalm, was composed at night, or that the train of thought was suggested
by the contemplation of the starry worlds. It is not improbable that the
thoughts occurred to the psalmist when meditating on the signal honor
which God had conferred on him, a feeble man (see the notes at [Psa
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002)), and when his thoughts were at
the same time directed to the goodness of God as the heavens were
contemplated in their silent grandeur.

Which thou hast ordained - Prepared, fitted up, constituted, appointed.
He had fixed them in their appropriate spheres, and they now silently
showed forth his glory.

[Psalms 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 8:4</span></span>

What is man - What claim has one so weak, and frail, and short-lived, to
be remembered by time? What is there in man that entitles him to so much
notice? Why has God conferred on him so signal honor? Why has he placed
him over the works of his hands? Why has he made so many arrangements
for his comfort? Why has he done so much to save him? He is so
insignificant his life is so much like a vapor, he so soon disappears,
he is so sinful and polluted, that the question may well be asked, why
such honor has been conferred on him, and why such a dominion over the
world has been given him. See these thoughts more fully expanded in the
notes at [Heb 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#006).

That thou art mindful of him - That thou dost remember him; that is,
think of him, attend to him - that he does not pass away wholly from thy
thoughts. Why should a God who is so vast and glorious, and who has all
the starry worlds, so beautiful and grand, to claim his attention - why
should he turn his thoughts on man? And especially why should he honor
him as he has done by giving him dominion over the works of his hands?

And the son of man - Any descendant of man - any one of the race. What
was man, as he was originally made, that such exalted honor should have
been conferred on him; and what has any one of his descendants become,
in virtue of his native faculties or acquired endowments, that he should
be thus honored? The design is the same as in the former part of the
verse, to express the idea that there was nothing in man, considered in
any respect, that entitled him to this exalted honor. Nothing that man
has done since the time when the question was asked by the psalmist has
contributed to diminish the force of the inquiry.

That thou visitest him - As thou dost; that is, with the attention and
care which thou dost bestow upon him; not forgetting him; not leaving
him; not passing him by. The word used here - פקד pâqad - would properly
express a visitation for any purpose - for inspection, for mercy; for
friendship, for judgment, etc. Here it refers to the attention bestowed
by God on man in conferring on him such marks of favor and honor as he
had done - such attention that he never seemed to forget him, but was
constantly coming to him with some new proof of favor. What God has done
for man since the psalmist wrote this, has done nothing to weaken the
force of this inquiry.

[Psalms 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 8:5</span></span>

For thou hast made him - Thou hast made man as such; that is, he was
such in the original design of his creation, in the rank given him, and
in the dominion conceded to him. The object here is to show the honor
conferred on man, or to show how God has regarded and honored him; and
the thought is, that in his original creation, though so insignificant
as compared with the vast worlds over which God presides, he had given
him a rank but little inferior to that of the angels. See the notes at
[Heb 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#007).

A little lower - The Hebrew word used here - חסר châsêr, means to want,
to lack - and then, to be in want, to be diminished. The meaming is,
"Thou hast caused him to want but little;" that is, he was but little
interior.

Than the angels - So this is rendered by the Aramaic Paraphrase: by the
Septuagint; by the Latin Vulgate; by the Syriac and Arabic; and by the
author of the Epistle to the Hebrews [Heb
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#007), who has literally quoted the
fourth, fifth, and sixth verses from the Septuagint. The Hebrew,
however, is - מאלהים mi'ĕlôhı̂ym - than God. So Gesenius renders it,
"Thou hast caused him to want but little of God; that is, thou hast made
him but little lower than God." So DeWette, "nur wenig unter Gott." So
Tholuck renders it, "nur um wenig unter Gott." This is the more natural
construction, and this would convey an idea conformable to the course of
thought in the psalm, though it has been usually supposed that the word
used here - אלהים 'Elohiym - may be applied to angels, or even men, as
in [Psa 82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001); [Psa
97:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#007); [Psa
138:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#001); [Exo
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006); [Exo
22:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#008). Gesenius (Thesau. Ling. Heb.,
p. 95) maintains that the word never has this signification. The
authority, however, of the Aramaic, the Septuagint, the Syriac, and the
author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, would seem sufficient to show that
that meaning may be attached to the word here with propriety, and that
somehow that idea was naturally suggested in the passage itself. Still,
if it were not for these versions, the most natural interpretation would
be that which takes the word in its usual sense, as referring to God,
and as meaning that, in respect to his dominion over the earth, man had
been placed in a condition comparatively but little inferior to God
himself; he had made him almost equal to himself.

And hast crowned him with glory and honor - With exalted honor. See the
notes at [Heb 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#007).

[Psalms 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 8:6</span></span>

Thou madest him to have dominion - Thou didst cause him to have, or
didst give him this dominion. It does not mean that God made or created
him for that end, but that he had conceded to him that dominion, thus
conferring on him exalted honor. The allusion is to [Gen
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026), [Gen
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028).

Over the works of thy hands - His works upon the earth, for the dominion
extends no further.

Thou hast put all things under his feet - Hast placed all things in
subjection to him. Compare [Psa 47:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#003);
[Psa 91:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#013); [Lam
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#034); [Rom
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020); [Co1
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025). The language is taken from the
act of treading down enemies in battle; from putting the feet on the
necks of captives, etc. The idea is that of complete and entire
subjection. This dominion was originally given to man at his creation,
and it still remains (though not so absolute and entire as this), for
nothing is in itself more remarkable than the dominion which man, by
nature so feeble, exercises over the inferior creation. it is impossible
to account for this in any other way than as it is accounted for in the
Bible, by the supposition that it was originally conceded to man by his
Creator. On the question of the applicability of this to Christ, see the
notes at [Heb 2:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#006).

[Psalms 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 8:7</span></span>

All sheep and oxen - Flocks and herds. [Gen
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026), "over the cattle." Nothing is
more manifest than the control which man exercises over flocks and herds
- making them subservient to his use, and obedient to his will.

And the beasts of the field - Those not included in the general phrase
"sheep and oxen." The word rendered "field," שׂדה śâdeh - or the poetic
form, as here - שׂדי śâday, means properly a plain; a level tract of
country; then, a field, or a tilled farm, [Gen
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#017); [Gen
47:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#020),; and then the fields, the
open country, as opposed to a city, a village, a camp [Gen
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#027); and hence, in this place the
expression means the beasts that roam at large - wild beasts, [Gen
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#020); [Gen
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#014). Here the allusion is to the
power which man has of subduing the wild beasts; of capturing them, and
making them subservient to his purposes; of preventing their increase
and their depredations; and of taming them so that they shall obey his
will, and become his servants. Nothing is more remarkable than this, and
nothing furnishcs a better illustration of Scripture than the conformity
of this with the declaration [Gen 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#002),
"And the fear of you, and the dread of you, shall be upon every beast of
the earth, and upon every fowl of the air," etc. Compare the notes at
[Jam 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#007). It is to be remembered that
no small number of what are now domestic animals were originally wild,
and that they have been subdued and tamed by the power anti skill of
man. No animal has shown himself superior to this power and skill.

[Psalms 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 8:8</span></span>

The fowl of the air - [Gen 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026), "Over
the fowl of the air." [Gen 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#002), "upon
every fowl of the air." This dominion is the more remarkable because the
birds of the air seem to be beyond the reach of man; and yet, equally
with the beasts of the field, they are subject to his control. Man
captures and destroys them; he prevents their multiplication and their
ravages. Numerous as they are, and rapid as is their flight, and strong
as many of them are, they have never succeeded in making man subject to
them, or in disturbing the purposes of man. See the notes at [Jam
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#007).

And the fish of the sea - [Gen 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026),
"Over the fish of the sea." [Gen 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#002),
"upon all the fishes of the sea." This must be understood in a general
sense, and this is perhaps still more remarkable than the dominion over
the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, for the fishes that
swim in the ocean seem to be placed still farther from the control of
man. Yet, so far as is necessary for his use and for safety, they are,
in fact, put under the control of man, and he makes them minister to his
profit. Not a little of that which contributes to the support the
comfort, and the luxury of man, comes from the ocean. From the mighty
whale to the shellfish that furnished the Tyrian dye, or to that which
furnishes the beautiful pearl, man has shown his power to make the
dwellers in the deep subservient to his will.

And whatsoever passeth through the paths of the seas - Everything, in
general, that passes through the paths of the sea, as if the ocean was
formed with paths or highways for them to pass over. Some have referred
this to man, as passing over the sea and subduing its inhabitants; some,
to the fishes before spoken of; but the most natural construction is
that which is adotpted in our received version, as referring to
everything which moves in the waters. The idea is that man has a wide
and universal dominion - a dominion so wide as to excite amazement,
wonder, and gratitude, that it has been conceded to one so feeble as he
is.

[Psalms 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 8:9</span></span>

O Lord our Lord, how excellent ... - Repeating the sentiment with which
the psalm opens, as now fully illustrated, or as its propriety is now
seen. The intermediate thoughts are simply an illustration of this; and
now we see what occupied the attention of the psalmist when, in [Psa
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001), he gave utterance to what seems
there to be a somewhat abrupt sentiment. We now, at the close of the
psalm, see clearly its beauty and truthfulness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 9](psa009)

</div>
