<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa072)  [Next](psa074.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 73](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 73:0</span></span>

This psalm (with the ten succeeding psalms, together with Ps. 50 -
twelve in all) is ascribed to Asaph, unless the reading in the margin,
"for Asaph" be correct. The most natural sense of the expression in the
title, however, is that they are psalms of Asaph; that is, that they
were composed by him. See Introduction to Ps. 50. It has been maintained
that a part of these psalms, particularly Ps. 74; [Psa
79:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#001.md); 80; could not be his, for it
is alleged that they refer to events long subsequent to his age. There
seems to be no objection, however, to the supposition that this psalm
was composed by him, as it has no particular reference to any particular
age or country, but is made up of general reflections, which might have
arisen in any age, or in any land.

Respecting the particular occasion on which the psalm was composed we
have no information. It was in view of the prosperity of the wicked, and
suggests the reflections which troubled the writer in regard to the
divine administration in view of that prosperity. The thoughts which are
recorded are such as might occur to any mind, and do often occur,
arising from the fact that wicked people are so successful and so happy
in the world, living in prosperity, and dying apparently without pain or
alarm, while So many of the good are poor and sorrowful in their lives,
and their whole course on earth is one of so much grief and sorrow. Such
thoughts as are expressed in this psalm will often cross the mind, and
the question will arise why God permits this; whether there is any
advantage in being good; and whether that God who sees this, and permits
this, can be just and benevolent - the friend of the righteous, and the
enemy of the wicked - or whether there is any God. The psalm describes
these feelings, and shows how the difficulties were solved in the case
of its author, suggesting as the solution, that this is not the world of
retribution; that there is a future state where exact justice will be
done, and where all the inequalities of the present system will be
adjusted. In that future world - "in eternity" - there will be ample
time and room to make such an adjustment; to do exact justice to all.
The "idea" in the psalm is, that these things cannot be explained except
on the supposition that there is a future state; and the psalm,
therefore, is an argument for a future state of existence. The affairs
of earth cannot be explained, and the character of God cannot be
vindicated, except on that supposition.

The psalm in its general structure and design bears a strong resemblance
to Ps. 37, though there is no evidence that the author of this psalm had
that before him, or in his eye. The expressions are not the same, nor
does one appear to have been copied from the other. They contain
independent reflections on the same general subject, suggesting the same
perplexities, and finding a solution of the difficulties in the same way
- in looking to the future, to a just retribution in the end. In this
case - Ps. 73 - the psalmist says that he learned the solution of the
problem by the instructions of the sanctuary [Psa
73:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017.md); in the former case - Ps. 37 -
the solution was found by an observation of the comparative effects of a
wicked and a religious life, [Psa
37:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#010.md), [Psa
37:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#020.md), [Psa
37:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#023.md), [Psa
37:35-37](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#035.md). The idea in both is, that
the ultimate effect of goodness or piety must be happiness; the ultimate
effect of sin must be misery. The author of one of these psalms finds
this solution in the present life; the author of the other, in the life
to come. In either case, the character of God is vindicated, and the
troubled feelings of the soul calmed down.

The general "idea" in the psalm is stated in the first verse, that "God
is good to Israel, to such as are of a clean heart;" that is, that he is
the true friend of the righteous, or that his administration is in favor
of virtue, or in favor of those who are righteous. The psalm states the
process by which the writer came to this conclusion; the mental
conflicts through which he passed before this result was reached; his
own agitation of mind, and the difficulties he saw in the subject, in
view of the facts which exist in this world. His mind had been greatly
perplexed when he had meditated on the subject, and the mental conflict
had gone so far with him as almost to lead him to abandon the idea that
there was a God, or that there was anything in religion, and to conclude
that it was all a delusion.

The psalm, therefore, consists of the following parts:

I. The statement of the general proposition that the divine
administration is favorable to virtue, or that there is a God who
presides in the affairs of people, [Psa
73:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001.md).

II\. The facts which the psalmist had observed, out of which his doubts
had sprung, or which had given him so much perplexity and trouble, [Psa
73:2-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#002.md). Those facts were, that the
wicked seemed to be prosperous and happy; that they lived without
trouble, and died without any tokens of the divine disapproval; that
their eyes stood out with fatness, and that they had more than heart
could desire; that they set their mouths against the heavens, and were
proud blasphemers, while God took no notice of them, or manifested no
disapprobation; that they contemned God, and yet were prospered in the
world, while, on the other hand, he himself - the psalmist - was
chastened, and afflicted, and plagued - suggesting the idea that there
could be no advantage in piety, and that all his anxiety to have pure
hands and a pure heart was in vain.

III\. The statement of his purpose to conceal his feelings on the
subject, lest he should do injury to those who had not these troublesome
thoughts, but who endeavored in humility to serve God, [Psa
73:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#015.md). He had thoughts which he did
not consider it proper to make known to others - thoughts which would
only pain them, or unsettle their faith in God, without doing any good.

IV\. The means by which his mind had been made calm on the subject, and
his difficulties solved, [Psa
73:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017.md). He had gone to the
sanctuary; he had looked at the end of these things; he had seen what
was to be the result; he had been instructed to look forward to a time
when all these inequalities would be adjusted, and when, in the
punishment of the wicked, it would be seen that there is a God, and that
he is just.

V. He now condemns his own former folly, and sees that his conduct had
been wholly irrational; that his views had been short-sighted; that he
had been stupid, like a beast, in the low conceptions which he had taken
of God, [Psa 73:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#021.md).

VI\. In view of all, the psalmist now commits himself to God. He sees
that there is reason to trust in him. He resolves to murmur or complain
no more. He finds his portion in God. He believes that God will guide
him by his counsel, and ultimately receive him to glory. He says that
there is none in heaven or on earth that he desires beside him. He is
cheered with the thought that when his strength and heart should fail,
God would be the strength of his heart, and his portion forever. He
would, therefore, henceforth, confide in the Lord God, [Psa
73:23-28](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#023.md).

[Psalms 73:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 73:1</span></span>

Truly God is good to Israel - That is, to his people; to the righteous;
to those who serve him. That is, God is the "real" friend of the
righteous. He has not forgotten them. He does not abandon them. He is
not indifferent to them. He is not the friend of wicked people; and the
administration of his government is not in favor of wickedness. After
all that seems to indicate this, after all that troubles the mind in
regard to his dealings, it is a truth that God is the friend of
righteousness, and not of wickedness, and that there is advantage in his
service. To see the force of what is said here by the psalmist we must
realize that the train of thought in the psalm had passed through his
mind, and that his perplexities had been relieved in the manner
specified in the psalm. The margin here is "yet;" "yet God is good to
Israel." This word "yet" would, in this place, be a happy translation.
The psalmist then would be represented as having been engaged in
meditating on the subject and in looking at all its perplexities, and
then he says, "Yet God is good; notwithstanding all the difficulties in
the case, it is nevertheless true that he is the friend of his people -
the friend of righteousness."

Even to such as are of a clean heart - Margin, as in Hebrew, "clean of
heart." See [Psa 73:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#013.md). The reference
is to those who are truly righteous, for all true righteousness has its
seat in the heart. See [Psa 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010.md).

[Psalms 73:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 73:2</span></span>

But as for me - literally, "And I." The meaning is, "And I, who so
confidently now trust in God, and believe that he is good, was formerly
in a far different state of mind; I was so hesitating, so troubled, and
so doubtful, that I had almost entirely lost confidence in him as a wise
and just moral governor."

My feet were almost gone - I was just ready to fall. Of course, this
refers to his state of mind. In regard to his faith or confidence in
God, he was like a man standing in a slippery place, and scarcely able
to remain upright.

My steps had well nigh slipped - The expression rendered "well nigh"
means "like nothing," or "as nothing;" that is, in reference to firmness
it was as if there was "nothing" left. There was nothing which would
keep him from slipping. The word rendered "slipped" means "poured out."
That is, in his going he was like water poured out, instead of being
like something solid and firm. The idea is, that his faith seemed to be
all gone. He was like a falling man; a man who had no strength to walk.

[Psalms 73:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 73:3</span></span>

For I was envious at the foolish - The word "foolish" here refers to
sinners. It may either refer to them as foolish, or as proud, insolent,
vain - for so the word is elsewhere used. See [Psa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001.md).

When I saw the prosperity of the wicked - More literally, "the peace of
the wicked." The reference is not so much to their prosperity in general
as to their peace; their conscious safety; their freedom from trouble;
and especially their calmness, and their freedom from suffering, in
death. From all this he was led for the moment to doubt whether there
was any advantage in religion; whether God was just; and whether he
befriended the righteous anymore than he did the wicked.

[Psalms 73:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 73:4</span></span>

For there are no bands in their death - The word rendered "bands" here
means properly "cords tightly drawn," [Isa
58:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006.md); then, pains, pangs, torments -
"as if" one were twisted or tortured with pain, as a cord is closely
twisted. The word occurs only in [Isa
58:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006.md), and in this place. The fact
which is here referred to by the psalmist, and which gave him so much
uneasiness, was that which so often occurs, that when the wicked die,
they do not seem to suffer in proportion to their wickedness; or there
seem to be no special marks of the divine displeasure as they are about
to leave the world. They have lived in prosperity, and they die in
peace. There is no uncommon agony in death; there is no special alarm
about the future world. They have enjoyed this world, and a sinful life
seems now to be followed by a peaceful death. They do not even suffer as
much in death as good people often do; - what then is the advantage of
piety? And how can we believe that God is just; or that he is the friend
of the righteous; or even that there is a God? Of the fact here adverted
to by the psalmist, that the wicked do thus live and die, there can be
no doubt, and that fact has given perplexity to good people in all ages
of the world.

But their strength is firm - Margin, as in Hebrew, "fat." That is, They
are not emaciated and weakened by disease, but they go down to death
apparently from good health, and without wasting disease. See the notes
at [Job 21:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#023.md).

[Psalms 73:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 73:5</span></span>

They are not in trouble as other men - Margin, "In the trouble of other
men." Literally, "In the labor of man they are not;" that is, they are
exempt from the common burdens and troubles of humanity, or those which
pertain to man as man. There seems to be some special interposition in
their favor to save them from the common calamities which come upon the
race.

Neither are they plagued like other men - Margin, "with." Literally,
"And with mankind they are not afflicted," or smitten. The calamities
which come so thickly and heavily on the race do not seem to come upon
them. They are favored, prospered, happy, while others are afflicted.

[Psalms 73:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 73:6</span></span>

Therefore pride compasseth them about as a chain - Therefore they are
proud, haughty, imperious. They put on the ornaments and trappings of
pride; their clothing and their adorning all are indicative of a proud
heart. They seem to imagine that they are better than others, and that
they are treated in this manner "because" they are better than others.
In the original it is a single word which is rendered "compasseth about
as a chain." The word means "to adorn with a necklace or collar;" and
the idea is, that pride surrounds them as with a neck-chain, or a collar
for the neck. They wear it as an ornament. They make it conspicuous. It
is apparent on a haughty neck - in an erect and stiff demeanour. Compare
the notes at [Isa 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#016.md) : "The
daughters of Zion walk with stretched forth necks."

Violence covereth them as a garment - Injustice or cruelty seems to be
their very clothing. It is manifest in their whole gait and demeanor
that they are men of haughtiness and pride; that they are destitute of
tenderness, sympathy, sensibility.

[Psalms 73:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 73:7</span></span>

Their eyes stand out with fatness - As the fruit of their high living.
They are not weakened and emaciated by toil and want, as other men often
are. Compare the notes at [Psa 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#010.md).

They have more than heart could wish - Margin, "they pass the thoughts
of the heart." Literally, "the imaginations or thoughts of the heart
pass;" pass along; pass forth. The meaning seems to be, not that they
have more than heart could desire, as in our translation - for that
would not probably be true; nor, that the thoughts of the heart are
"disclosed," as Prof. Alexander supposes - for that idea does not seem
to be in the language; but that their thoughts, their plans, their
purposes, pass freely along without any obstruction; their wishes are
all gratified; their purposes are accomplished; they have all that they
wish. Whatever comes into the mind as an object of desire is obtained
without hindrance or trouble. They seem only to wish for a thing, or to
think of a thing, and they have it.

[Psalms 73:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 73:8</span></span>

They are corrupt - literally, "they mock." The word rendered "they are
corrupt" never has this signification. It is the very word - מוק mûq -
from which our word mock is derived, and means the same thing. The idea
is that they deride religion, or mock at all that pertains to God, and
to the retributions of the future world.

And speak wickedly concerning oppression ... - literally, "they speak in
wickedness; oppression they speak from on high." That is, they use
arrogant language; they speak in a proud manner, as if they were above
others; they use harsh and violent language, not regarding the feelings
or the rights of others.

[Psalms 73:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 73:9</span></span>

They set their mouth against the heavens - Compare [Rev
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#006.md). Literally, "They set their mouth
in heaven," or in the heavens. The idea is, they speak as if they were
"in" the heavens; as if they were clothed with all authority; as if they
were superior beings, and had a right to command the universe.

And their tongue walketh through the earth - It has no limit; it is as
if it roamed over all the earth. They speak without any restraint of
law, or propriety; without any regard to the command of God, or to what
is due to people, In other words, they seem to set themselves above all
law, and to act as if there were no one in heaven or in earth to control
them.

[Psalms 73:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 73:10</span></span>

Therefore his people - Those that truly love God; the pious in the
earth.

Return hither - Return to this subject. In their musings - their
meditations on divine things - they come back to this inquiry. The
subject occupies their minds, and they recur to it as a subject which
perplexes them; as a thing that is incomprehensible. They think it over
again and again, and are more and more perplexed and embarrassed. The
difficulties which these facts suggest about God and his government are
such that they cannot solve them.

And waters of a full cup are wrung out to them - literally, "waters of
fullness;" or, full waters. The Chaldee renders this, "Many tears flow
from them." The Septuagint, and the Latin Vulgate, "And full days shall
be found by them." The word rendered "are wrung out" - from מצה mâtsâh -
means properly to "suck;" then, to suck out; to drink greedily. See [Isa
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017.md). It is applied to one who drinks
greedily of an intoxicating cup; and then, to one who drinks a cup of
poison to the dregs. [Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md). The
meaning here is, that the facts in the case, and the questions which
arose in regard to those facts, and which so perplexed them, were like a
bitter cup; a cup of poison, or an intoxicating cup which overpowered
their faculties - and that they, in their perplexities, "exhausted" the
cup. They drank it all, even to the dregs. They did not merely taste it;
but they drank it. It was a subject full of perplexity; a subject that
wholly overpowered all their faculties, and "exhausted" all their
powers.

[Psalms 73:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 73:11</span></span>

And they say - His people say. The connection demands this
interpretation. The meaning is, that his people, as they return again
and again to this subject [Psa 73:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#010.md),
are constrained to put this question. They are compelled by these facts
to start such painful inquiries about God; and distressing as the
inquiries are, and as are the doubts which they involve, these thoughts
will pass through their mind, even though to avoid giving needless pain
to those who have no such perplexities and difficulties they keep these
thoughts to themselves, [Psa 73:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#015.md).

How doth God know? - That is, How can these facts be reconciled with
God's omniscience? How can it be that he sees all this, and yet suffers
it to occur, or that he does not interpose to prevent it? Is it not a
fair inference from these facts that God does "not" see them, and that
he is "not" an Omniscient Being? Can it be explained, can it be
believed, that God sees all this, and that he calmly looks on, and does
nothing to prevent it? If he sees it, why does he not interpose and put
an end to it? These perplexities were not confined to the psalmist. They
are such as have been felt by good people in all ages; and no one yet
has been able to furnish a solution of them that is wholly free from
difficulty.

And is there knowledge in the Most High? - Can there be in God a
knowledge of these facts? Are we not driven to the conclusion that he
must be ignorant of them? for, if he knew them, would he not interpose
to prevent them? How "can" it be consistent with the idea that he
"knows" them, and "sees" them, that he does "not" interpose, and that he
suffers these things to take place without any attempt to check such
evils? Who, even now, can answer these questions?

[Psalms 73:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 73:12</span></span>

Behold, these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world - This is also
to be understood as the language of the good man perplexed and
embarrassed by the fact that the wicked are prosperous and happy. The
meaning is, "Lo, these are wicked people - people of undoubted
depravity; they are people who live regardless of God; and yet they are
peaceful, tranquil, happy, prospered." This was one of the facts which
so much embarrassed the psalmist. If there had been any doubt about the
character of those people, the case would have been different. But there
was none. They were people whose character for wickedness was well
known, and yet they were permitted to live in peace and prosperity, as
if they were the favorites of heaven. The literal meaning of the words
rendered "who prosper in the world" is, "tranquil (or secure) for the
age;" that is, forever, or constantly. They know no changes; they see no
reverses; they are the same through life. They are always tranquil,
calm, happy, successful.

They increase in riches - literally, "They become great in substance."
They make constant accumulations in wealth, until they become great.

[Psalms 73:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 73:13</span></span>

Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain - That is, There is no advantage
in all my efforts to become pure and holy. It does not assist me in
obtaining the favor of God; and it would be just as well to live a
sinful life - to indulge in the pleasures of sense - to make the world
my portion. Nothing is to be gained by all my painful efforts at
self-discipline; by all my endeavors to become righteous. It would have
been as well for me - or better - if I had lived a life of sin like
other people. The righteous obtain from God fewer blessings than the
wicked; they have less happiness and less prosperity in this world; they
are subjected to more trouble and sorrow; and to all else there must be
added the struggles, the conflict, the warfare, the painful effort "to
be" pure, and to lead a holy life, all of which is now seen to be of no
advantage whatever. Such thoughts as these were not confined to the
psalmist. They are thoughts which will start up in the mind, and which
it is not easy to calm down.

And washed my hands in innocency - That is, It has been of no use that I
have washed my hands in innocency. The word "innocency" here means
"purity." He had washed his hands in that which was pure; as, pure
water. To wash the hands is emblematic of innocence or purity. See the
notes at [Psa 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006.md).

[Psalms 73:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 73:14</span></span>

For all the day long - Continually. All my life.

Have I been plagued - Smitten; afflicted; troubled. My life has been a
life of trial. I have not known prosperity.

And chastened every morning - Margin, as in Hebrew, "My chastisement
was." That is, my sufferings - my trials - have been repeated with every
returning morning. Each new day has brought some new form of affliction,
designed to rebuke and punish me. I never have found exemption from
trial even for a single day. So different is my lot from the lot of
wicked people, who know nothing of this, and who are always prospered
and happy. See the notes at [Job 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#018.md).

[Psalms 73:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 73:15</span></span>

If I say, I will speak thus - If I should resolve to give expression to
my feelings. If I should utter all that is passing in my mind and my
heart. It is implied here that he had "not" given utterance to these
thoughts, but had confined them to his own bosom. He knew how they might
be regarded by others; how others might be led to feel as if no
confidence was to be placed in God; how this might suggest thoughts to
them which would not otherwise occur to them, and which would only tend
to fill their minds with distress; how such thoughts might unsettle the
foundations of their faith, their peace, their hope, and their joy.

I should offend against the generation of thy children - The word
rendered "I should offend," means to treat perfidiously, or in a
faithless or treacherous manner. Then it means, "to deal falsely with."
And this is the meaning here; "I should not be "true" to them; I should
not be "faithful" to their real interests; I should do that which would
be equivalent to dealing with them in a false and perfidious manner."
The idea is, that he "ought" not to say or do anything which would tend
to lessen their confidence in God, or which would suggest to their minds
grounds of distrust in God, or which would disturb their peace and hope.
This was alike an act of justice and benevolence on his part. Whatever
might be his own troubles and doubts, he had no "right" to fill their
minds with doubts and distrust of God; and he felt that, as it was
desirable that the minds of others should not be harassed as his own had
been, it could not be kind to suggest such thoughts.

This, however, should not forbid anyone from mentioning such
difficulties to another for the purpose of having them removed. If they
occur to the mind, as they may to the minds of any, however sincere and
pious they may be, nothing can make it improper that they should be laid
before one of greater age, or longer experience, or wider opportunities
of knowledge, in order that the difficulties may be solved. Nothing can
make it improper for a child to have recourse thus to a parent - or a
member of a church, to a pastor. If, however, these doubts can be calmed
down otherwise, it is better that they should be mentioned to no one.
Some little additional strength may be given them even by dwelling on
them long enough to mention them to another, and by putting them in such
a form that they would be understood by another; and the true way is to
go to God with them by prayer, and to spread them out before the
mercy-seat. Prayer, and a careful study of the word of God may calm them
down without their being suggested to any human being. At any rate, they
should not be suggested at all to the young, or to those with fewer
advantages of education, or of less experience than we have had, on whom
the only effect would be to fill their minds with doubts which they
could not solve - and with thoughts tending only to perplexity and
unbelief - such as would never have occurred to themselves.

[Psalms 73:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 73:16</span></span>

When I thought to know this - When I endeavored to comprehend this, or
to explain it to myself. The idea is that he "thought" on the subject,
or "meditated" on it with a view to be able to understand it. He did not
express his opinions and feelings to others, but he dwelt on them in his
own mind; not to find additional difficulties, not to confirm himself in
opposition to God, and not to find new occasions for distrusting the
divine government, but to understand exactly how this was. It was his
object to seek and understand "the truth."

It was too painful for me - Margin, "It was labor in mine eyes." The
Hebrew word rendered "painful," means properly labor, toil, a burden;
and the idea is, that the question was a burden - was too weighty for
his weak powers.

[Psalms 73:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 73:17</span></span>

Until I went into the sanctuary of God - The word "sanctuary" we now
apply to a place of public worship; and, thus understood, the passage
here would mean that he learned the truth on the subject only by the
statements and disclosures made there in regard to the divine plans and
dealings, and the results of human conduct. This interpretation makes
good sense, and is in itself true, but it is not the idea in the
original. The word "sanctuary" in the Old Testament, in the singular
number, is applied to the tabernacle, or the temple, or, more especially
to the most holy place in the tabernacle or the temple; the place of the
unique dwelling of God. Thus understood the idea would be that he
learned the solution of the mystery "there." But these were not places
of instruction, and it cannot be supposed that the reference is to
either of them. The word in the original is in the plural number -
sanctuaries - things that God regarded as holy; and the meaning seems to
be, that the only solution of the case was to be learned from those
things which pertained to God's most holy and secret places; or in those
places which were nearest to him, and where he most clearly manifested
himself. The difficulty was not to be solved by any mere human reasoning
- by the powers of man, away from God; it was to be learned in the
presence of God himself, and in the disclosures which He made about his
divine plans and purposes. The psalmist had tried his own powers of
reason, and the subject was above his reach. The only solution of the
difficulty was to be obtained by a near approach to God himself. There
the mystery could be solved, and there it was solved. The "end" of all
this, as disclosed by God, would determine why, it was permitted, and
would remove the perplexity of the mind.

Then understood I their end - literally, their after things; that is,
the things which will occur to them hereafter. That solves all the
difficulty. There will be a judgment hereafter, and dark as things may
now appear, it will be seen in the end, or in the result, that exact and
equal justice will be done to all.

[Psalms 73:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 73:18</span></span>

Surely thou didst set them in slippery places - Not in a solid and
permanent position; not where their foothold would be secure, but as on
smooth and slippery rocks, where they would be liable any moment to fall
into the foaming billows. However prosperous their condition may seem to
be now, yet it is a condition of uncertainty and danger, from which they
must soon fall into ruin. In their prosperity there is nothing of
permanence or Stability; and this fact will explain the difficulty.

Thou castedst them down into destruction - They are placed, not in a
permanent condition, but in a condition from which they will be cast
down to destruction. Ruin is before them; and the end will demonstrate
the justice of God. Nothing can be determined from their present
condition as to the question which caused so much perplexity, but in
order to a proper solution we must wait to see the end. As an
illustration of this, see the interesting account of the interview
between Solon of Athens, and Croesus, the rich king of Lydia, as given
in Herodotus, book i., 30-33.

[Psalms 73:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 73:19</span></span>

How are they brought into desolation, as in a moment! - How suddenly and
unexpectedly does destruction come upon them! Nothing can be argued from
their apparent prosperity, for there is no ground of security in "that,"
no basis for an argument that it will continue. The end must be seen in
order to form a correct estimate on the subject, and that end may soon
come. Compare the notes at [Job
15:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#020.md).

They are utterly consumed with terrors - literally, "they perish; they
are destroyed by terrors;" that is, by terrible things, or by things
suited to produce terror in the mind. The idea is not that they are
destroyed by their own fears, but that things come upon them which are
suited to overwhelm the soul, and that by those things they are utterly
destroyed. It is by this result that we are to determine in regard to
the equity of the divine administration, and not by their prosperity and
their apparent safety.

[Psalms 73:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 73:20</span></span>

As a dream when one awaketh - Their prosperity is like the visions of a
dream; the reality is seen when one awakes. A man in a dream may imagine
that he is a king; that he dwells in a palace; that he is surrounded by
flatterers and courtiers; that he walks in pleasant groves, listens to
the sounds of sweet music, sits down at a table loaded with the luxuries
of all climes, and lies upon a bed of down. He may awake only to find
that he is encompassed with poverty, or that he is on a bed of
languishing, or that he is the miserable tenant of a hovel or a dungeon.
The reality is when he awakes. So it is in regard to our present
condition on earth. The reality is seen when the dream - the gorgeous
dream - of life is over.

So, O Lord, when thou awakest - The Hebrew expression here - בעיר bā‛ı̂yr
- occurs in more than fifty other places in the Scriptures, and is in
all these places translated "in the city." This interpretation, however,
would be quite unmeaning here, and the probability is that the
expression is a form of the verb עור ‛ûr, "to awake, to arouse;" and the
idea is not, as in our version, that of "God's" awaking as if he had
been asleep, but it refers to the dreamer when he shall awake. It is,
literally, in the awaking; that is, when the dream is over.

Thou shalt despise their image - The image that floated before their
imaginations in the dream of life. Thou wilt pay no attention to it;
there is no reality in it; it will at once vanish. In the future world,
God will pay no regard to the dreams of human life, to the outward show,
to the appearance; but the affairs of eternity will be regulated by what
is real - by that which constitutes the character of the man. By that,
and not by the vain dreams of the world, will the destiny of people be
determined. We are to look at "that" in determining the question about
the government of God, and not at what "appears" in the brief dream of
life.

[Psalms 73:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 73:21</span></span>

Thus my heart was grieved - literally, and more expressively, "was
soured." The meaning is, that his heart was grieved, pained,
dissatisfied. His mind was embittered, and he was rendered unhappy, by
the views which he cherished about God, as doubting the wisdom and
justice of his dealings with people - and about people, as being envious
at their prosperity.

And I was pricked in my reins - The reins are often in the Scriptures
represented as the seat of the thoughts or affections. See the notes at
[Psa 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#009.md). The word rendered "pricked"
means to sharpen, as a sword; and then, to pierce and penetrate as a
sword does. The idea is, that these thoughts, so distressing and
painful, seemed to be like a sharp sword penetrating to the seat of
life.

[Psalms 73:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 73:22</span></span>

So foolish was I, and ignorant - Such low and imperfect views did I take
of the subject. The margin is, "I knew not." So the Hebrew: "And I am
brutish, and know not;" that is, I did not understand the case; I had no
correct views in regard to it.

I was as a beast before thee - Margin, as in Hebrew, "with thee." That
is, in thy very presence; or, I was guilty of such foolishness in the
very presence of my Maker. If it had been when I was alone, or when no
one saw me, the folly would not have been so aggravated, and so much to
be regretted, but it was when the very eye of God was upon me. Compare
[Isa 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007.md); [Jer
7:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#030.md); [Jer
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#010.md); [Psa
51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004.md). When he says that he was as a
beast, he means that he was stupid and senseless; he had no proper
understanding of the case; he did not take any just views of it.

[Psalms 73:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 73:23</span></span>

Nevertheless, I am continually with thee - I am kept by thee in the land
of the living; I am permitted to abide in thy presence; I am allowed to
hope in thy mercy. Notwithstanding my low and unworthy views,
notwithstanding my doubts about the justice of the divine
administration, notwithstanding my envy at the prosperity of the wicked,
and my spirit of complaining against God, I am not driven away from God;
I am not banished from his presence, or cut off from his favor. Well may
we marvel when we reflect on our thoughts about God, that He has not
risen in his anger, and banished us from his presence forever and ever.

Thou hast holden me by my right hand - Thou hast not left me. Thou hast
stretched out thy hand to keep me. Thou hast been to me as, a Protector
and Friend. Thou hast not been angry at my unkind and ungrateful
thoughts; thou hast not banished me eternally from thy presence.

[Psalms 73:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 73:24</span></span>

Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel - With thy advice; with thy
teaching. This implies two things:

\(a\) his belief that God "would" do this, notwithstanding his folly;
and

\(b\) his purpose that God "should" be his guide now.

He would no longer murmur or complain, but would entrust all to God, and
allow himself to be led as God should be pleased to direct him.

And afterward receive me to glory - After thou hast led me along the
path of the present life in the way in which thou wouldst have me to go,
thou wilt then receive me to thyself in heaven - to a world where all
shall be clear; where I shall never have any doubts in regard to thy
being, to the justice of thy dispensations, or to the principles of thy
government.

[Psalms 73:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 73:25</span></span>

whom have I in heaven but thee? - literally, "Who is to me in the
heavens?" That is, There is no one there that in my love for him can be
compared with thee; no one who can do for me what thou canst do; no one
who can meet and satisfy the needs of my soul as thou canst; no one who
can be to me what God "is" - what a God "must" be. After all my
complaining and my doubts there is no one, not even in the heavens, who
cant supply the place of "God," or be to me what God is; and the warm
affections of my soul, therefore, are "really" toward him. I feel my
need of him; and I must and do find my supreme happiness in him. What
would even heaven be to me without God? who there, even of the angels of
light, could supply the place of God?

And there is none upon earth that I desire beside thee - That is, Thou
art all-sufficient; thou dost meet and satisfy the needs of my nature.
All my happiness is in thee; no one on earth could be substituted in thy
place, or be to me what thou art as God.

[Psalms 73:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 73:26</span></span>

My flesh and my heart faileth - Flesh and heart here seem to refer to
the whole man, body and soul; and the idea is, that his powers of body
and mind failed; were spent; were exhausted. This seems to have been
said in an "ideal" sense, or by anticipation. He does not mean to say
that his strength then had actually failed, but he seems to have placed
himself by imagination in the situation where his strength "would" be
all gone - in sickness, in weakness, in sorrow, on the bed of death. He
asks himself now what would be his strength then - what would be the
object of chief interest and love - on what he would rely; and he
answers without hesitation, and with entire confidence, that he could
rely on God, and that He would be his portion forever. Even then, when
heart and flesh should fail, when all the powers of mind and body should
be exhausted, the love of God would survive, and he would find strength
and joy in Him.

But God is the strength of my heart - Margin, as in Hebrew, "rock;" the
rock on which my heart relies; that is, my refuge, my defense. See the
notes at [Psa 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002.md). Compare [Psa
61:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#002.md).

And my portion for ever - The source of my happiness. Not wealth, then;
not honor; not earthly friends; not fame - will be my reliance and the
ground of my hope; but that which I shall regard as most valuable - my
supreme joy and rejoicing - will be the fact that God is my friend and
portion. With all the doubts which I have had in regard to the rectitude
of his government, I am sure that when I come to die, I shall cling to
him as my hope, my joy, my all. My last refuge - my sufficient refuge -
is God. When people come to die, they have "no other refuge" but God.
Nothing that they can accumulate of this world's goods will meet their
needs then, for God only can give strength and comfort on the bed of
death. Of each and all, however vigorous they may now be, it will be
true that "flesh and heart" will "fail;" of each and all it is true that
when this shall occur, none but God can be the portion and the strength
of the soul.

[Psalms 73:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 73:27</span></span>

For, lo, they that are far from thee shall perish - All that are
estranged from thee; all who are not thy friends. They will certainly be
destroyed. For them there can be no hope. This is the fact which solved
the difficulty of the psalmist in regard to the divine dealings with
people, [Psa 73:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#003.md). The fact that
there will be a righteous judgment, in which God will deal with people
according to their deserts, made all plain. Compare [Psa
73:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#016.md).

Thou hast destroyed - That is, Thou wilt certainly destroy. The psalmist
places himself in the future, and speaks of this as if it were already
done. It will be so certainly done that he could speak of it as if it
were already accomplished.

All them that go a whoring from thee - The relation of God to his people
is often compared in the Scriptures with the marriage relation (compare
Ps. 45); and a departure from Him is compared with a want of fidelity to
the marriage contract. See [Mat 12:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#039.md);
[Mat 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#004.md); [Jer
3:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#008.md); [Jer
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#007.md); [Jer
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#027.md); [Eze
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#037.md); [Rev
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#022.md) :

[Psalms 73:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 73:28</span></span>

But it is good for me to draw near to God - That is, It is pleasant; it
is profitable; it is the chief good. For myself, happiness is to be
found in that alone; there I find what my nature pants for and desires.
Others find, or attempt to find, happiness in other things; my happiness
is found in God alone. This is the result to which the psalmist came
after all his perplexity. With all his doubts and difficulties, his real
desire was to be near to God; his supreme happiness was found there.

I have put my trust in the Lord God - I have truly confided in him; he
is my portion and the sole ground of my reliance. The doubts which he
had had were not, after all, real doubts about the claim of God to
confidence. There was an underlying trust in God in the midst of all
this. He had not desired to cherish such doubts; he did, on the most
calm reflection, still trust in God.

That I may declare all thy works - That I might make known thy doings
toward the children of men. I have desired rightly to understand thee
and thy government, that I might vindicate thy name, and assert thy
claim to the love and confidenee of mankind. His doubts and perplexities
had not really been because he was an enemy of God, or because he
desired to cherish doubts in regard to him, but because, when
appearances were against the equity of the divine government, he wished
to see how the things which occurred could be explained consistently
with a proper belief in the goodness and justice of God, in order that
he might go and explain the matter to his fellow-men. Such perplexities
and doubts, therefore, are not really inconsistent with true love for
God and genuine confidence in him; and it is well when such doubts are
made the means of enabling us more clearly to explain the divine
dealings - it is well when, under all such doubts and difficulties, we
can still find evidence that we truly love God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 74](psa074.md)

</div>
