<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa029)  [Next](psa031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 30:0</span></span>

This is said to be "A Psalm or Song at the dedication of the house of
David." There is no reason to call in question the correctness of this
inscription, though it cannot be certain that it was prefixed by the
author himself. The words of the title are found in the Hebrew, and it
is to be presumed that they were affixed to the psalm by some one of the
inspired writers.

It is clearly implied in the title, though not expressly affirmed, that
David was the author of the psalm, for it is to be presumed that he
would himself compose the hymn or song that was to be used at the
dedication of his own dwelling. In fact, the title, as Rosenmuller has
remarked, might not improperly be read, "A Psalm, a song of dedication
of a house, of David," so that the words "A Psalm of David" might not
improperly be regarded as united.

It is not absolutely certain what occasion is referred to in the psalm.
Some have supposed that the tabernacle is meant; but the tabernacle was
dedicated long before the time of David. Others, and among them several
Jewish interpreters, have supposed that it was prepared in order to be
sung either at the dedication of the temple which Solomon built, or the
dedication of that which was erected after the return from the
Babylonian captivity. Others have supposed that it was intended to be
used at the dedication of the house or palace which David built for
himself on Mount Zion, [Sa2 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#011). It
was usual for the Hebrews to "dedicate" a house when it was finished;
that is, to devote it in a solemn manner to God, probably with
appropriate religious exercises. [Deu
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#005), "what man is there that hath
built a new house, and hath not dedicated it? Let him go and return to
his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man dedicate it."

Compare also [Neh 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#027). Others, as
Rosenmuller and Prof. Alexander, suppose that the psalm was designed to
be used at the dedication of the altar reared by David on the
"threshing-floor" of Ornan, which David purchased at the time of the
pestilence which came upon the people for his sin in numbering the
people, [Ch1 21:15-26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#015). But there is no
certain evidence of this. Apart from the incongruity of calling an altar
a "house," the circumstances are not such as to lead us to believe that
the psalm was composed for that occasion. The allusion in the psalm is
rather to a previous state of depression, trouble, and sorrow, such as
occurred in the life of David before he conquered his enemies, and
before he was peaceably established on his throne - and to the joy which
he felt when he had triumphed over his foes, and was peacefully
established as king in Jerusalem. All the circumstances seem to me to
accord best with the time when David erected a house for his own abode -
a palace - upon Mount Zion, and to the act of dedicating such a house to
God. See [Sa2 5:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#009); [Sa2
7:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#001). It may be added that that was
properly called "the house of David" - a name which could be given
neither to the altar erected on the threshing-floor of Ornan, nor to the
tabernacle, nor to the temple.

But although the psalm was composed for the purpose of being used at the
dedication of his "house," it was in view of some important
circumstances of his past life, and particularly of his feelings in time
of dangerous illness, and of his obligation on his recovery to devote
himself to God. In the dedication of his house to God he recurs with
deep interest to that period of his life, and dwells with grateful
satisfaction on the goodness of God manifested in his restoration to
health. On entering his new abode, he seems to have felt that there was
a special propriety in his recognizing the fact that he owed his life to
God; his life, not only in general, but in this special act of goodness,
by which he had been raised up from the borders of the grave. "His
former condition of calamity and sorrow as contrasted with his present
happy and prosperous condition," therefore, suggested the train of
thought in the psalm at the dedication of his house. In the course of
the psalm, as illustrating his feelings, he adverts to the following
points:

\(1\) His former state of self-confidence or security when he was in
health, and when he thought his "mountain" stood "strong," [Psa
30:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006).

\(2\) His sickness as a means of humbling him, and teaching him his
dependence, [Psa 30:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#002).

\(3\) His prayer for deliverance when he was sick, [Psa
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#002), [Psa
30:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#008).

\(4\) His deliverance as an act of God [Psa
30:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#002), [Psa
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#011).

\(5\) His obligation to give thanks to God for his mercy, [Psa
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001), [Psa
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#004),[Psa
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#012).

These would suggest most appropriate topics of meditation on entering a
near abode, and looking forward to the vicissitudes which might and
which would probably occur there.

That the allusion in the psalm is to "sickness," seems to me to be
evident from [Psa 30:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#002), [Psa
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#009), though at what time of life this
occurred, or what was the particular form of disease, we are not
informed. From [Psa 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#003), [Psa
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#009), however, it is certain that it
was a "dangerous" illness; that he anticipated death; and that he was
saved from death only in answer to fervent prayer. The psalm, therefore,
in this respect, has a resemblance to [Psa
6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001); Ps. 35; [Psa
41:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001); psalms composed also in view
of sickness. In a book claiming to be from God, and designed for all
mankind in a world where sickness so abounds, it was to be expected that
there would be allusions to disease as well as to other forms of
affliction, and that in the examples of ancient saints suffering on beds
of pain, we should be able to find illustrations of proper pious
feeling; that we should be directed by their example to the true sources
of consolation, and should be made acquainted with the lessons which God
designs to teach us in sickness.

The direct contents of the psalm are as follows:

I. The author recounts the signal mercy of God to him in the time of his
danger. God had lifted him up, and had not allowed his enemies to exult
over his death, [Psa 30:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001).

II\. He calls upon others to unite with him in praising God, and
especially in view of the truth that affliction, as endured by the
people of God, would not continue long, and that it would certainly be
followed by peace and joy, as the light of the morning will certainly
follow the darkest night, [Psa 30:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#004).

III\. He adverts again, in illustration of this, to his former state,
saying that there was a time when he thought he should never be moved;
when he supposed that his "mountain" stood "strong," and that he was
secure; but that God had hid His face, and troubled him, teaching him
not to confide in his own strength, or in the mere fact that he was
prosperous, [Psa 30:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006).

IV\. He adverts to his earnest prayer in the time of his affliction, and
recounts the substance of that prayer, [Psa
30:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#008). The "argument" which he then
urged was that there could be no "profit" or advantage to God "in his
blood," or in his being cut off; that the "dust," that is, the dead,
could not praise Him or declare His truth. He, therefore, prayed that
God would keep him alive, that he might honor Him upon the earth.

V. In [Psa 30:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#011), he refers to the
fact that the prayer was heard, and to the reason why it was heard. God
had turned his mourning into dancing; he had put off his sackcloth, and
girded him with gladness. The reason why God had done this was, that his
"glory," that is, his tongue (margin), might give praise to God, and not
be silent; and, in view of all the goodness of God to him, he expresses
his purpose to praise God forever.

It will be seen, therefore, that the contents of the psalm are every way
suitable to the occasion supposed to be referred to - the dedication of
his house to God. On entering such a habitation for the first time it
was proper to recall the past scenes of his life - his perils and
troubles; it was proper to acknowledge the goodness of God in delivering
him from those perils and troubles; it was proper to express his solemn
purpose to serve God in that dwelling, and to consecrate himself and all
that he had to Him and to His service evermore. What was proper for the
royal author of this psalm is proper for all; and there can be nothing
more appropriate when we have erected a house to dwell in than to
dedicate it to God, with a suitable recollection of his dealings with us
in our past life, and to pray that He may also condescend to dwell with
us there.

[Psalms 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 30:1</span></span>

I will extol thee - literally, "I will exalt thee;" that is, he would
make God first and supreme in his thoughts and affections; he would do
what he could to make Him known; he would elevate Him high in his
praises.

For thou hast lifted me up - To wit, from the state of danger in which I
was [Psa 30:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#002). The Hebrew word used
here means properly to draw out, as from a well; and then, to deliver,
to set free. As God had thus lifted him up, it was proper that he should
show his gratitude by "lifting up" or extolling the name of God.

And hast not made my foes to rejoice over me - Hast not suffered them to
triumph over me; that is, thou hast delivered me from them. He refers to
the fact that he had been saved from a dangerous illness, and that his
enemies had not been allowed to exult over his death. Compare the notes
at [Psa 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#005).

[Psalms 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 30:2</span></span>

O Lord my God, I cried unto thee - In the time of trouble and danger.

And thou hast healed me - Thou didst restore me to health. The language
here evidently refers to the fact that he had been sick, and had then
been restored to health.

[Psalms 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 30:3</span></span>

O, Lord, thou hast brought up my soul from the grave - My life; me. The
meaning is, that he had been in imminent danger of death, and had been
brought from the borders of the grave. The word here rendered "grave" is
"Sheol" - a word which, properly used, commonly denotes the region of
the dead; the underworld which is entered through the grave. Compare
[Isa 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#009), note; [Psa
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005), note.

Thou hast kept me alive, that I should not go down to the pit - More
literally, "thou hast caused me to live from them which go down to the
pit;" that is, thou hast distinguished me from them by keeping me alive.
The word "pit" here means the same as the grave. See the notes at [Psa
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001).

[Psalms 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 30:4</span></span>

Sing unto the Lord, O ye saints of his - This call upon others to give
thanks to God is in view of the mercy which he had experienced. He
invites them to unite with him in celebrating the praises of that God
who had showed him so much mercy. It was not because they had been
benefited by these tokens of the divine favor; but:

\(a\) because when we are partakers of the divine mercy, we desire that
others may assist us in giving utterance to the praise due to God; and

\(b\) because others may learn from the mercies bestowed on us that God
is worthy of praise, or may see in His dealings with us an argument for
His goodness; and may, therefore, appropriately unite in His praise.

Thus religion diffuses its influence on all around us, and tends to
"unite" the hearts of many in every manifestation of the character of
God. Infidelity is solitary and dissocial; religion is social; and, no
matter on whom the favor is bestowed, its effect is to unite the hearts
of many to each other and to God.

And give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness - Margin, "to the
memorial." The Hebrew is, "to the memory of his holiness." The sense is,
in calling to recollection the acts of his holiness, or his holy
perfections. Compare the notes at [Psa
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#003). The word "holiness" here is used
in a large sense as denoting, not so much the hatred of sin, as
benevolence, kindness, mercy - the divine compassion toward those who
are in trouble or danger. It is true that it is a proper subject of
rejoicing and praise that God is a holy God, a God of truth and justice,
a God who cannot look upon sin but with abhorrence, a God in whose
nature is combined every possible perfection; but that is not the exact
idea here. The word refers to his compassion, goodness, kindness; and to
the acts by which that had been manifested to the psalmist, as laying a
proper foundation for gratitude and praise.

[Psalms 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 30:5</span></span>

For his anger endureth but a moment - Margin: There is but "a moment in
his anger." So the Hebrew. That is, his anger endures but a short time,
or brief period. The reference here is to the troubles and sorrows
through which the psalmist had passed, as compared with his subsequent
happiness. Though at the time they might have seemed to be long, yet, as
compared with the many mercies of life, with the joy which had succeeded
them, and with the hopes now cherished, they seemed to be but for a
moment. God, according to the view of the psalmist, is not a Being who
cherishes anger; not one who lays it up in his mind; not one who is
unwilling to show mercy and kindness: he is a Being who is disposed to
be merciful, and though he may be displeased with the conduct of men,
yet his displeasure is not cherished and nourished, but passes away with
the occasion, and is remembered no more.

In his favor is life - It is his nature to impart life. He spares life;
He will give eternal life. It is, in other words, not His nature to
inflict death; death is to be traced to something else. Death is not
pleasing or gratifying to Him; it is pleasing and gratifying to Him to
confer life. His favor secures life; death is an evidence of His
displeasure - that is, death is caused by sin leading to His
displeasure. If a man has the favor of God, he is sure of life; if not
life in this world, yet life in the world to come.

Weeping may endure for a night - Margin: "in the evening." So the
Hebrew. The word here rendered "endure" means properly "to lodge, to
sojourn," as one does for a little time. The idea is, that weeping is
like a stranger - a wayfaring person - who lodges for a night only. In
other words, sorrow will soon pass away to be succeeded by joy.

But joy cometh in the morning - Margin: "singing." The margin expresses
the force of the original word. There will be singing, shouting,
exultation. That is, if we have the friendship of God, sorrow will
always be temporary, and will always be followed by joy. The morning
will come; a morning without clouds; a morning when the sources of
sorrow will disappear. This often occurs in the present life; it will
always occur to the righteous in the life to come. The sorrows of this
life are but for a moment, and they will be succeeded by the light and
the joy of heaven. Then, if not before, all the sorrows of the present
life, however long they may appear to be, will seem to have been but for
a moment; weeping, though it may have made life here but one unbroken
night, will be followed by one eternal day without a sigh or a tear.

[Psalms 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 30:6</span></span>

And in my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved - I shall never be
visited with calamity or trial. This refers to a past period of his
life, when everything seemed to be prosperous, and when he had drawn
around him so many comforts, and had apparently made them so secure,
that it seemed as if they could never be taken from him, or as if he had
nothing to fear. To what precise period of his life the psalmist refers,
it is now impossible to ascertain. It is sufficient to say, that men are
often substantially in that state of mind. They have such vigorous
constitutions and such continued health; their plans are so uniformly
crowned with success; everything which they touch so certainly turns to
gold, and every enterprise so certainly succeeds; they have so many and
such warmly attached friends; they have accumulated so much property,
and it is so safely invested - that it seems as if they were never to
know reverses, and they unconsciously suffer the illusion to pass over
the mind that they are never to see changes, and that they have nothing
to dread. They become self-confident. They forget their dependence on
God. In their own minds they trace their success to their own efforts,
tact and skill, rather than to God. They become worldly-minded, and it
is necessary for God to teach them how easily he can sweep all this away
- and thus to bring them back to a right view of the uncertainty of all
earthly things. Health fails, or friends die, or property takes wings
and flies away; and God accomplishes his purpose - a purpose invaluable
to them - by showing them their dependence on Himself, and by teaching
them that permanent and certain happiness and security are to be found
in Him alone.

[Psalms 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 30:7</span></span>

Lord, by thy favor thou hast made my mountain to stand strong - Margin:
"settled strength for my mountain." This refers, I apprehend, to his
former state of mind; to his confidence in that which constituted his
prosperity as referred to in the previous verse; to his feeling, in that
state, that everything pertaining to himself was safe; to his freedom
from any apprehension that there would be any change. The word
"mountain" seems to be used as denoting that on which he relied as his
security or strength, as the mountain, or the inaccessible hills,
constituted a refuge and security in times of danger. See [Psa
18:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#001), [Psa
18:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#033); [Psa
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#005). It does not refer to Mount
Moriah, or Mount Zion, as some have supposed, for the passage relates to
a former period of his life when these were not in his possession; but
he speaks of himself as having, through the favor of God, put himself
into a strong position - a position where he feared no enemy and no
change; where he thought himself entirely secure - the state of
"prosperity" to which he had referred in the previous verse. In that
state, however, God showed him that there was no real security but in
his favor: security not in what a man can draw around himself, but in
the favor of God alone.

Thou didst hide thy face - That is, at the time when I was so confident,
and when I thought my mountain stood so strong, and that I was so
secure. Then I was shown how insecure and uncertain was all that I
relied on, and how absolutely, after all that I had done, I was
dependent for safety on God. To "hide the face" is synonymous in the
sacred writings with the withdrawing of favor, or with displeasure. See
the notes at [Psa 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001). Compare [Psa
104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029).

And I was troubled - I was confounded, perplexed, agitated, terrified. I
was thrown into sudden fear, for all that I had so confidently relied
on, all that I thought was so firm, was suddenly swept away. We do not
know what this was in the case of the psalmist. It may have been the
strength of his own fortifications; it may have been the number and
discipline of his army; it may have been his own conscious power and
skill as a warrior; it may have been his wealth; it may have been his
bodily health - in reference to any of which he may have felt as if none
of these things could fail. When that on which he so confidently relied
was swept away, he was agitated, troubled, anxious. The same thing may
occur now, and often does occur, whenpeople rely on their own strength;
their health; their wealth. Suddenly any of these may be swept away;
suddenly they are often swept away, to teach such men - even good men -
their dependence on God, and to show them how vain is every other
refuge.

[Psalms 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 30:8</span></span>

I cried to thee, O Lord - That is, when those reverses came, and when
that on which I had so confidently relied was taken away, I called upon
the Lord; I uttered an earnest cry for aid. The prayer which he uttered
on the occasion is specified in the following verses. The idea here is,
that he was not driven from God by these reverses, but TO him. He felt
that his reliance on those things in which he had put his trust was
vain, and he now came to God, the true Source of strength, and sought
His protection and favor. This was doubtless the design of the reverses
which God had brought upon him; and this will always be the effect of
the reverses that come upon good men. When they have placed undue
reliance upon wealth, or health, or friends, and when these are taken
away, the effect will be to lead them to God in earnest prayer. God
designs to bring them back, and they do come back to him. Afflictions
are always, sooner or later, effectual in bringing good men back to God.
The sinner is often driven from God by trial; the good man is brought
back to find his strength and comfort in God. The one complains, and
murmurs, and is wretched; the other prays, and submits, and is made more
happy than he was in the days of his prosperity.

[Psalms 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 30:9</span></span>

What proof is there in my blood - That is, What profit or advantage
would there be to thee if I should die? What would be "gained" by it?
The argument which the psalmist urges is that he could better serve God
by his life than by his death; that his death, by removing him from the
earth, would prevent his rendering the service which he might by his
life. The same argument is presented also in [Psa
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005) (see the notes at that verse), and
is found again in [Psa 88:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#010), and
in the hymn of Hezekiah, [Isa
38:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#018). See the notes at that
passage. The prayer used here is to be understood, not as a prayer at
the time of the composition of the psalm, but as that which the psalmist
employed at the time when he thought his mountain stood strong, and when
God saw suitable to humble him by some calamity - perhaps by a dangerous
illness, [Psa 30:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006).

When I go down to the pit? - To the grave; or, If I should go down to
the grave. See the notes at [Psa 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#003).

Shall the dust praise thee? - That which turns to dust; the lifeless
remains. See the notes at [Psa 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005).

Shall it declare thy truth? - Can a lifeless body stand up in defense of
the truth, or make that truth known to the living? This shows on what
his heart was really set, or what was the prevailing desire of his soul.
It was to make known the truth of God; to celebrate his praise; to bring
others to an acquaintance with him. It cannot be denied that the
statement here made is founded on obscure views, or on a misconception
of the condition of the soul after death - a misconception which we are
enabled to correct by the clearer light of the Christian religion; but
still there is a truth here of great importance. It is, that whatever we
are to do for making known the character and perfections of God on earth
- for bringing others to the knowledge of the truth, and saving their
souls - is to be done before we go down to the grave. whatever we may do
to honor God in the future world - in the vast eternity on which we
enter at death - yet all that we are to do in this respect on earth is
to be accomplished before the eyes are closed, and the lips are made
mute in death. We shall not return to do what we have omitted to do on
earth; we shall not come back to repair the evils of an inconsistent
life; we shall not revisit the world to check the progress of error that
we may have maintained; we shall not return to warn the sinners whom we
neglected to warn. Our work on earth will be soon done - and done
finally and forever. If we are to offer prayer for the salvation of our
children, neighbors, or friends, it is to be done in this world; if we
are to admonish and warn the wicked, it is to be done here; if we are to
do anything by personal effort for the spread of the Gospel, it is to be
done before we die. Whatever we may do in heaven, these things are not
to be done there, for when we close our eyes in death, our personal
efforts for the salvation of men will cease for ever.

[Psalms 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 30:10</span></span>

Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me, - etc. This, too, is the prayer
which he uttered in the calamities adverted to in [Psa
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007). It is a cry for mercy founded on
the idea referred to in [Psa 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#009).

[Psalms 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 30:11</span></span>

Thou hast turned for me - In my behalf. That is, God had heard his
prayer; he had brought his troubles to an end; he had caused his sorrows
to be succeeded by correspondent joy.

My mourning into dancing - Joy, exultation, every expression of
rejoicing, had been made to succeed his deep sorrows. Compare [Psa
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005). It was this which he
commemorated at the dedication of his house; this joy succeeding scenes
of sorrow that he now called to remembrance as he entered the place
which he had reared for a permanent abode. The contrast of his
circumstances now - in a palace, with every comfort of plenty and peace
around him - with his former circumstances which had been so sad, made
it proper for him thus to celebrate the goodness of God.

Thou hast put off my sackcloth - That which I wore, or had girded around
me, as an emblem of sorrow, or in the time of my mourning. See [Isa
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#024), note; [Job
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#015), note; and [Mat
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#021), note.

And girded me with gladness - Instead of a girdle of sackcloth he had
been clothed in a festive dress, or with such a dress - girded with an
elegant girdle - as was worn on joyous and festive occasions. See the
notes at [Mat 5:38-41](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#038).

[Psalms 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 30:12</span></span>

To the end that my glory may sing praise to thee - Margin, my "tongue,"
or my "soul." DeWette renders it, "my heart." The Aramaic Paraphrase:
"that the honorable of the world may praise thee." The Septuagint and
the Latin Vulgate: "my glory." The reference is, undoubtedly, to what
the psalmist regarded as most glorious, honorable, exalted, in himself.
There is no evidence that he referred to his "tongue" or his "heart"
particularly, but the expression seems to be equivalent to "my highest
powers" - all the powers and faculties of my nature. The "tongue" would
indeed be the instrument of uttering praise, but still the reference is
rather to the exalted powers of the soul than to the instrument. Let all
that is capable of praise within me, all my powers, be employed in
celebrating the goodness of God.

And not be silent - Be employed in praise.

O Lord my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever - Compare the notes
at [Isa 38:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#020). This verse states the
purpose which the psalmist now saw that God intended to accomplish by
his dealings with him in the varied scenes of his past life; and his own
purpose now as he entered his new abode. "The purpose of God," in all
these various dealings - in the prosperity which had been bestowed on
him [Psa 30:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006); in the reverses and
trials by sickness or otherwise which had come upon him [Psa
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#003), [Psa
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007); and in the deliverance which God
had granted him in answer to his prayers [Psa
30:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#002), [Psa
30:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#010) - was, that he should learn
to praise the Lord. "His own purpose" now, as he entered his new
habitation and dedicated it to God, was, to praise God with his highest
powers forever: to consecrate all that he had to his gracious preserver;
to make his house, not a habitation of gaiety and sin, but an abode of
serious piety - a home where the happiness sought would be that which is
found in the influence of religion. It is scarcely necessary to add that
every new dwelling should be entered by a family with feelings similar
to these; that the first act of the head of a family on entering a new
habitation - whether it be a palace or a cottage - should be solemnly to
consecrate it to God, and to resolve that it shall be a house where His
praises shall be celebrated, and where the influence of religion shall
be invoked to guide and sanctify all the members of the household.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 31](psa031)

</div>
