<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa075)  [Next](psa077.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 76](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 76:0</span></span>

This psalm is one of those which in the title are ascribed to Asaph (see
Introduction to Ps. 73), and there is no reason to call in question that
statement. On the phrase "To the chief Musician on Neginoth," see
Introduction to [Psa 4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001.md).

The occasion on which the psalm was composed is not stated, and cannot
now be ascertained. The Septuagint regards it as having had reference to
the Assyrians - ᾠδὴ προς τὸν Ἀσσύριον hōdē pros ton Assurion - "An ode
to the Assyrian." So the Latin Vulgate; Canticum ad Assyrios. This is
the opinion adopted also by Jarchi. The title in the Syriac version is,
"When Rabbah of the Ammonites was laid waste; and further it describes
the judment of the Messiah against the wicked. Grotius supposes that it
was intended to describe the victory over the Ammonites. Rudinger
ascribes its composition to the time of the Maccabees. DeWette supposes
that it refers to some late period of the Jewish history, but that the
particular time is unknown. It would be vain to attempt to ascertain
with any certainty the particular occasion on which the psalm was
composed. It was evidently on some occasion when an attack had been made
on "Salem," that is, on Jerusalem [Psa
76:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002.md), and when that attack had been
repelled, and the enemy had been driven back. Many of the circumstances
in the psalm. would agree well with the account of the invasion of the
Assyrians under Sennacherib, but there were many other occasions in the
Jewish history to which it would, in like manner, be applicable.

The psalm is a song of praise for deliverance from an enemy. The
contents are as follows:

I. The fact that God had made himself known "in Judah," or to the Jewish
people - or, that he had manifested himself to them in a remarkable
manner, [Psa 76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001.md).

II\. The fact that he had showed this in a special manner in "Salem,"
the capital of the nation - referring to some particular time in which
this was done, [Psa 76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002.md).

III\. The manner in which he had done this - by breaking the arrows of
the bow, and the shield; by showing that his power was superior to all
the defenses which men had set up; and by overcoming entirely the
invading foe, [Psa 76:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#003.md).

IV\. The fact that, on this account, God was to be feared and
reverenced, [Psa 76:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#007.md).

V. The statement of a great truth, and a most important principle, which
had been particularly illustrated by the occurrence; to wit, that the
wrath of man would be made to praise God, and that the remainder of
wrath he would restrain, [Psa 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010.md).

VI\. A call on all people to acknowledge God in a suitable manner, by
bringing presents, and by standing in awe of him, [Psa
76:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#011.md).

[Psalms 76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 76:1</span></span>

In Judah is God known - That is, he has made himself known there in a
special manner; he has evinced his watchful care over the city so as to
demand a proper acknowledgment; he has manifested himself there as he
has not elsewhere. It is true that God is known, or makes himself known
everywhere; but it is also true that he does this in some places, and at
some times, in a more marked and striking manner than he does in other
places and at other times. The most clear and impressive displays of his
character are among his own people - in the church. "His name is great
in Israel." Among the people of Israel; or, among his own people. The
meaning here is, that, by some act referred to in the psalm, he had so
displayed his power and his mercy in favor of that people, as to make it
proper that his name should be exalted or praised.

[Psalms 76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 76:2</span></span>

In Salem also - This was the ancient name for Jerusalem, and is
evidently so used here. It continued to be given to the town until the
time of David, when it was called "Jerusalem." See the notes at [Isa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md). The word properly means "peace,"
and is so rendered here by the Septuagint, ἐν εἰρήνῃ ὁ τόπος αύτοῦ en
eirēnē ho topos autou - "his place is in peace." There may have been an
allusion here to that ancient signification of the name, as being more
poetical, and as suggesting the fact that God had restored peace to the
city and nation when invaded.

Is his tabernacle - The tent, or sacred place where he is worshipped.
Salem or Jerusalem was made the place of public worship, and the ark
removed there by David, [Sa2 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#017.md).

And his dwelling-place in Zion - That is, on Mount Zion - the portion of
Jerusalem in which David built his own palace, and which he made the
place of public worship. This remained so until the temple was built on
Mount Moriah; see the notes at [Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006.md); compare [Psa
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#011.md); [Psa
48:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#012.md); [Psa
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001.md).

[Psalms 76:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 76:3</span></span>

There brake he the arrows of the bow - That is, in Salem, or near Salem.
The language is such as would be used in reference to invaders, or to
armies that came up to storm the city. The occasion is unknown; but the
meaning is, that God drove the invading army back, and showed his power
in defending the city. The phrase "the arrows of the bow," is literally,
"the lightnings of the bow," the word rendered "arrows" meaning properly
"flame;" and then, "lightning." The idea is, that the arrows sped from
the bow with the rapidity of lightning.

The shield - Used for defense in war. See [Psa
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#012.md); [Psa
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#020.md); compare the notes at [Eph
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016.md).

And the sword - That is, he disarmed his enemies, or made them as
powerless as if their swords were broken.

And the battle - He broke the force of the battle; the strength of the
armies drawn up for conflict.

[Psalms 76:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 76:4</span></span>

Thou art more glorious and excellent - The word rendered glorious - נאור
na'ôr - is from the verb which means "to shine," to give light, and the
word would properly refer to a luminous or "shining" object - as the
sun, the source of light. Hence, it means "shining," splendid, glorious;
and it is thus applied to the Divine Being with reference to his
perfections, being like light. Compare [Jo1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005.md). The word rendered "excellent,"
means exalted, noble, great. These words are applied here to God from
the manifestation of his perfections in the case referred to.

Than the mountains of prey - The word "prey" as employed here - טרף
ṭereph - means that which is obtained by hunting; and then, plunder. It
is usually applied to the food of wild beasts, beasts of prey. Here it
refers to the "mountains" considered as the abode or stronghold of
robbers and banditti, from where they sally forth in search of plunder.
These mountains, in their heights, their rocks, their fastnesses,
furnished safe places of retreat for robbers, and hence, they became
emblems of power. It is not improbable that the hordes referred to in
the psalm had their abodes in such mountains, and hence, the psalmist
says that God who made those mountains and hills was superior to them in
strength and power.

[Psalms 76:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 76:5</span></span>

The stout-hearted are spoiled - The valiant men, the men who came so
confidently to the invasion. The word "spoiled" here, as elsewhere in
the Scriptures, means "plundered," not (as the word is now used)
"corrupted." See the notes at [Col
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008.md).

They have slept their sleep - They are dead; they have slept their last
sleep. Death, in the Scriptures, as in all other writings, is often
compared with sleep.

And none of the men of might - The men who came forth for purposes of
war and conquest.

Have found their hands - The Septuagint renders this, "Have found
nothing in their hands;" that is, they have obtained no plunder. Luther
renders it, "And all warriors must suffer their hands to fall." De
Wette, "Have lost their hands?" The idea seems to be, that they had lost
the use of their hands; that is, that they had no use for them, or did
not find them of any use. They could not employ them for the purpose for
which they were intended, but were suddenly stricken down.

[Psalms 76:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 76:6</span></span>

At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob - At thy word; thy bidding; or, when God
rebuked them for their attempt to attack the city. The idea is, that
they were discomfited by a word spoken by God.

Both the chariot and horse ... - The Septuagint renders this, "They who
are mounted on horses." The word rendered "chariot" here - רכב rekeb -
may mean "riders, cavalry," as well as chariot. See the notes at [Isa
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#007.md). Hence, there would be less
incongruity in the Hebrew than in our translation, where it is said that
the "chariots" have fallen into a deep sleep. The idea may be either
that horsemen and horses had fallen into a deep slumber, or that the
rumbling of the chariot-wheels had ceased, and that there was a profound
silence, like a deep sleep.

[Psalms 76:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 76:7</span></span>

Thou, even thou, art to be feared - To be had in reverence or
veneration. The repetition of the word "thou" is emphatic, as if the
mind paused at the mention of God, and remained in a state of reverence,
repeating the thought. The particular "reason" suggested here why God
should be had in reverence, was the display of his power in overthrowing
by a word the mighty hosts that had come against the holy city.

And who may stand in thy sight - Who can stand before thee? implying
that no one had the power to do it. "When once thou art angry." If such
armies have been overcome suddenly by thy might, then what power is
there which could successfully resist thee?

[Psalms 76:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 76:8</span></span>

Thou didst cause judgment to be heard from heavens - It seemed to come
from heaven; it was manifestly from thee. The overthrow of these enemies
of thy people was a manifest judgment from thee, and should be so
regarded.

The earth feared - The world itself seemed to hear the voice of God, and
to stand in awe.

And was still - It seemed to be profoundly attentive to what God said,
and as if it reverently listened to his voice. It is not uncommon in the
Scriptures to represent the earth - the hills, the mountains, the
streams, the rivers, the plains - as conscious of the presence of God;
as either rejoicing or trembling at his voice. Compare [Psa
65:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#012.md); [Psa
114:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#003.md); [Hab
3:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#008.md).

[Psalms 76:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 76:9</span></span>

When God arose to judgment - That is, when he came to overthrow and
destroy the enemies of his people, as referred to in the former part of
the psalm.

To save all the meek of the earth - Of the land - to wit, the land of
Judea; or, to save his people when in affliction. The word "meek," which
with us usually means those who are forbearing under injuries, means
here the humble, the afflicted, the crushed, the oppressed.

[Psalms 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 76:10</span></span>

Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee - It shall be the occasion of
praise; or, honor shall accrue to thee from it, "as if" it were employed
in thy praise, and "as if" it were voluntarily engaged in promoting thy
glory. The deliverance of the people by the direct interposition of God
in the case referred to in the psalm, the sudden and entire overthrow of
the invading forces by his power, led to this reflection. The overruling
power of God was displayed. The "wrath" of the invading host had given
occasion for this manifestation of the divine perfections; or, in other
words, his character would not have been displayed in this manner if it
had not been for these wicked purposes of people. It is not that there
was anything in the wrath itself, or in their plans or intentions, that
was in itself "adapted" to honor God; but that it was overruled by him,
so that he took "occasion" from it to display his own character.

The wicked conduct of a child is an "occasion" for the display of the
just character and the wise administration of a parent; the act of a
pirate, a rebel, a murderer, furnishes an "occasion" for the display of
the just principles of law, and the stability and power of a government.
In like manner, the sins of the wicked are made an occasion for the
display of the divine perfections in maintaining law; in the
administering of justice; in preserving order. But there is another
sense, also, in which the wrath of man is made the occasion for
glorifying God. It is, that since there is such wrath, or since there
are such wicked purposes, God makes use of that wrath, or of those
wicked purposes, as he does of the powers of nature - of pestilence,
disease, and storms, as instruments to accomplish his own designs, or to
bring about great results. Thus he made use of the treasonable purpose
of Judas, and the mad passions and the angry feelings of the Jews, in
bringing about the work of redemption by the death of his Son; thus be
made use of the purposes of Sennacherib in order to punish his own
people (see the notes at [Isa 10:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005).md);
thus he employed Cyrus to "execute his counsel" [Isa
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#010.md); and thus he made use of the
wrath evinced in persecuting the church to secure its permanent
establishment in the world. Whether these things could be accomplished
"without" that wrath, is a question which is too high for man to
determine. It is certain, also, that the fact that God overrules the
wrath of people does not justify that wrath. The purposes of people are,
like the pestilence and the storm, what they are in themselves; and the
nature of their conduct is not affected by any use that God may make of
it. People must be judged according to their own deeds, not for what God
does through their wickedness.

The remainder of wrath - The word "remainder" here - שׁארית she'êrı̂yth -
means properly "part;" what remains, especially after a defeat or
slaughter - the "survivors" of a battle, [Jer
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#023.md); [Jer
44:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#014.md); [Mic
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#018.md); [Zep
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#007.md). Gesenius renders it here
(Lexicon) "extreme wrath," retained even in extremity. The Septuagint,
ἐγκατάλειμμα engkataleimma - "the things which are left." So the
Vulgate, "reliquice." Luther, "When men rage against thee, thou turnest
it to honor; and when they rage yet more, thou art yet prepared." Venema
supposes that the meaning is the whole wrath. As in Arabic the word used
here means "wholeness," or the whole of anything; and according to this,
the idea would be that it was not merely wrath in general, or in a
general sense, that would be made use of, but all that there was in
wrath; it would all be made use of in advancing the divine purposes. The
allusion seems to be to something that had been laid up in a magazine -
as provision or arms, when the soldier went forth to war - which he
would make use of if necessary, so that "all" might be ultimately
consumed or employed. The control of God was over "this" as well as over
that which was actually employed; he could overrule that which was
employed. He could restrain people from at all using this that was kept
in reserve. The idea seems to be that all the "wrath" which is
"manifested" among people would be made to praise God, or would be
overruled for his glory - and "all" which would "not" contribute to this
end he would keep back, he would check; he would prevent its being put
forth - so that "all" should be under his control, and "all" disposed of
as he should will. There was nothing in the heart or the purposes of man
that was beyond his jurisdiction or control; man could do nothing in his
wrathful plans that God could not dispose of in his own way, and for his
own honor.

Shalt thou restrain - The word used here - חגר châgar - means literally
to bind around; to gird; to gird up, as of a garment or sword that is
girded on, [Sa1 17:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#039.md); [Sa1
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#013.md); [Psa
45:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003.md); or sackcloth, [Isa
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#003.md); [Jer
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#003.md). The Septuagint renders this,
"and the remainder of wrath shall make a feast to thee," ἐορτάσει σοί
heortasei soi - that is, it shall praise or honor thee as in a festival.
So the Vulgate. Prof. Alexander renders it, "Shalt thou gird about
thee;" that is, God would gird it on as a sword, and would make use of
it as a weapon for executing his own purposes. So DeWette, "And with the
last wrath thou shalt gird thyself." Others render it, "Thou restrainest
the remainder of thy wrath" - that is, punishment - "when the wrath of
man will not promote the knowledge of thyself" It seems to me, however,
that our translators have expressed the exact idea in the psalm; and the
meaning is, that the whole of the wrath of man is under the control of
God, and that whatever there is, or would be, in the manifestation of
that wrath, or in carrying out the purposes of the heart, which could
not, in the circumstances, be made to promote his glory, or which would
do injury, he would check and restrain. He would suffer it to proceed no
further than he chose, and would make it certain that there should be no
exhibition of wrathful feelings on the part of man which would not, in
some way, be made to promote his honor, and to advance his own great
purposes. He has absolute control over the passions of people, as he has
over the pestilence, over earthquakes, and over storms, and can make all
tributary to his glory, and executioners of his will.

[Psalms 76:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 76:11</span></span>

vow, and pay unto the Lord your God - That is, Pay your vows, or
sacredly observe them. On the word "vow," see the notes at [Psa
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#025.md). Compare [Psa
50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014.md); [Psa
56:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#012.md); [Psa
66:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013.md). The word refers to a voluntary
promise made to God.

Let all that be round about him - All that worship him, or that profess
to honor him.

Bring presents - Bring gifts or offerings; things expressive of
gratitude and homage. See the notes at [Psa
45:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012.md). Compare [Isa
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001.md), note; [Isa
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#007.md), note; [Isa
60:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#005.md), note.

Unto him that ought to be feared - Margin, "to fear." The meaning would
be well expressed by the word dread; "to the Dread One." It was not to
inspire fear that the presents were to be brought; but they were to be
brought to One who had shown that he was the proper object of dread or
reverence.

[Psalms 76:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 76:12</span></span>

He shall cut off the spirit of princes - That is, He will cut down their
pride; he will break them down. Luther renders it, "He shall take away
the wrath of princes." The allusion is to what he had done as celebrated
in this psalm. He had shown that he could rebuke the pride and
self-confidence of kings, and could bring them low at his feet.

He is terrible to the kings of the earth - When they are arrayed against
him.

\(1\) they are wholly under his control.

\(2\) he can defeat their plans.

\(3\) he can check them when he pleases.

\(4\) he can, and will, make their plans - even their wrath - the means
of promoting or carrying out his own purposes.

\(5\) he will allow them to proceed no further in their plans of evil
than he can make subservient to the furtherance of his own.

\(6\) he can cut down the most mighty of them at his pleasure, and
destroy them forever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 77](psa077.md)

</div>
