<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa058)  [Next](psa060) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 59](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 59:0</span></span>

The general title to this psalm is the same as in the two preceding
psalms. That it was written by David, as is affirmed in the title, there
is every reason to believe. The "occasion" on which it is said to have
been composed was "when Saul sent, and they watched the house to kill
him." This incident is related in [Sa1
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#011) : "Saul also sent messengers
unto David's house to watch him, and to slay him in the morning." There
is nothing in the psalm inconsistent with this statement in regard to
the time and the occasion of its composition, unless it is in the word
"heathen" - גוים gôyim - twice used [Psa
59:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#005), [Psa
59:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#008) - a term, which (DeWette
maintains) belongs properly to people of a foreign nation, and a foreign
religion. It is true, however, that while the word originally had this
meaning, it came to be used to denote any people or persons who had the
general character and spirit which was supposed to distinguish nations
without the knowledge of the true God; those who were cruel, harsh,
unfeeling, oppressive, savage. [Psa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001), [Psa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008); [Psa
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#005), [Psa
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015), [Psa
9:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#019); [Psa
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#016); [Psa
79:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#006), [Psa
79:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#010); [Psa
106:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#047), et al. In this sense it might
be used here, without impropriety, as applicable to the enemies of
David.

At what precise "time" the psalm was composed, it is, of course,
impossible now to ascertain. All that is determined by the title is that
it was on that occasion, or with reference to that event; but whether it
was at the very time when those enemies were known to be watching the
house, or whether it was in view of that scene as recollected afterward,
recalling the feelings which then passed through his mind, cannot now be
determined with certainty. That David was aware that his enemies were
thus watching him is apparent from [Sa1
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#011); that such thoughts as are
recorded in the psalm passed through his mind in that time of danger is
not improbable, but it can hardly be supposed that such an occasion
would allow of the leisure necessary to express them in the form in
which we now have them in the psalm. The probability, therefore, seems
to be, that the psalm is a subsequent composition, recording the
thoughts which then actually passed through his mind.

The psalm has no very regular order. The mind passes from one thing to
another - now uttering fervent prayer; now describing the enemy - his
character and plans; and now expressing the confident hope of
deliverance, and the purpose to praise God. Indeed the very structure of
the psalm seems to me to furnish evidence that it describes feelings
which "would" pass through the mind on such an occasion. Thus we have in
[Psa 59:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#001), [Psa
59:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#005),[Psa
59:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#011), "prayer" for deliverance; in
[Psa 59:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#003), [Psa
59:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#006),[Psa
59:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#012), intermingled with these
prayers, a description of the character and designs of these enemies;
and in [Psa 59:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#008), [Psa
59:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#016), an expression of confident
hope - a purpose to praise God, for deliverance and mercy. All this is
indicative of such feelings as "might," and probably "would," pass
through the mind in such a time of peril as that referred to in the
title.

On the different phrases in the title, see Introductions to Psalms 4;
47; 16.

[Psalms 59:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 59:1</span></span>

Deliver me from mine enemies, O my God - See the notes at [Psa
18:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#048). This prayer was offered when
the spies sent by Saul surrounded the house of David. They had come to
apprehend him, and it is to be presumed that they had come in sufficient
numbers, and with sufficient power, to effect their object. Their
purpose was not to break in upon him in the night, but to watch their
opportunity, when he went forth in the morning, to slay him [Sa1
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#011), and there seemed no way for him
to escape. Of their coming, and of their design, Michal, the daughter of
Saul, and the wife of David, seems to have been apprised - perhaps by
someone of her father's family. She informed David of the arrangement,
and assured him that unless he should escape in the night, he would be
put to death in the morning. She, therefore, let him down through a
window, and he escaped, [Sa1 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#012). It
was in this way that he was in fact delivered; in this way that his
prayer was answered. A faithful wife saved him.

Defend me from them that rise up against me - Margin, as in Hebrew, "Set
me on high." The idea is that of placing him, as it were, on a tower, or
on an eminence which would be inaccessible. These were common places of
refuge or defense. See the notes at [Psa
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002).

[Psalms 59:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 59:2</span></span>

Deliver me from the workers of iniquity - The workers of iniquity here
referred to were Saul and those whom he employed to carry out his
murderous purpose - the people that had been sent to slay him.

And save me from bloody men - Hebrew, "Men of bloods;" that is, men
whose trade is blood; who seek to shed my blood, or who seek my life.
See [Psa 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#006), note; [Psa
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009), note; [Psa
55:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023), note.

[Psalms 59:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 59:3</span></span>

For, lo, they lie in wait for my soul - They lie in wait as wild beasts
do for their prey, ready to spring upon it. The word used here is often
employed to denote the act of lying in ambush; of watching in secret
places to spring upon a victim: [Jdg
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#032); [Jdg
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#020); [Psa
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#009). The word "soul" here means
"life." They lie in ambush that they may kill me.

The mighty are gathered against me - Strong men; hostile men; cruel men.
Saul would employ on this occasion not the weak, the cowardly, the
faint-hearted, but men of courage and strength; men who were
unscrupulous in their character; men who would not be likely to be moved
by entreaty, or turned from their purpose by compassion. It is not mere
"strength" that is here referred to, but that kind of strength or
courage which can be employed in a desperate enterprise, and which is
suited to accomplish any scheme of wickedness, however daring or
difficult.

Not for my transgression, nor for my sin - This is done not on account
of my violating the laws of the land, nor because it is alleged that I
am a sinner against God. David was conscious that he did not deserve
this treatment from the hand of man. He bad been guilty of no wrong
against Saul that exposed him to just punishment. He carried with him
the consciousness of innocence as to any crime that could have made this
treatment proper; and he felt that it was all the result of unjust
suspicions. It was not improper for him to refer to this in his prayer;
for, however he might feel that he was a sinner in the sight of God, yet
he felt that a great and grievous wrong was done him by man; and he
prayed, therefore, that a righteous God would interpose. See [Psa
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#008), note; [Psa
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#002), note; [Psa
35:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#024), note; [Psa
43:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#001), note.

[Psalms 59:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 59:4</span></span>

They run and prepare themselves - That is, they "hasten" to accomplish
this; they are quick to obey the command of Saul requiring them to slay
me. The word "prepare" refers to whatever was deemed necessary to enable
them to accomplish what they had been commanded to do - arming
themselves, making provision for their journey, etc.

Without my fault - That is, without anything on my part to deserve this,
or to justify Saul and those employed by him in what they attempt to do.
David, in all this, was conscious of innocence. In his own feelings
toward Saul, and in all his public acts, he knew that he had sought only
the king's welfare, and that he had been obedient to the laws.

Awake to help me - That is, "arouse," as one does from sleep. See the
notes at [Psa 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#006). Compare [Psa
35:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#023). The word rendered "to help me,"
is rendered in the margin, "to meet me." This is the meaning of the
Hebrew. It is a prayer that God would meet him, or come to him, and aid
him.

[Psalms 59:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 59:5</span></span>

Thou therefore, O Lord God of hosts - God of armies: commanding all the
armies of heaven - the angels, and the stars and constellations drawn
out in the form of armies; thou, thus endowed with all power, and able
to subdue all people though arrayed and combined for purposes of evil -
awake to my help. On the meaning of the phrase "God of hosts," see the
notes at [Isa 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009).

The God of Israel - The God of the Hebrew people - the descendants of
Jacob or Israel - the Protector of thy people - awake to help me, one of
those who, being of that covenant people, come under the promise of
protection.

Awake to visit all the heathen - On the word here rendered "heathen" -
גוים gôyim - see the notes at [Psa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001). It is from the use of this word
in this verse and in [Psa 59:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#008), as
remarked in the Introduction to the psalm, that DeWette infers that the
psalm could not have been composed on the occasion referred to in the
title, and argues, that this term could not be applied by David to Saul
and his followers. This objection, however, will lose its force if the
word is understood as denoting people who had the usual character of
pagans, who were fierce, bloody, savage, cruel. In this sense the word
might be employed with reference to those who were engaged in seeking
the life of David. David, using the common word "heathen" or "nations,"
as denoting those who are wicked, cruel, harsh, prays that God would
awake to visit them; that is, to visit them for purposes of punishment,
or so to visit them as to prevent their carrying out their designs.

Be not merciful to any tricked transgressors - That is, Arrest and
punish them "as" transgressors, or "being" transgressors. This prayer is
not inconsistent with a desire that such people might be converted, and
"thus" obtain mercy; but it is a prayer that God would not suffer them,
being wicked people, to go at large and accomplish the work of
wickedness which they designed. See General Introduction Section 6. (5)
(e).

Selah - A musical pause. See the notes at [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002).

[Psalms 59:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 59:6</span></span>

They return at evening - Many have rendered this in the imperative, as
in [Psa 59:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#014), "Let them return at
evening," etc. So Luther renders it, and so also DeWette. But the more
natural and obvious interpretation is to render it in the indicative, as
describing the manner in which his enemies came upon him - like dogs
seeking their prey; fierce mastiffs, howling and ready to spring upon
him. From the phrase "they return at evening," thus explained, it would
seem probable that they watched their opportunity, or lay in wait, to
secure their object; that having failed at first, they drew off again
until evening, perhaps continuing thus for several days unable to
accomplish their object.

They make a noise like a dog - So savages, after lurking stealthily all
day, raise the war-whoop at night, and come upon their victims. It is
possible that an assault of this kind "had" been attempted; or, more
probably, it is a description of the manner in which they "would" make
their assault, and of the spirit with which it would be done.

And go round about the city - The word "city" is used in a large sense
in the Scriptures, and is often applied to places that we should now
describe as "villages." Any town within the limits of which David was
lodged, would answer to this term.

[Psalms 59:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 59:7</span></span>

Behold, they belch out with their mouth - The word rendered "belch out"
means properly to boil forth; to gush out, to flow; and then, to pour
forth copiously, or in a running stream, as a fountain does. Hence, the
word means also to pour out "words" - words that flow freely - words of
folly, abuse, or reproach. [Pro 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#002),
"the mouth of fools poureth out (Margin, belcheth or babbleth)
foolishness." [Pro 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#028), "the mouth
of the wicked poureth out evil things;" that is, "gushes over" with
wicked things - as a fountain overflows. In this place, the word means
that the enemies of David who were in pursuit of his life, poured out
reproaches and threatenings like a gushing fountain.

Swords are in their lips - Their words are as sharp swords. See the
notes at [Psa 57:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004).

For who, say they, doth hear? - That is, no one hears who will be able
to punish us. They dread no man; and they have no fear of God. Compare
the notes at [Psa 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#011). The words
"say they" are, however, supplied here by the translators, and are not
in the original; and the language "may" be understood as that of David
himself, "as if" no one heard; that is, It is no wonder that they thus
pour out words of reproach, for who "is" there to hear and to punish
them? The former interpretation, however, is to be preferred. The
language expresses the feelings of the enemies of David, who indulged
freely in language of abuse and reproach "as if" there were none to
hear.

[Psalms 59:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 59:8</span></span>

But thou, O Lord, shalt laugh at them - That is, God will hear them, and
will have all their efforts in derision, or will treat them with
contempt. See [Psa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004), note; [Psa
37:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#013), note.

Thou shalt have all the heathen in derision - All those referred to in
this psalm - the enemies of David - who have the character, and who
manifest the spirit of the pagan; that is, of those who are not actuated
by true religion. See the notes at [Psa
59:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#005). This verse expresses the strong
conviction of David, that all the efforts of his enemies would be vain;
that God "would be" his Protector; and that he would save him from their
evil designs.

[Psalms 59:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 59:9</span></span>

Because of his strength will I wait upon thee - literally, "His strength
- I will wait upon thee." The reference here is not to the strength or
power of God, as if the fact that "He" was powerful was a reason why the
psalmist should look to him - but it is to the strength or power of the
enemy - of Saul and his followers. There is much abruptness in the
expression. The psalmist looks at the power of his enemy. "'His
strength,' he cries. It is great. It is beyond my power to resist it. It
is so great that I have no other refuge but God; and because it is so
great, I will fix my eyes on him alone." The word rendered "wait upon"
means rather to look to; to observe; to fix the eyes upon.

For God is my defense - Margin, "My high place." That is, God was to him
"as" a high place, or a place of refuge; a place where he would be safe.
See the notes at [Psa 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002).

[Psalms 59:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 59:10</span></span>

The God of my mercy shall prevent me - Or rather, "My God - his mercy
shall prevent me." This is in accordance with the present reading of the
Hebrew text, and is probably correct. The psalmist looks to God as his
God, and then the feeling at once springs up that his mercy - favor -
his loving-kindness - "would" "prevent" him. On the word "prevent" see
the notes at [Psa 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#003); compare [Psa
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#013); [Psa
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#005). The meaning here is, that God
would "go before him," or would "anticipate" his necessities.

God shall let me see my desire upon mine enemies - That is, He will let
me see them discomfited, and disappointed in their plans. This is
equivalent to saying that God would give him the victory, or would not
suffer them to triumph over him. See the notes at [Psa
54:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#007).

[Psalms 59:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 59:11</span></span>

Slay them not, lest my people forget - The meaning of this seems to be,
Do not destroy them at once, lest, being removed out of the way, the
people should forget what was done, or should lose the impression which
it is desirable should be produced by their punishment. Let them live,
and let them wander about, as exiles under the divine displeasure, that
they may be permanent and enduring proofs of the justice of God; of the
evil of sin; of the danger of violating the divine law. So Cain wandered
on the earth [Gen 4:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#012), a living
proof of that justice which avenges murder; and so the Jews still
wander, a lasting illustration of the justice which followed their
rejection of the Messiah. The prayer of the psalmist, therefore, is that
the fullest expression might be given to the divine sense of the wrong
which his enemies had done, that the salutary lesson might not be soon
forgotten, but might be permanent and enduring.

Scatter them by thy, power - Break up their combinations, and let them
go abroad as separate wanderers, proclaiming everywhere, by being thus
vagabonds on the earth, the justice of God.

And bring them down - Humble them. Show them their weakness. Show them
that they have not power to contend against God.

O Lord our shield - See [Psa 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#012),
note; [Psa 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#020), note. The words
"our" here, and "my" in the former part of the verse, are designed to
show that the author of the psalm regarded God as "his" God, and the
people of the land as "his," in the sense that he was identified with
them, and felt that his cause was really that of the people.

[Psalms 59:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 59:12</span></span>

For the sin of their mouth ... - That is, in belching out words of
reproach and malice, [Psa 59:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#007).

Let them even be taken in their pride - In the very midst of their
schemes, or while confidently relying on the success of their plans.
Even while their hearts are elated, and they are sure of success, let
them be arrested, and let their plans be foiled.

And for cursing and lying which they speak - That is, on account of the
false charges which they have brought against me, and of their bitter
imprecations on me. The allusion is to the accusations brought against
David, and which were believed by Saul, and which were the foundation of
the efforts made by Saul to take his life.

[Psalms 59:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 59:13</span></span>

Consume them in wrath - Or, in thy justice. The idea in the word
"consume" here is to finish; to complete; to bring to an end. It does
not mean to "burn" them as our word might seem to imply, nor is there
any reference to the "mode" or "manner" in which their power was to be
brought to an end. It is merely a prayer that all their plans might be
frustrated; that there might be an entire completion of their attempts;
or that they might be in no sense successful.

Consume them - The expression is repeated for the sake of emphasis,
implying a desire that the work might be "complete."

That they may not be - That things might be as if they were not in the
land of the living.

And let them know - Those who are now plotting my death.

That God ruleth in Jacob - That God rules among his people, protecting
them and guarding them from the attacks of their enemies; that he is
their friend, and that he is the enemy of all those who seek to injure
and destroy them.

Unto the ends of the earth - Everywhere. All over the world. Let it be
shown that the same principles of government prevail wherever man abides
or wanders - that God manifests himself everywhere as the friend of
right, and the enemy of wrong. The phrase "the ends of the earth," is in
accordance with the prevailing conception that the earth was an extended
plane, and that it had limits or boundaries. Compare the notes at [Isa
40:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022), notes at [Isa
40:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#028).

[Psalms 59:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 59:14</span></span>

And at evening let them return - See the notes at [Psa
59:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#006). The original here is the same as
in [Psa 59:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#006), with the exception of
the word "and" at the beginning. This qualifies the sentence, and makes
the construction in our version proper. The language is that of
confident triumph. They came around the city to take David; they shouted
and shrieked as dogs bark and howl when they come upon their prey. David
asked God to interpose and save him; and then, says he, let them come if
they will, and howl around the city; they will find no prey; they will
be like hungry dogs from whom their anticipated victim has escaped. Let
them come, and howl and rage. They can do no harm. They will meet with
disappointment; and such disappointment will be a proper punishment for
their sins.

[Psalms 59:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 59:15</span></span>

Let them wander up and down for meat - Let them be like dogs that wander
about for food, and find none. The idea is, that they would not find
him, and would be then as dogs that had sought in vain for food.

And grudge if they be not satisfied - Margin, If they be not satisfied,
then they will stay all night. The marginal reading is most in
accordance with the Hebrew. The sentence is obscure, but the idea seems
to be that they would not be satisfied - that is, they would not obtain
that which they had sought; and, like hungry and disappointed dogs, they
would be compelled to pass the night in this miserable and wretched
condition. The word which our translators have rendered "grudge" - from
לוּן lûn - means properly to pass the night; then, to abide, to remain,
to dwell; and then, in Hiphil, to show oneself obstinate and stubborn -
from the idea of remaining or persisting in a bad cause; and hence, the
word sometimes means to complain: [Num
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#029); [Exo
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#003). It has not, however, the
signification of grudging, though it might mean here to murmur or
complain because they were disappointed. But the most natural meaning is
that which the word properly bears - that of passing the night, as
referring to their wandering about, disappointed in their object, and
yet still hoping that they might possibly obtain it. The anticipated
feeling in the mind of the psalmist is that which he would have in the
consciousness of his own safety, and in the pleasure of knowing that
they must sooner or later find out that their victim had escaped.

[Psalms 59:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 59:16</span></span>

But I will sing of thy power - That is, I will praise thee for the
manifestation of thy power in rescuing me from danger.

Yea, I will sing aloud of thy mercy in the morning - When the light
dawns; when these troubles are over; when the night of calamity shall
have passed by. There is an allusion here, probably, to the fact that
they encompassed the place of his abode at night [Psa
59:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#006), [Psa
59:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#014); but there is also the implied
idea that that night was emblematic of sorrow and distress. The morning
would come; morning after such a night of sorrow and trouble; a morning
of joy and gladness, when he would feel that he had complete
deliverance. Then would he praise God aloud. Compare the notes at [Isa
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#012).

For thou hast been my defense and refuge in the day of my trouble - That
is, he looked to the time when he would feel this; when looking back he
could say this; when in view of it he would praise God.

[Psalms 59:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 59:17</span></span>

Unto thee, O my strength, will I sing - The source of strength to me;
the real strength by which I have obtained deliverance is in thee. See
the notes at [Psa 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#001).

For God is my defense - See the notes at [Psa
59:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#009).

And the God of my mercy - The God who has showed mercy to me; he from
whom all these favors have sprung. Whatever means might be used to
secure his own safety (compare [Sa1
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#012) ff) still he felt that his
deliverance was to be traced wholly to God. He had interposed and had
saved him; and it was proper, therefore, that praise should be ascribed
to him. The experience of David in the case referred to in this psalm
should be an inducement to all who are in danger to put their trust in
God; his anticipated feelings of gratitude, and his purpose to praise
God when he should be delivered, should awaken in us the resolution to
ascribe to God all the praise when we are delivered from impending
troubles, and when our lives are lengthened out where we have been in
imminent danger. Whatever may have been the means of our rescue, it is
to be traced to the interposition of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 60](psa060)

</div>
