<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa140)  [Next](psa142) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 141](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 141:0</span></span>

This, also, is a psalm of David, and apparently composed under
circumstances similar to the former. It is impossible, however, to
determine the precise time at which it was written, or the exact
circumstances of the psalmist at the time.

The circumstances, as far as they can be gathered from the psalm, are
these:

\(1\) He was in a situation of peril; so much so as to have almost no
hope for himself or his followers. Snares and gins were laid for him
[Psa 141:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#009), and his followers and
friends were scattered and dispirited, as if their bones were scattered
at the grave's mouth, [Psa 141:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#007).
Everything looked dark and discouraging.

\(2\) in these circumstances it occurred to his mind, or was suggested
to him, to say or do something which, not honorable or right in itself,
might have brought relief, or which might have rescued him from his
peril, and secured the favor of his enemies; some trick - some artful
scheme - some concession of principle - which would have delivered him
from his danger, and which would have secured for him a position of
safety, plenty, and honor, [Psa
141:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#003). Many considerations, derived
from his danger, might have been suggested for this, even by those who
were not bad people, but who might have been timid men, and who might
have felt that their cause was hopeless, and that it would be proper to
avail themselves of this opportunity to escape from their peril in any
way.

\(3\) David knew that to resist this - to abstain from following this
apparently wise and prudent counsel - to refuse to do what the
circumstances might seem to others to justify - would expose him to the
rebukes of sincere and honest people who thought that this would be
right. Yet knowing all this, he resolved to hear their reproach rather
than to follow such advice by doing a wrong thing. He says [Psa
141:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#005), that though they should smite
him, it would (he knew) be in kindness, with the best intention; though
they should reprove him, it would be like a "gentle oil" - it would not
break his head or crush him. He would cherish no resentment; he would
still pray for them as usual in the time of their calamities, [Psa
141:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#005). Even when the "judges," the
rulers - his enemies - should be overthrown, as they might be, he would
take no advantage of that circumstance; he would not seek for revenge;
his words should be "sweet" kind words still, [Psa
141:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#006).

\(4\) David prays, therefore, in view of this temptation, and of the
counsel suggested to him, that he might be able to set a watchful guard
over his own lips, and to keep his heart, that he might not be betrayed
into anything which would be dishonorable or wicked; that he might not
be allured to that which was wrong by any prospect of temporal advantage
which might follow. [Psa 141:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#001).

\(5\) as the result of all, he put his trust in God, that he might be
enabled to pursue an upright course; and that, in such a course, he
might be preserved from the snares which had been laid for him, [Psa
141:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#008).

Perhaps what is here said in illustration of the design of the psalm
will best agree with the supposition that it refers to the time
mentioned in [Sa1 24:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#001). Saul was
then in his power. He could easily have put him to death. His friends
advised it. The "suggestion" was a natural one; it would seem to many to
be a justifiable measure. But he resisted the temptation, trusting in
the Lord to deliver him, without his resorting to a measure which could
not but have been regretted ever afterward.

The practical truth which would be illustrated by this view of the psalm
would be, "that we are not to say or do anything that is wrong, though
good people, our friends, advise it; though it should subject us to
their reproaches if we do it not; though to do it would be followed by
great personal advantages; and though not to do it would leave us still
in danger - a danger from which the course advised would have delivered
us. It is better to act nobly, honorably, and in a high-minded manner,
and to leave the result with God, still trusting in him."

[Psalms 141:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 141:1</span></span>

Lord, I cry unto thee - In view of my perils; in view of the suggestions
of my friends; in view of my temptation to do a wrong thing at their
advice, and with the prospect of the advantage which it might seem to be
to me.

Make haste unto me - To save me from all this danger: the danger from my
enemies; the danger from the counsels of my friends. See the notes at
[Psa 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#019); compare [Psa
40:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#013); [Psa
70:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa070.htm#001), [Psa
70:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa070.htm#005); [Psa
71:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#012). The meaning is, that there is
need of immediate interposition. There is danger that I shall be
overcome; that I may be tempted to do a wrong thing; that I may be
ruined if there is any delay.

Give ear unto my voice ... - See the notes at [Psa
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#001).

[Psalms 141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 141:2</span></span>

Let my prayer be set forth before thee - Margin, "directed." The Hebrew
word means to fit; to establish; to make firm. The psalmist desires that
his prayer should not be like that which is feeble, languishing, easily
dissipated, but that it should be like that which is firm and secure.

As incense - See the notes and illustrations at [Luk
1:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#009). Let my prayer come before thee
in such a manner as incense does when it is offered in worship; in a
manner of which the ascending of incense is a suitable emblem. See the
notes at [Rev 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008); notes at [Rev
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003).

And the lifting up of my hands - In prayer; a natural posture in that
act of worship.

As the evening sacrifice - The sacrifice offered on the altar at
evening. Let my prayer be as acceptable as that is when it is offered in
a proper manner.

[Psalms 141:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 141:3</span></span>

Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth - That I may not say anything
rashly, unadvisedly, improperly. Compare [Psa
39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001). The prayer here is, that God
would guard him from the temptation to say something wrong. To this he
seems to have been prompted by the circumstances of the case, and by the
advice of those who were with him. See introduction to the psalm.
Compare the notes at [Psa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001).

Keep the door of my lips - That my lips or mouth may not open except
when it is proper and right; when something good and true is to be said.
Nothing can be more proper than "this" prayer; nothing more desirable
than that God should keep us from saying what we ought not to say.

[Psalms 141:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 141:4</span></span>

Incline not my heart to any evil thing - Hebrew, to a word that is evil;
that is, wrong. The connection seems to demand that the term should be
thus explained. The expression "Incline not" is not designed to mean
that God exerts any "positive" influence in leading the heart to that
which is wrong; but it may mean "Do not place me in circumstances where
I may be tempted; do not leave me to myself; do not allow any improper
influence to come over me by which I shall be led astray." The
expression is similar to that in the Lord's Prayer: "Lead us not into
temptation." The psalmist's allusion here has been explained in the
introduction to the psalm.

To practice wicked works with people that work iniquity - To be united
or associated with people who do wrong; to do the things which wicked
and unprincipled people do. Let me not be permitted to do anything that
will be regarded as identifying me with them. Let me not, in the
circumstances in which I am placed, be left to act so that the fair
interpretation of my conduct shall be that I am one of their number, or
act on the same principles on which they act. Literally, "To practice
practices in wickedness with people."

And let me not eat of their dainties - Let me not be tempted by any
prospect of participating in their mode of living - in the luxuries and
comforts which they enjoy - to do a wicked or wrong thing. Let not a
prospect or desire of this overcome my better judgment, or the dictates
of my conscience, or my settled principles of what is right. People
often do this. Good people are often tempted to do it. The prospect or
the hope of being enabled to enjoy what the rich enjoy, to live in
luxury and ease, to be "clothed in short linen and fare sumptuously
every day," to move in circles of splendor and fashion, often leads them
to a course of action which their consciences condemn; to practices
inconsistent with a life of godliness; to sinful indulgences which
utterly ruin their character. Satan has few temptations for man more
attractive and powerful than the "dainties" which wealth can give; and
there are few of his devices more effectual in ruining people than those
which are derived from these allurements. The word here rendered
dainties properly refers to things which are pleasant, lovely,
attractive; which give delight or pleasure. It may embrace "all" that
the world has to offer as suited to give pleasure or enjoyment. It
refers here to what those in more elevated life have to offer; what they
themselves live for.

[Psalms 141:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 141:5</span></span>

Let the righteous smite me - This verse is exceedingly difficult and
obscure (compare the margin); and there have been almost as many
different opinions in regard to its meaning as there have been
commentators on the psalm. A large number of these opinions may be seen
in Rosenmuller in loc. DeWette explains it, "I gladly suffer anything
that is unpleasant from my friends, that may be for my good; but the
wickedness of my enemies I cannot endure." The Septuagint and Latin
Vulgate render it, "Let a righteous man correct me with mercy, and he
will work convictions in me; but let not the oil of a sinner (for this
shall still be my prayer) anoint my head at their pleasure." "Thompson's
translation." According to this, the sense would be, "If the righteous
smite me with severity of words I shall take it as an act of kindness
and benevolence; on the other hand, the bland words of a sinner, smooth
as oil, which wound more than sharp arrows, may God avert from me."

Or, in other words, "I had rather be slain by the severe words of the
righteous than anointed by the oily and impious words of the wicked."
The sense proposed by Hengstenberg (Com. in loc.) is, "Even as I through
the cloud of wrath can see the sunshine of divine goodness, I will not
give myself over to doubt and despair, according to the course of the
world, when the hand of the Almighty rests upon me; but I will, and can,
and should, in the midst of trouble, be joyful, and that is the high
privilege of which I will never be deprived." According to this, the
idea is, that the sufferings endured by good people, even at the hand of
the wicked, are chastisements inflicted by a gracious God in justice and
mercy, and as such may be likened to a festive ointment, which the head
of the sufferer should not refuse, as he will still have occasion for
consolation to invoke God in the midst of trials yet to be experienced.

The word "righteous" is evidently employed in the usual sense of the
term. It refers to those who love and serve God. The word translated
"smite" - חלם châlam - is rendered broken in [Jdg
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#022); [Isa
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#008); [Isa
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001) ("margin," but rendered by our
translators "overcome," sc. with wine); "smote," [Jdg
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#026); [Isa
41:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#007); "beaten," [Pro
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#035); "beating down," [Sa1
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#016); "break down," [Psa
74:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#006). It does not elsewhere occur,
except in the verse before us. It would apply to any beating or smiting,
with the fist, with a hammer, with a weapon of war, and then with
"words" - words of reproof, or expressions of disapprobation. According
to the view above taken (Introduction), it is used here with reference
to an apprehended rebuke on the part of good people, for not following
their advice.

It shall be a kindness - literally, "A kindness;" that is, an act of
kindness. The idea is, that it would be so intended on their part; it
should be so received by him. Whatever might be the wisdom of the
advice, or the propriety of yielding to it, or whatever they might say
if it were not followed, yet he could regard it as on their part only
well-intended. If a certain course which they had advised should be
rejected, and if by refusing or declining to follow it one should incur
their displeasure, yet that ought to be interpreted only as an act
well-intended and meant in kindness.

And let him reprove me - As I may anticipate that he will, if his advice
is not taken. I must expect to meet this consequence.

It shall be an excellent oil - literally, "Oil of the head." That is -
like oil which is poured on the head on festive occasions, or when one
is crowned, as a priest, or a prophet, or a king. See the notes at [Mar
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#013); notes at [Luk
4:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#018). Oil thus used for the head,
the face, etc., was an indispensable article for the toilet among
Orientals. The idea is here that the reproof of the righteous should be
received as readily as that which contributed most to comely adorning
and comfort; or that which diffused brightness, cheerfulness, joy.

Which shall not break my head - Or rather, Which my head shall not (or,
should not) refuse; which it should welcome. The word rendered break
should not have been so translated. The Hebrew word - הניא hāniy', is
from נוא nû' - in Hiphil, to negative; to make naught; then to refuse,
to decline, to deny. It is rendered "discourage" in [Num
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#007), [Num
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#009) (Margin, "break"); "disallow,"
[Num 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#005) ("twice"), [Num
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#008), [Num
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#011); "make of none effect," [Psa
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#010); "break," in the passage before
us. It does not elsewhere occur. The idea is, "If such reproof comes on
me for the faithful doing of what I regard as wise and best, I ought no
more to reject it than the head would refuse the oil poured on it, to
make the person healthful and comely."

For yet my prayer also shall be in their calamities - I will not be
sullen, displeased, angry, revengeful. I will not refuse to pray for
them when trials come upon them, because they have not approved of my
course, because they have reproved me for not following their counsel,
because they have used words that were like heavy blows. I will cherish
no malice; I will not be angry; I will not seek to be revenged. I will
not turn away from them when trouble comes on them. I will love them,
cherish with gratitude the memory of the kindness they meant, and pray
for them in the time when they especially need prayer. Should they now
rebuke me rather than pray for me, yet I will not in turn "rebuke" them
in similar trials, but "will pray for them," as though nothing of this
had happened. Noble spirit - indicative of what should always be the
spirit of a good man. Our friends - even our pious friends - may not be
always "wise" in their advice, and they may be severe in their reproofs
if we do not follow their counsel; yet let us receive all as
well-intended, and let us not in anger, in sullenness, or in revenge,
refuse to aid them, and to pray for them in trouble, though they were
"not" wise, and though they used words of severity toward us.

[Psalms 141:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 141:6</span></span>

When ... - This passage is no less difficult than the preceding, and it
seems almost impossible to determine its exact meaning. What is meant by
"judges"? What judges are referred to by the word "their"? What is meant
by their being "overthrown"? What is the sense of the words "in stony
places"? Does the passage refer to some certain prospect that they
"would be" overthrown, or is it a mere supposition which relates to
something that "might" occur? Who are meant by "they," in the phrase
"they shall hear my words?" It seems to me that the most plausible
interpretation of the passage is founded on that which has been assumed
thus far in the explanation of the psalm, as referring to the state of
things recorded in [Sa1 24:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#001). David
was in the wilderness of En-gedi, in the midst of a rocky region. Saul,
apprised of his being there, came with three thousand chosen men to
apprehend him, and went into a cave to lie down to rest. Unknown,
probably, to him, David and his men were in the "sides of the cave."
They now saw that Saul was completely in their power, and that it would
be an easy thing to enter the cave, and kill him when off his guard. The
men urgently advised David to do this. David entered the cave, and cut
off the skirt of Saul's robe, showing how completely Saul was in his
power, but he proceeded no further; he did not follow the suggestions of
his friends; he did not take the life of Saul, as he might have done;
and he even regretted what he had done, as implying a want of due
respect for the anointed of the Lord, [Sa1
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#011). Yet he had the fullest
confidence that the king and his forces would be overthrown, and that it
would be done in a way consistent with open and manly war, and not in an
underhanded and stealthful way, as it would have been if he had cut him
off in the cave. With this in view, it seems to me that the difficult
passage before us may be explained with, at least, some degree of
plausibility.

Their judges - By the judges, are to be understood the rulers of the
people; the magistrates; those in office and power - referring to Saul
and the officers of his government. "Their judges;" to wit, the judges
or rulers of the hosts in opposition to me - of those against whom I
war; Saul and the leaders of his forces.

Are overthrown - Are discomfited, vanquished, subdued; as I am confident
they will be, in the regular prosecution of the war, and not by
treachery and stealth.

In stony places - literally, "in the hands of the rock;" or, as the word
"hands" may sometimes be used, "in the sides of the rock." It might mean
"by the power of the rock," as thrown upon them; or, "against its
sides." The essential idea is, that the "rocks," the rocky places, would
be among the means by which they would be overthrown; and the sense is,
that now that Saul was in the cave - or was in that rocky region, better
known to David than to him - Saul was so completely in his power, that
David felt that the victory, in a regular course of warfare, would be
his.

They shall hear my words - The followers of Saul; the people of the
land; the nation. Saul being removed - subdued - slain - the people will
become obedient to me who have been anointed by a prophet as their king,
and designated as the successor of Saul. David did not doubt that he
would himself reign when Saul was overcome, or that the people would
hear his words, and submit to him as king.

For they are sweet - They shall be pleasant; mild; gentle; equitable;
just. After the harsh and severe enactments of Saul, after enduring his
acts of tyranny, the people will be glad to welcome me, and to live
under the laws of a just and equal administration. The passage,
therefore, expresses confidence that Saul and his hosts would be
overthrown, and that the people of the land would gladly hail the
accession to the throne of one who had been anointed to reign over them.

[Psalms 141:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 141:7</span></span>

Our bones are scattered at the grave's mouth - We are, indeed, now like
bones scattered in the places of graves; we seem to be weak, feeble,
disorganized. We are in a condition which of itself seems to be
hopeless: as hopeless as it would be for dry bones scattered when they
were buried to rise up and attack an enemy. The reference is to the
condition of David and his followers as pursued by a mighty foe. His
hope was not in his own forces, but in the power and interposition of
God [Psa 141:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#008).

As when one cutteth and cleaveth wood upon the earth - Like chips,
blocks, splinters, that have no strength; as when these lie scattered
around - a fit emblem of our feeble and scattered forces.

[Psalms 141:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 141:8</span></span>

But mine eyes are unto thee, O God the Lord - My hope is in thee. I do
not rely on my own power. I do not trust in my armed forces. I know that
they are weak, dispirited, scattered - like strewed bones - like the
chips and splinters lying around the place where wood is chopped. I
look, therefore, solely to God. I believe that he "will" interpose; and
now that my enemy has placed himself in this position, I do not need to
resort to stealthful arts - to dishonorable acts - to assassination - as
my friends advise, but the object will be accomplished, and I shall be
placed on the throne by the act of God, and in a manner that will not
subject my name and memory to reproach by a base and treacherous deed.

In thee is my trust - I rely on thee alone.

Leave not my soul destitute - My life; my all. Do not now leave me
without thy gracious interposition; do not suffer this juncture to pass
by without such an interposition as will end the war, and restore peace
to me and to a distracted land.

[Psalms 141:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 141:9</span></span>

Keep me from the snares ... - See the notes at [Psa
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006). Compare [Psa
38:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#012); [Psa
69:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022); [Psa
91:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#003). The secret plans which they have
laid against me.

And the gins of the workers of iniquity - Wicked men; men who seek my
destruction. On the word gins, see the notes at [Isa
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014). The gin is a trap or snare to
catch birds or wild animals. The word used here is the same which occurs
in [Psa 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#005), and which is there
rendered "snare." See the notes at that passage. Compare also [Psa
64:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#005); [Psa
69:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022); [Psa
106:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#036); [Psa
140:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#005), where the same word occurs.

[Psalms 141:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 141:10</span></span>

Let the wicked fall into their own nets - See the notes at [Psa
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#008). Compare [Psa
7:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015).

While that I withal escape - Margin, as in Hebrew, "pass over." While I
safely pass over the net or snare which has been secretly laid for me.
The word "withal" means, in the Hebrew, "together, at the same time;"
that is, At the same time that they fall into the net, let me pass over
it in safety. See the notes at [Job
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 142](psa142)

</div>
