<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa135)  [Next](psa137) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 136](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 136:0</span></span>

This psalm also has no title to indicate the author, or to explain the
occasion on which it was composed. It is a psalm of very special
construction, and stands alone in the form of its poetry. The
peculiarity consists in repeating at the close of each verse the
language "for his mercy endureth forever." This is a kind of refrains,
and may have been designed, in public worship, to be a response by a
choir, or by the people. That it may have been intended to be so used
cannot be disproved, nor can anyone show that such a response in public
worship is, itself, improper or wrong. It is not certain, however, that
it was meant to be so used; and it should not, therefore, be appealed to
as proving that such responses are proper in public worship, whatever
may be true on that point. It may have been merely a specimen of the
poetic art among the Hebrews - one of the forms in which Hebrew poetry
expressed itself. The subjects referred to as laying the foundation for
the response in each verse - "for his mercy endureth forever," are such
as have been often introduced in the previous psalms, and will require
but little additional illustration. The general idea is, that all these
acts of the divine interposition - all that God has done, even though it
seemed to be a display of power or of justice, of severity or of wrath -
was, in fact, an illustration of the "mercy" of God, and laid a
foundation for praise. That is, All this was connected with the good of
his people, with favors to mankind, with the accomplishment of great and
benevolent purposes, and, therefore, was expressive of mercy - a proof
that the "mercy of God endures forever."

[Psalms 136:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 136:1</span></span>

O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good - This whole verse is the
same as [Psa 106:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#001), except that that
is introduced by a Hallelujah. See the notes at that verse.

For his mercy endureth for ever - See also [Psa
106:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#001), note; [Psa
107:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#001), note. Literally, "For unto
eternity his mercy." That is, It is ever the same; it never changes; it
is never exhausted; it is found in all his dealings - in all his acts
toward his creatures, and ever will be.

[Psalms 136:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 136:2</span></span>

O give thanks unto the God of gods - See [Deu
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017). The supreme God; the God
superior to all that is called God, or that is adored by the nations of
the earth; above all to whom the name God is ever applied.

For his mercy... - The ground of praise here is, that it is a
characteristic of the supreme God that he is a merciful Being; that
there is blended in his character eternal mercy with infinite power.
Mere power might fill us with dread; power mingled with mercy, and able
to carry out the purposes of mercy, must lay the foundation for praise.

[Psalms 136:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 136:3</span></span>

O give thanks to the Lord of lords - The Lord or Ruler of all in
authority - all kings, princes, rulers. He is supreme over all. This is
an attribute of Divinity; yet this is ascribed to the Lord Jesus, thus
proving that he is divine. See the notes at [Rev
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#016).

For his mercy ... - The ground of praise here, as in the previous verse,
is, that this God - the Supreme Ruler over all the potentates and
magistrates of earth - is a merciful Being. He is kind and benignant
toward those rulers, and through them to mankind.

[Psalms 136:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 136:4</span></span>

To him who alone doeth great wonders - Miracles; marvelous things;
things which spring from his direct and absolute power; things lying
beyond the range of natural laws. See the notes at [Psa
72:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#018).

For his mercy ... - For all these mighty wonders are performed in
carrying out purposes of mercy. So the wonders which were done in Egypt
were for the deliverance of an oppressed people; so the miracles
performed by the Saviour and his apostles were to remove disease and
pain, and to establish a religion of mercy; so the divine interpositions
among the nations are to assert the principles of righteousness, to
secure the reign of order and love, and to promote the welfare of
mankind.

[Psalms 136:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 136:5</span></span>

To him that by wisdom made the heavens - Made them in so wise a manner;
where so much wisdom was manifested. See [Pro
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#019); [Pro
8:24-31](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#024).

For his mercy ... - The making of the heavens was a manifestation of
mercy and goodness as furnishing an abode for unfallen and holy beings;
as a dwelling-place for redeemed sinners when they shall be removed
there from the earth; and as, by their order, their beauty, their
harmony, and their happy influences, tending to promote the happiness of
man on earth.

[Psalms 136:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 136:6</span></span>

To him that stretched out the earth above the waters - [Gen
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001), [Gen
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009); see the notes at [Psa
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#002).

For his mercy ... - As an illustration of his benignity and kindness in
preparing an abode for man, and for other creatures in the world.
Whatever there is of life or happiness, on the continents and islands,
has resulted from that act of God when "he made the dry land appear."

[Psalms 136:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 136:7</span></span>

To him that made great lights - [Gen
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014). The sun and the moon are here
particularly referred to.

For his mercy ... - As manifested in all that has followed from the
creation and diffusion of light - (all the beauty in the universe as
seen; all the life, beauty, and vigor in the vegetable and animal world;
all that there is of life and happiness in the universe - for there
could be neither if darkness reigned everywhere); light, the emblem of
happiness; the source of joy; the producer, in a great measure, of the
beauties of the universe, and the revealer of those beauties everywhere.
How can a man think of light and not praise its Author?

[Psalms 136:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 136:8</span></span>

The sun to rule by day - [Gen 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016).
Margin, as in Hebrew, for the ruling of the day. That is, to control, as
it were, the day; to determine its length - its beginning - its ending -
to make it what it is.

For his mercy ... - By all the blessings of day as distinguished from
night and darkness - by all that the sun in his daily course does to
diffuse life, joy, peace, comfort, happiness on the earth - by all that
are warmed by its beams, cheered by its light, guided in labor, guarded
from dangers - do we derive an argument for the mercy of God; by all
this there is laid a foundation for his praise.

[Psalms 136:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 136:9</span></span>

The moon and stars to rule by night - [Gen
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016).

For his mercy ... - As a proof also of his benignity and mercy. By all
the beauty of the moon and stars in their course through the heavens -
by all that there is in the harmony and order of their movements - by
all that there is to make night less hideous and fearful - by all that
there is to reveal a countless number of worlds whose existence could
not have been discovered but for the night - by all that there is to
guide the mariner on the ocean, enabling him to determine his position
and to mark his course when on the deep - and therefore by all the
blessings of navigation and commerce, binding the different parts of the
world together, by all that there is in the "North-star," fixed and true
in guiding those who flee from bondage - by all these and kindred things
without number, do we see the benignity, the goodness, the mercy of God,
in forming the moon and stars "to rule by night."

[Psalms 136:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 136:10</span></span>

To him that smote Egypt in their first-born - [Exo
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029). That is, he struck them down,
or destroyed them, by his own direct power.

For his mercy ... - It was in mercy to his people. It was the means of
their deliverance from bondage, for the Egyptians would not otherwise
have suffered them to depart. By all the results of their deliverance
both to themselves and to mankind, the act was seen to be an act of
mercy to the world. It was better for mankind that the Hebrews should be
delivered even at this sacrifice than it would have been that they
should not be brought into the promised land.

[Psalms 136:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 136:11</span></span>

And brought Israel out from among them - From the land of Egypt. By all
the wonders manifested in their deliverance, and in conducting them out
of the land so that they should escape from their pursuers.

For his mercy ... - His mercy in this respect was to be measured by all
that there was of power in conducting them forth in safety, and by the
results of it.

[Psalms 136:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 136:12</span></span>

With a strong hand - A powerful hand; as by a hand that could grasp and
subdue all that opposed.

And with a stretched-out arm - As if the arm were stretched out to
strike with the utmost force, or to exert its utmost power. See [Exo
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006); [Deu
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#034); [Deu
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#015); [Deu
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#019); [Deu
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#008); [Jer
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#021).

For his mercy ... - The exertion of his power in delivering his people
was the expression of a mercy, the consequences of which are to endure
forever, for the results of that deliverance will never cease in the
history of the world; will never cease in heaven.

[Psalms 136:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 136:13</span></span>

To him which divided the Red sea into parts - More literally, "Parted it
into parts;" made parts of that which before was unbroken and a whole.
It was actually divided into two parts, so that the Hebrews passed
between them: [Exo 14:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021).

For his mercy ... - This, too, was an exercise of mercy, or a
manifestation of benevolence toward them and toward the world, to be
measured by all the good which would result from it in itself, and by
all the power which was put forth to effect it.

[Psalms 136:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 136:14</span></span>

And made Israel to pass through the midst of it - [Exo
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#029).

For his mercy ... - The mercy manifested in keeping the waves from
returning on them and overwhelming them.

[Psalms 136:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 136:15</span></span>

But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red sea - Margin, as in
Hebrew, shaked off. The word is applicable to a tree shaking off its
foliage. [Isa 33:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#009). The same word is
used in [Exo 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#027) : "And the Lord
overthrew (Margin, shook off) the Egyptians in the midst of the sea," He
shook them off as if he would no longer protect them. He left them to
perish.

For his mercy ... - Their destruction was done in mercy to his people
and to the world, for it was the means of deliverance to Israel. The
death of a wicked man is a benefit to the world, and the act of removing
him may be really an act of the highest benevolence to mankind. No wrong
is done to such people, for they deserve to die; and the only service
which can be rendered to the world through them is by their removal from
the earth.

[Psalms 136:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 136:16</span></span>

To him which led his people through the wilderness - For all the
manifestations of his care during a period of forty years.

For his mercy ... - That is, his mercy was to be measured by all the
protection extended over them; by all the provision made for their
needs; by all that God did to defend them; by all his interposition when
attacked by their enemies; by safely bringing them to the land to which
he had promised to conduct them.

[Psalms 136:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 136:17</span></span>

To him which smote great kings - On this passage see the notes at [Psa
135:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#010). There is little difference
in the two places, except that here the statement is divided by the
refrain, "For his mercy endureth forever." The idea in the whole
passage, in view of the divine interposition in slaying the mighty
kings, and in giving their land for a possession to the Hebrew people,
is, that it was a proof of mercy and benevolence. It is benevolence to
mankind and to the church of God - it is in the interests of humanity,
of domestic peace, and of the charities of life, to remove wicked people
from the world. This mercy may be manifested further, not merely in
removing the wicked, but in transferring their possessions to those who
will make a better use of them. Thus the possessions of these mighty
kings, Sihon and Og, were transferred to the people of God, and lands
which had been devoted to the service of blood, ambition, crime,
pollution, and idolatry, became devoted to the service of religion and
righteousness. In like manner, through the removal of a wicked man from
the world by death, God may cause his wealth, accumulated by avarice and
dishonesty, to be transferred to the hands of children who will make a
good use of it - children converted as if in anticipation of this, and
with a view to this. Among the highest expressions of mercy to the world
may be, therefore, the removal of wicked princes in war - or the removal
of wicked people, in other ranks of life, by death in any form.

[Psalms 136:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 136:23</span></span>

Who remembered us in our low estate - When we were few in number; when
we were a feeble people; when we were a people unable to contend with
such mighty foes.

For his mercy ... - By all that he did for us when thus feeble; by all
his power put forth to defend us from our enemies, he has showed his
mercy and kindness to us and to the world.

[Psalms 136:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 136:24</span></span>

And hath redeemed us from our enemies - Has rescued or delivered us from
all our foes; has given to us freedom and peace.

For his mercy ... - By all that he has done in order to redeem us; and
by all the prosperity, happiness, and peace which have followed as the
result of that, he has showed his mercy. So it is in the greater work of
the redemption of the soul. By all the love manifested in the gift of a
Saviour - by all the sufferings and toils of his life - by his "agony
and bloody sweat" in the garden of Gethsemane - by his "cross and
passion," by all the blessings of salvation here, all our peace, all our
purity, all our consolations, all our hopes, and by all the glories of
heaven hereafter - the mercy of God in our redemption is to be estimated
and measured. Who can take the full account of it?

[Psalms 136:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 136:25</span></span>

Who giveth food to all flesh - To all living things: all in the air, on
the earth, in the waters. See the notes at [Psa
104:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#027); compare [Psa
115:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#016).

For his mercy ... - All this is a proof of his benignity and kindness.
To see this, it would be necessary to have a view of what is done every
day in the providence of God to meet the needs of the countless
multitudes thus dependent on him. Let it be remembered, also, that the
needs of each insect, fowl, animal; fish, is to be provided for as an
individual - and who can take in a full view of the care, the wisdom,
the benevolence of what is done every day by the Father of all in
providing for their needs? Let it be remembered, also, that this has
been continned without ceasing from the foundation of the world, and
will be demanded until its close, and then let us try to imagine what is
necessary to be done to provide for the needs of all the dwellers in
distant worlds - and who, in this view, can form any proper estimate of
the wisdom and the goodness of God?

[Psalms 136:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 136:26</span></span>

O give thanks unto the God of heaven - The God who reigns in heaven;
whose home is heaven.

For his mercy ... - In view of all this - of all that he does in heaven
and on earth - let praise be ascribed to him. To know the measure of the
praise due to him; to see how great is his "mercy," it would be
necessary to know all that he does in heaven and on earth. That will not
be known here. It will constitute the theme of contemplation and praise
forever and ever. Enough, however, is known here to show the propriety
of repeating again, again, and again, as in this psalm, the language,
"For his mercy endureth forever;" "For his mercy endureth forever;" "For
his mercy endureth forever."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 137](psa137)

</div>
