<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa116)  [Next](psa118.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 117](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 117:0</span></span>

The occasion and the author of this psalm are alike unknown. DeWette
regards it as a temple-psalm, and agrees with Rosenmuller in the
supposition that it was sung either at the beginning or the end of the
service in the temple. Knapp supposes that it was used as an
intermediate service, sung during the progress of the general service to
vary the devotion, and to awaken a new interest in the service, either
sung by a choir or by the whole people.

In many manuscripts of Kennicott and De Rossi, and in several editions
of the Scriptures, this psalm is united with the following. The psalm
has no independent character or meaning of its own, and seems to have
been designed, like the "Doxologies" in our Books of Psalms and Hymns,
to be attached to other psalms as occasion might require. There is no
psalm designed for public worship to which it might not thus properly be
attached.

[Psalms 117:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 117:1</span></span>

O praise the Lord, all ye nations - The idea is that God has a claim to
universal worship, and that all the nations of the earth are under
obligations to adore him as the true God. He is not the God of the
Hebrew people only, but of all people; his praise should be celebrated
not merely by one nation, but by all. This is one of the passages in the
Old Testament, anticipating what is more fully disclosed in the New
Testament, in which the sacred writer extends his vision beyond the
narrow boundaries of Judea, and looks to the world, the whole world, as
the theater on which the true religion was to be displayed, and for
which it was designed. It is language such as would be indited by the
Spirit of inspiration on the supposition that the time would come when
the barrier between Jews and Gentiles would be broken down, and when all
the nations of the earth would be in the possession of the true
religion, and would unite in the worship of the same God. This doctrine,
however, was not fully made known until the coming of the Redeemer. The
announcement of this was made by the Redeemer himself (compare [Mat
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011.md); [Mat
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#021.md); [Mat
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019).md); it was the occasion of no
small part of the trouble which the Apostle Paul had with his countrymen
(compare [Act 13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046.md); [Act
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#006.md); [Act
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#021.md); [Act
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#021.md); [Act
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#020.md), [Act
26:23](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#023).md); it was one of the doctrines
which Paul especially endeavored to establish, as a great truth of
Christianity, that all the barriers between the nations were to be
broken down, and the Gospel proclaimed to all people alike, [Rom
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#029.md); [Rom
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#024.md), [Rom
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030.md); [Rom
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011.md); [Rom
15:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009.md), [Rom
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016.md), [Rom
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#018.md); [Gal
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002.md); [Eph
2:11-18](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#011.md); [Eph
3:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#001.md). It is under the gospel that
this language becomes especially appropriate.

Praise him, all ye people - People of all lands. The word here rendered
"praise" - שׁבח shâbach - means properly to soothe, to still, to
restrain - as, for example, billows [Psa
89:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#009.md); and then, to praise, as if to
soothe with praises - mulcere laudibus, Pacuv. The idea of soothing or
mitigating, however, is not necessarily in the word, but it may be
understood in the general sense of praise. We may in fact often soothe
or appease people - angry, jealous, suspicious people - by skillful
flattery or praise - for there are few, even when under the influence of
anger or hatred, who may not thus be approached, or who do not value
praise and commendation more than they do the indulgence of passion; but
we cannot hope thus to appease the anger of God. We approach him to
utter our deep sense of his goodness, and our veneration for his
character; we do not expect to turn him from anger to love - to make him
forget his justice or our sins - by soothing flattery.

[Psalms 117:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 117:2</span></span>

For his merciful kindness is great toward us - His kindness; his
compassion; his love. All nations - all people - may say this, and
therefore the psalm is adapted to universal praise. Especially may this
be said in view of the love of God to mankind in the gift of a Saviour -
a Saviour not for any one people especially or exclusively, but for the
world, [Joh 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016.md).

And the truth of the Lord endureth for ever - All that God has said: his
declarations; his promises; his assurances of mercy. They are the same
in all lands where they are made known, and they are the same in all
ages of the world. Truth is a representation of things as they are; and
truth, therefore, must be ever the same. What was true in the first ages
of the world in regard to the relation of the sum of the squares on the
two sides of a right-angled triangle to the square of the hypothenuse is
true now, and will always be true; and so, what God has affirmed at any
one time will always remain the same in all ages and in all lands. What
was truth to Abraham is truth to us; what was truth to Paul is truth to
us; what was truth to the martyrs is truth to us; what is truth to us
will be truth to all generations of the world in all lands, and will be
truth forever. This fact, too, is a just foundation for universal
praise, and therefore the psalm is so adapted to be used in all lands
and among all people. How often in our own language has this psalm been
the medium of the utterances of praise in Christian sanctuaries:

"From all that dwell below the skies,

Let the Creator's praise arise;

Let the Redeemer's name be sung,

Through every land, by every tongue.

Eternal are thy mercies, Lord;

Eternal truth attends thy word;

Thy praise shall sound from shore to shore,

Till suns shall rise and set no more.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 118](psa118.md)

</div>
