<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa105)  [Next](psa107.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 106](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 106:0</span></span>

The author of this psalm is unknown, and the occasion on which it was
composed cannot now be ascertained. It belongs to the same "class" as
Ps. 78; 105; as referring to the ancient history of the Hebrew people,
and as deriving lessons of instruction, admonition, gratitude and praise
from that history. The cvth Psalm referred to that history particularly
as showing the mercy and favor of God to that people, and hence, their
obligation to love and serve him; this psalm is occupied mainly with a
confession, drawn from a review of that history, that the nation had not
been mindful of those mercies, but that they had rebelled against God,
and incurred his displeasure. The psalm has a striking resemblance in
many respects to the prayer in Dan. 9; and, like that, is a prayer that
God would now interpose and deliver the people as in times that were
past. It is possible that the psalm may have been composed in the time
of the Babylonian captivity (compare [Psa
106:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#047).md), and this is the opinion of
Hengstenberg; but it is impossible to demonstrate this with any
certainty. It was evidently composed in some period of public calamity,
and there is no impropriety in supposing that it may have been then.

The psalm consists essentially of three parts:

I. A brief introduction, setting forth the duty of praising God, and
referring to his mercy, and expressing the desire of the author of the
psalm that he himself might participate in his mercy, and share the
happy lot of the "chosen" of God, [Psa
106:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#001.md).

II\. A reference to the history of the nation, and a confession of their
sins in all the periods of their history, and their proneness as a
people to disobey God, referring particularly to their history in Egypt,
[Psa 106:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#006.md); in the desert, Ps.
106:13-33; and in the land of Canaan, [Psa
106:34-43](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#034.md).

III\. A prayer - founded on the fact that God had often interposed in
their behalf - that he would now again interpose, and gather them from
among the pagan, that they might again sing his praises, [Psa
106:44-48](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#044.md).

[Psalms 106:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 106:1</span></span>

Praise ye the Lord - Margin, "Hallelu-jah." The two Hebrew words mean,
"praise ye the Lord." They are the same words with which the previous
psalm closes, and are here designed to indicate the general duty
illustrated in the psalm.

O give thanks unto the Lord - See the notes at [Psa
105:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#001.md).

For he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever - See [Psa
100:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#005.md), note; [Psa
107:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#001.md), note; where the language in the
Hebrew is the same.

[Psalms 106:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 106:2</span></span>

Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord? - Who can speak the great
things of God? Who can find language which will suitably express what he
has done, or which will "come up" in sublimity to his acts? In other
words, human language must fall immeasurably short of adequately
expressing the praises of Yahweh, or conveying the fullness of what he
has done. Who has not felt this when he has endeavored to praise God in
a proper manner? Compare the notes at [Psa
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#005.md).

Who can shew forth all his praise - Hebrew, "Cause to be heard." That
is, Language cannot be found which would cause "it to be heard" in a
suitable manner.

[Psalms 106:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 106:3</span></span>

Blessed are they that keep judgment - They are blessed, for their
conduet is right, and it leads to happiness. The Hebrew is, "the keepers
of judgment;" that is, they who observe the rules of justice in their
conduct, or who are governed by the principles of integrity.

And he that doeth righteousness at all times - All who yield obedience
to just law - whether a nation or an individual. The psalm is designed
to illustrate this "by contrast;" that is, by showing, in the conduct of
the Hebrew people, the consequences of "disobedience," and thus
impliedly what would have been, and what always must be, the
consequences of the opposite course. Compare [Psa
15:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001.md).

[Psalms 106:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 106:4</span></span>

Remember me, O Lord, with the favor that thou bearest unto thy people -
literally, "Remember me with the favor of thy people." This is the
language of the author of the psalm: a pious ejaculation such as will
occur to the mind in recounting what God has done for his church; what
are the advantages of being his friends; what blessings of peace,
happiness, and joy are connected with true religion. Even the wicked
sometimes have this feeling when they look on the happy life, and the
peaceful death of the godly. So Balaam said, "Let me die the death of
the righteous, and let my last end be like his!" [Num
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#010.md).

O visit me with thy salvation - Come to me with salvation; confer it
upon me.

[Psalms 106:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 106:5</span></span>

That I may see the good of thy chosen - Thy chosen people; or, thine
elect. That I may possess and enjoy the same favor and happiness which
they do. It is implied here that there are special favors conferred on
them; or, that happiness is found in the friendship of God which is not
to be found elsewhere. It is a characteristic of true piety to desire to
make that our own. A truly religious man more desires the happiness
which results from being among the "chosen" of God than all that the
world can confer.

That I may rejoice in the gladness of thy nation - The happiness found
in the nation that serves thee. True religion - the favor of God - not
only confers happiness on the "individual" who possesses it, but on the
nation or people where it prevails. It is just as much suited to produce
happiness there, and is just as necessary for happiness there, as in the
case of an individual.

That I may glory with thine inheritance - That I may share the honor of
thy people. The word "inheritance" here is used to denote that which is
one's own, and is thus applied to the people of God considered as "his."
The meaning is, that the psalmist desired no other glory, honor, or
distinction, than that which pertained to God's people as such. He
sought not the "glory" connected with the distinctions of the world; the
display of wealth; the triumph of genius, of conquest, of arms - but the
"glory" of being a friend of God, and of partaking of that which God
confers on his people.

[Psalms 106:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 106:6</span></span>

We have sinned with our fathers - We have sinned as "they" did; we have
followed their example. The illustration of the manner in which the
nation had sinned occupies a considerable part of the remainder of the
psalm; and the idea here is, that, in the generation in which the
psalmist lived, there had been the manifestation of the same rebellious
spirit which had so remarkably characterized the entire nation. The
"connection" of this with the foregoing verses is not very apparent. It
would seem to be that the psalmist was deeply impressed with a sense of
the great blessings which follow from the friendship of God, and from
keeping his commandments - as stated, [Psa
106:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#003.md); but he remembered that those
blessings had not come upon the people as might have been expected, and
his mind suddenly adverts to the cause of this, in the fact that the
nation had "sinned." It was not that God was not disposed to bestow that
happiness; it was not that true religion "failed" to confer happiness;
but it was that the nation had provoked God to displeasure, and that in
fact the sins of the people had averted the blessings which would
otherwise have come upon them. The psalmist, therefore, in emphatic
language - repeating the confession in three forms, "we have sinned - we
have committed iniquity, we have done wickedly," acknowledges that the
failure was in them, not in God. The language here is substantially the
same as in [Dan 9:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#005.md), and it would
seem not improbable that the one was suggested by the other. Which was
prior in the order of time, it is now impossible to determine. Compare
the notes at [Dan 9:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#005.md).

[Psalms 106:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 106:7</span></span>

Our fathers understood not - They did not fully comprehend the design of
the divine dealings. They did not perceive the greatness of the favor
shown to them, or the obligation to obey and serve God under which they
were placed by these remarkable manifestations.

Thy wonders in Egypt - The miracles performed there in behalf of the
Hebrew people.

They remembered not the multitude of thy mercies - The great number of
the divine interpositions in their behalf. They did not allow them to
influence their conduct as they should have done. The aggravation of
their offence in the case here referred to was particularly in the
"multitude" of the mercies. It would have been sinful to have forgotten
even one act of the divine favor; it was a great aggravation of their
guilt that "so many" acts were forgotten, or that they failed to make an
impression on them. So now. It is a great sin to be unmindful of a
"single" favor conferred by God; it is a great aggravation of guilt that
men live continually amidst so many proofs of the divine goodness; that
they are fed, and clothed, and protected; that they breathe the pure
air, and look upon the light of the sun; that they enjoy the comforts of
domestic life, the blessings of liberty, and the offers of salvation;
that they lie down and rise up; that their toils are crowned with
success, and that the blessings of every land are made to come around
them - and yet they forget or disregard all these proofs of the divine
mercy.

But provoked him at the sea, even at the Red Sea - [Exo
14:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#010.md). They "rebelled" against him.
Even amidst the wonders there occurring, and after all the blessings
which they had received at his hands, when they were in danger they
doubted his power, and called in question his faithfulness.

[Psalms 106:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 106:8</span></span>

Nevertheless, he saved them for his name's sake - For the promotion of
his own honor and glory; that it might be seen that he is powerful and
merciful. This is constantly given as the reason why God saves people;
why he forgives sin; why he redeems the soul; why he delivers from
danger and from death. Compare [Eze
36:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#022.md), [Eze
36:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#032.md); [Isa
37:35](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#035.md); [Isa
43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025.md); [Isa
48:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#009.md); [Jer
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#007.md); [Psa
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#004.md); [Psa
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#003.md); [Psa
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#011.md); [Psa
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#016.md); [Psa
44:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#026.md). This is the highest reason
which can be assigned for pardoning and saving sinners.

That he might make his mighty power to be known - [Exo
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016.md). Compare the notes at [Rom
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017.md).

[Psalms 106:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 106:9</span></span>

He rebuked the Red Sea also - The word rendered "rebuke" commonly means
to chide - as when one is angry with another for having done wrong. Here
it is evidently a poetic term, meaning that he spake "as if" he were
angry; or "as if" the Red Sea did wrong in presenting an obstacle or
obstruction to the passage of his people. Compare [Exo
14:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021.md),

So he led them through the depths - Through what had been the abyss;
what had seemed to be depths, being covered with water.

As through the wilderness - As through a desert or dry place; as he
afterward led them through the wilderness. The waters parted asunder,
and made a way for them.

[Psalms 106:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 106:10</span></span>

And he saved them from the hand of him that hated them - From Pharaoh.
By making a path through the waters, they were enabled to escape; by the
overthrow of the Egyptians in the Red Sea, they were completely and
forever delivered from their oppressors. [Exo
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#030.md).

[Psalms 106:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 106:11</span></span>

And the waters covered their enemies ... - [Exo
14:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#027.md); [Exo
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#005.md).

[Psalms 106:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 106:12</span></span>

Then believed they his words - In immediate view of his interpositions
in their behalf in conducting them through the Red Sea, and in the
destruction of their enemies.

They sang his praise - In the song composed by Moses on the occasion of
their deliverance. Exo. 15.

[Psalms 106:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 106:13</span></span>

They soon forgat his works - On [Psa
106:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#013.md), see the notes at [Psa
78:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#017.md). Literally, here, as in the
margin, "They made haste, they forgat." They did it soon; did it without
any delay. It was as if they were impatient to have it done.

They waited not for his counsel - For the fulfillment of his promise; or
for his command in regard to their future conduct. They did not look to
him, but they depended on themselves, and followed their own desires and
wishes.

[Psalms 106:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 106:14</span></span>

But lusted exceedingly in the wilderness - Margin, as in Hebrew, "lusted
a lust." The reference is to their desire of better food than the manna.

And tempted God in the desert - Tried God, whether he "could" provide
for them food and drink. [Psa
78:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#019.md).

[Psalms 106:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 106:15</span></span>

And he gave them their request - By sending great quantities of quails.
[Num 11:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#031.md).

But sent leanness into their soul - The word translated "leanness" is
from a verb - רזה râzeh - to make thin; to cause to waste away; to
destroy. The radical idea is that of abrading or "scraping;" and hence,
it means to become lean, to waste away. It occurs only here and in [Isa
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#016.md), rendered "leanness," and in
[Mic 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#010.md), rendered "scant;" margin,
"leanness." It means here that the effect of all this on their souls was
similar to the effect on the body when it wastes away by disease or want
of food. This effect often occurs. In the gratification of their
desires, in great temporal success and prosperity, individuals,
churches, nations, often forget their dependence on God; lose their
sense of the value of spiritual privileges and blessings: are satisfied
with their condition; become selfconfident and proud, and forfeit the
favor of God. If we pray for temporal prosperity, we should also pray
that we may at the same time have grace commensurate with it, that it
may be a blessing and not a curse; if we are visited with prosperity
when it has not been a direct object of our prayer - if we inherit
riches, or if our plans are successful beyond our expectations - or, in
the language of the world, if "fortune smiles upon us," there should be
special prayer on our part that it may not be a curse rather than a
blessing; that it may be so received and used as not to alienate our
minds from God. Few are the Christian people who can bear continued
success in life; few are those who are not injured by it; rare is it
that growth in grace keeps pace with uninterrupted worldly prosperity;
rare is it that the blessings of earth are so received and employed that
they are seen to be a means of grace, and not a hindrance to growth in
piety. A man does not know what is best for him when his heart is set on
worldly prosperity; and God is more benevolent to people than they are
to themselves, in withholding what is so often the object of their
intense desire. "What is asked in passion, is often given in wrath" -
Henry.

[Psalms 106:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 106:16</span></span>

They envied Moses also in the camp - They were envious of him, or
rebelled against him, as assuming too much authority. See [Num
16:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001.md). The reference here is rather
to the "result" of that envy in producing rebellion than to the envy
itself. It is true, however, that the foundation of their opposition to
him "was" envy.

And Aaron the saint of the Lord - That is, as set apart to the service
of the Lord; or, as employed in holy things. The reference is to his
"office," not to his personal character.

[Psalms 106:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 106:17</span></span>

On these verses see [Num 16:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#031.md).
This refers to the time when they rebelled against Moses.

[Psalms 106:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 106:19</span></span>

They made a calf in Horeb - [Exo 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#004.md).
Probably in resemblance of the Egyptian god "Apis." The image was made
by Aaron out of materials furnished by the people, and at their request
[Exo 32:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001.md), so that it might be said
to be the act of the people.

And worshipped the molten image - The word rendered "molten" is from a
verb נסך nâsak - to pour, to pour out; hence, to cast, to found; and it
means anything that is made by fusion or casting. This image was cast
[Exo 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#004.md), and hence, this name is
given to it.

[Psalms 106:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 106:20</span></span>

Thus they changed their glory - Their true glory - the proper object of
worship - God. Compare the notes at [Rom
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#023.md). They "exchanged" that as an
object of worship for the image of an ox.

Into the similitude of an ox that eateth grass - Into the likeness of an
ox. That is, They worshipped God under that image. The circumstance of
its "eating grass" is added to show the absurdity of the act. Instead of
worshipping God - an independent Being, who does not need to be
supported, but who himself sustains all things, and provides for all -
they worshipped an animal that had need of constant sustenance, and
would itself soon die if deprived of its proper nourishment. Compare the
notes at [Isa 40:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018.md); notes at [Isa
41:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#006.md).

[Psalms 106:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 106:21</span></span>

They forgat God their Saviour ... - The God who had saved, or delivered
them, out of Egypt. The sentiment here is the same as in [Psa
78:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#011.md). See the notes at that place.

[Psalms 106:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 106:23</span></span>

Therefore he said that he would destroy them - See [Exo
32:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#010.md). He threatened to destroy
them, and he would have done it, if Moses had not interposed and pleaded
for them. There was nothing strange or very unusual in this. Many a
descending curse upon guilty people is turned away by prayer, and by
human intervention. We are constantly endeavoring to turn aside evils
which would come upon others - by our intervention - by labor or by
prayer. Thus, when we toil to provide food for our children, or give it
in charity to the poor, we are endeavoring to avert the evil of
starvation which would otherwise come upon them; when we provide for
them clothing, we turn away the evils of nakedness and cold; when we
give them medicine we turn away the evil of long-continued disease or of
death; when we rush through the flames if a house is on fire, or venture
out in a rough sea in a boat, to save others from devouring flame or
from a watery grave, we seek to turn aside evils which would otherwise
come upon them. So when we pray for others we may turn away evils which
would otherwise descend on the guilty. No one can estimate the number or
the amount of evils which are thus turned away from the guilty and the
suffering by intervention and intercession; no one can tell how many of
the blessings of his own life he owes to the intercessions and the toils
of others. "All the blessings that come upon sinners - "all" that is
done to turn away deserved wrath from people - is owing to the fact that
the one great Intercessor - greater than Moses - cast himself into the
"breach," and himself met and rolled back the woes which were coming
upon a guilty world. "Had not Moses his chosen." Chosen to lead and
guide his people to the promised land.

Stood before him - Presented himself before him.

In the breach - literally, "in the breaking." The allusion is to a
breach made in a wall [Kg1 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#027.md); [Isa
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#013.md); [Amo
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#003.md); [Job
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#014.md), and to the force with which an
army rushes through a breach that is thus made. So God seemed to be
about to come forth to destroy the nation.

[Psalms 106:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 106:24</span></span>

Yea, they despised the pleasant land - Margin, as in Hebrew, "land of
desire." That is, a country "to be desired," - a country whose
situation, climate, productions, made it desirable as a place of abode.
Such Palestine was always represented to be to the children of Israel
([Lev 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#024.md); [Num
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#027.md); [Num
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#008.md); [Num
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#014.md); [Deu
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#003.md); [Deu
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#009); et al.;.md) but this land had to
them, at the time here referred to, no attractions, and they rather
desired to return again to Egypt; [Num
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#005.md).

They believed not his word - His assurance in regard to the land to
which they were going.

[Psalms 106:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 106:25</span></span>

But murmured in their tents ... - [Num
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#002.md), [Num
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#027.md). They complained of Moses; they
complained of their food; they complained of the hardships of their
journey; they complained of God. They did this when "in their tents;"
when they had a comfortable home; when safe; when provided for; when
under the direct divine protection and care. So people often complain:
perhaps oftener when they have "many" comforts than when they have
"few."

[Psalms 106:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 106:26</span></span>

Therefore he lifted up his hand against them - [Num
14:27-33](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#027.md). He resolved to cut them off,
so that none of them should reach the promised land.

To overthrow them in the wilderness - literally, to cause them to
"fall."

[Psalms 106:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 106:27</span></span>

To overthrow their seed also among the nations - Margin, as in Hebrew,
"to make them fall;" to wit, among the surrounding people. The reference
here is to the posterity of those who complained and fell in the
wilderness. The result of their rebellion and complaining would not
terminate with them. It would extend to their posterity, and the
rebellion of the fathers would be remembered in distant generations. The
overthrow of the nation, and its captivity in Babylon was thus one of
the remote consequences of their rebellion in the wilderness.

And to scatter them in the lands - In foreign lands - as at Babylon. If
this psalm was written at the time of the Babylonian captivity, this
allusion would be most appropriate. It would remind the nation that its
captivity there had its origin in the ancient and long-continued
disposition of the people to revolt from God.

[Psalms 106:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 106:28</span></span>

They joined themselves also unto Baal-peor - They joined in their
devotions, or, they shared in the rites of idolatrous worship. This
occurred when they were in the regions of Moab, and on the very borders
of the promised land. Num. 25. Many other instances of a similar kind
are passed over by the psalmist, and this seems to have been selected
because of its special aggravation, and to show the general character of
the nation. Even after their long-continued enjoyment of the favor and
protection of God - after he had conducted them safely through the
wilderness - after he had brought them to the very border of the land of
Canaan, and all his promises were about to be fulfilled, they still
showed a disposition to depart from God. Baal-peor was an idol of the
Moabites, in whose worship females prostituted themselves. Gesenius,
Lexicon. Compare [Num 25:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001.md). Baal was
the name of the idol; Peor was the name of a mountain in Moab, where the
idol was worshipped.

And ate the sacrifices of the dead - Of false gods, represented as
"dead" or having no life, in contradistinction from the true and "living
God." They ate the sacrifices offered to those idols; that is, they
participated in their worship. [Num
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#002.md).

[Psalms 106:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">psa 106:29</span></span>

Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions - The word
rendered "inventions" means properly "works; deeds;" then it is used in
the sense of "evil" deeds, crimes.

And the plague brake in upon them - See [Num
25:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#008.md). No less than twenty-four
thousand fell in the plague. [Num
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#009.md).

[Psalms 106:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">psa 106:30</span></span>

Then stood up Phinehas, and executed judgment ... - Inflicted summary
punishment upon a principal offender. [Num
25:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#007.md).

[Psalms 106:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">psa 106:31</span></span>

And that was counted unto him for righteousness - See [Num
25:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#011.md). Compare the notes at [Rom
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003.md). The meaning here is, that this
was regarded as a "proof" or "demonstration" that he was a righteous man
- a man fearing God.

Unto all generations for evermore - Hebrew, "To generation and
generation forever." The record would be transmitted from one generation
to another, without any intermission, and would be permanent. This is
one of the illustrations of the statement so frequently made in the
Scriptures (compare [Exo 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#006.md); [Deu
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#009.md); [Rom
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#028).md) that the blessings of religion
will descend to a distant posterity. Such instances are constantly
occurring, and there is no legacy which a man can leave his family so
valuable as the fact that he himself fears God and keeps his laws.

[Psalms 106:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">psa 106:32</span></span>

They angered him also at the waters of strife - [Num
20:3-13](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#003.md). They complained of the lack
of water. They wished that they had died as others had done. They
murmured against God as if he could not supply their needs. They showed
an unbelieving and rebellious spirit - provoking God, and tempting Moses
to in act of great impatience by their conduct. In [Num
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#013.md), this is, "the waters of
Meribah;" - margin, "strife." This is the meaning of the Hebrew word.
The place took its name from the fact that the people there strove
against the Lord and against Moses.

So that it went ill with Moses for their sakes - Evil came upon him. He
was betrayed into impatience, and was tempted to use words which
offended God, and prevented his being permitted to lead the people into
the promised land. [Num 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#012.md).

[Psalms 106:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">psa 106:33</span></span>

Because they provoked his spirit - literally, "They made his spirit
bitter," or they embittered his soul. They threw him off his guard, so
that instead of manifesting the meekness and gentleness which so
eminently characterized him in general (see [Num
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#003).md), he gave way to expressions of
anger. See [Num 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#010.md).

So that he spake unadvisedly with his lips - Passionately; in a severe,
harsh, and threatening manner. He did not bear with them as he should
have done; he did not refer to God, to his power, and to his goodness as
he should have done; he spake as if the whole thing depended on him and
Aaron: "Hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch you water out of this rock?"
The word rendered "spake unadvisedly" - בטא bâṭâ' - means properly to
"babble;" and then, to talk idly, or unadvisedly; to utter that which
has no meaning, or an improper meaning. Let us not harshly blame Moses,
until we are placed in circumstances similar to his, and see how we
would ourselves act. Who is there that would not have been provoked as
he was, or even to a greater degree? If there are any such, let them
"cast the first stone."

[Psalms 106:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">psa 106:34</span></span>

They did not destroy the nations - The Canaanites, Hivites, Jebusites,
etc.; the nations that inhabited the land of Canaan.

Concerning whom the Lord commanded them - The command on this subject
was positive; and it was to destroy them, to spare none of them. [Num
33:52](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#052.md); [Deu
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#005.md), [Deu
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#016.md).

[Psalms 106:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">psa 106:35</span></span>

But were mingled among the heathen - Among the nations; by
intermarriage, and by commerce. They suffered them to remain in the
land, contrary to the command of God, and thus greatly exposed and
endangered the purity of their religion and their own morals. See [Jdg
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#002.md); [Jdg
3:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#005.md).

And learned their works - Their practices; their customs and habits:
learned to live as they did. This was an illustration of the danger of
contact with the wicked and the worldly. What occurred in their case has
often occurred since in the history of the people of God, that by
"mingling" with the world they have learned to practice their "works;"
have become conformed to their manner of living, and have thus lost
their spirituality, and brought dishonor on the cause of religion. There
is some proper sense in which the people of God are not to be conformed
to the world; in which, though living among them, they are to be
separate from them; in which, though they are parts of the same nation,
and live under the same government and laws, they are to be a distinct
and special people, ruled supremely by higher laws, and having higher
and nobler ends of life. [Rom 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002.md);
[Co2 6:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014.md).

[Psalms 106:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">psa 106:36</span></span>

And they served their idols - [Jdg
2:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#012.md), [Jdg
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#017.md), [Jdg
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#019.md); [Jdg
3:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#006.md).

Which were a snare unto them - Like the snares or toils by which birds
and wild beasts are caught. That is, they were taken unawares; they were
in danger when they did not perceive it; they fell when they thought
themselves safe. The bird and the wild beast approach the snare,
unconscious of danger; so the friend of God approaches the temptations
which are spread out before him by the enemy of souls - and, ere he is
aware, he is a captive, and has fallen. Nothing could better describe
the way in which the people of God are led into sin than the arts by
which birds are caught by the fowler, and wild beasts by the hunter.

[Psalms 106:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">psa 106:37</span></span>

Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters - See [Kg2
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#003.md); [Eze
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#020.md); [Eze
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#031.md); [Isa
57:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#005.md).

Unto devils - Hebrew, שׁדים shêdiym. The Septuagint, δαιμονίοις
daimoniois, "demons." So the Vulgate, "daemoniis." The word is used only
in the plural number, and is applied to idols. It occurs only in this
place, and in [Deu 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#017.md). On the
meaning of this, see the notes at [Co1
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020.md).

[Psalms 106:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">psa 106:38</span></span>

And shed innocent blood ... - The blood of those who had committed no
crime; who did not "deserve" the treatment which they received. That is,
they were sacrificed "as" innocent persons, and "because" it was
believed that they "were" innocent: the pure for the impure; the holy
for the unholy. It was on the general principle that a sacrifice for sin
must be itself pure, or it could not be offered in the place of the
guilty; that an offering made for one who had violated law must be by
one who had "not" violated it. This was the principle on which "lambs"
were offered in sacrifice. It is on this principle that the atonement
for sin by the Lord Jesus was made; on this depend its efficacy and its
value.

And the land was polluted with blood - That is, Either so much blood was
thus poured out, that it might be said that the very land was polluted
with it; or, the sin itself was so great, that it seemed to defile and
pollute the whole land.

[Psalms 106:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">psa 106:39</span></span>

Thus were they defiled with their own works - By their very attempts to
deliver themselves from sin. They were corrupt, and the consciousness
that they were sinners led them to the commission of even greater
enormities in attempting to expiate their guilt, even by the sacrifice
of their own sons and daughters. Thus all the religions of the pagan
begin in sin, and end in sin. The consciousness of sin only leads to the
commission of greater sin; to all the abominations of idol-worship; to
the sacrifice - the murder - of the innocent, with the vain hope of thus
making expiation for their crimes. Sinners have never yet been able to
devise a way by which they may make themselves pure. It is only the
great Sacrifice made on the cross which meets the case; which provides
expiation; and which saves from future sin.

And went a whoring - Apostacy from God and backsliding are ofen
illustrated in the Scriptures by the violation of the marriage compact,
as the relation between God and his people is often compared with the
relation between a husband and wife. Compare [Isa
62:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#005.md); [Jer
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#014.md); [Jer
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#009.md); [Jer
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#027.md); [Eze
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#020.md), [Eze
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#022.md), [Eze
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#025.md), [Eze
16:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#033.md); [Eze
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#017.md).

With their own inventions - More literally, With their own works. See
the notes at [Psa 106:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#029.md).

[Psalms 106:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">psa 106:40</span></span>

Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people - Anger
is often compared with a fire; as we say now, a man is "inflamed" with
passion. See [Est 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#012.md); [Lam
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#003.md); [Psa
79:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#005.md); [Psa
89:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#046.md); [Jer
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#004.md); [Jdg
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#014.md). Of course, this must be taken in
a manner appropriate to God. It means that his treatment of his
offending people was as if he were burning with wrath against them.

Insomuch that he abhorred his own inheritance - He was offended with his
people; he treated them "as if" they were an abomination to him. He
punished them; he cast them off; he left them to the just results of
their own conduct. Were ever any writers more candid and honest than the
sacred penmen? There is no effort to vindicate the nation; there is no
apology offered for them; there is no concealment of their guilt; there
is no attempt to soften the statement in regard to the feelings of God
toward them. Their conduct was abominable; they deserved the divine
displeasure; they were ungrateful, evil, and rebellious; and the sacred
writers do not hesitate to admit the truth of this to the fullest
extent.

[Psalms 106:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">psa 106:41</span></span>

And he gave them into the hand of the heathen - That is, of foreign
nations. They were indeed "pagans," in the sense in which that term is
used now - that is, they were ignorant of the true God, and worshipped
idols; but that idea is not necessarily in the original word. The word
"Gentiles" expresses all that the word implies.

And they that hated them ruled over them - Had them in subjection.

[Psalms 106:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">psa 106:42</span></span>

Their enemies also oppressed them - Septuagint, "Afflicted them," They
invaded their country; they destroyed their vintages; they laid desolate
their land; they made them captives.

And they were brought into subjection - Hebrew, made to bow.

[Psalms 106:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">psa 106:43</span></span>

Many times did he deliver them - From danger of invasion; from foreign
arms; from entire overthrow. Numerous instances of this are recorded in
the history of the Hebrew people.

But they provoked him with their counsel - This does not mean that they
gave counsel or advice to God; but it refers to the counsel which they
took among themselves; the plans which they formed. These were such as
to offend God.

And were brought low for their iniquity - Margin, "impoverished or
weakened." The Hebrew word means to melt away, to pine; and hence, to
decay, to be brought low. See [Job
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#024.md), where it is rendered "brought
low," and [Ecc 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#018.md), where it is
rendered "decayeth." The word does not occur elsewhere. The meaning is,
that they were weakened; their national strength was exhausted as a
punishment for their sins.

[Psalms 106:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">psa 106:44</span></span>

Nevertheless, he regarded their affliction - literally, "And he looked
upon the trouble that was upon them;" or, "and he saw in the distress to
them." The meaning is, that he did not turn away from it; he saw the
need of interposition, and he came to them.

When he heard their cry - literally, "In his hearing their cry." Their
cry for help came before him, and he did not refuse to look upon their
affliction. The idea is, that he was attracted to their case by their
loud cry for help; and that when he heard the cry, he did not refuse to
look upon their low and sad condition. God assists us when we cry to
him. We ask his attention to our troubles; we pray for his help; and
when he hears the cry, he comes and saves us. He does not turn away, or
treat our case as unworthy of his notice.

[Psalms 106:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">psa 106:45</span></span>

And he remembered for them his covenant - His solemn promises made to
their fathers. He remembered that covenant in their behalf; or, on
account of that, he came and blessed them. He had made gracious promises
to the patriarchs; he had promised to be the God of their posterity; he
had his own great purposes to accomplish through their nation in the
distant future; and on these accounts, he came and blessed them.

And repented - He averted impending judgments. He checked and arrested
the calamities which he was bringing upon them for their sins. He acted
toward them as though his mind had been changed; as though he was sorry
for what he was doing. The word "repent" can be applied to God in no
other sense than this. It cannot be applied to him in the sense that he
felt or admitted that he had done wrong; or that he had made a mistake;
or that he had changed his mind or purposes; or that he intended to
enter on a new course of conduct; but it may be applied to him in the
sense that his treatment of people is "as if" he had changed his mind,
or "as if" he were sorry for what he had done: that is, a certain course
of things which had been commenced, would be arrested and changed to
meet existing circumstances, because "they" had changed - though all
must have been foreseen and purposed in his eternal counsels.

According to the multitude of his mercies - The greatness of his mercy;
the disposition of his nature to show mercy; the repeated instances in
which he had shown mercy in similar circumstances.

[Psalms 106:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">psa 106:46</span></span>

He made them also to be pitied of all those that carried them captives -
That is, he exercised such control over the minds of the pagan that they
were willing to show them mercy and to release them. It was not by any
native tenderness on the part of the pagan; it was not because they were
disposed of themselves to show them any favor; it was not because they
had any "natural" relentings on the subject; but it was because God had
access to their hearts, and "inclined" them to show compassion for their
suffering prisoners. This is a remarkable instance of the power of God
over even the hardened minds and hearts of pagan men; and it shows that
he holds this power, and can exercise it when he pleases. If he could
excite in their hard hearts feelings of compassion toward his own people
in bondage, what should prevent his having such access to the hearts of
the pagan now as to lead them to repentance toward himself? On the
exercise of this power the salvation of the pagan world - as of all
sinners - must depend; and for the putting forth of this power we should
most fervently pray. The "literal" rendering of this verse would be,
"And he gave them to compassions before all those that made them
captive." That is, he inclined them to show favor or compassion. Compare
[Dan 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#009.md); [Kg1
8:50](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#050.md).

[Psalms 106:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">psa 106:47</span></span>

Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us from among the heathen - From
among the nations. From this it would seem that the psalm was composed
when the nation was in captivity, or was dispersed among the nations
that were hostile to them. The prayer is, that as God had, in former
periods, recovered his people when they were in exile, or were scattered
abroad, he would again graciously interpose and bring them to the land
of their fathers, where they had been accustomed to worship God.

To give thanks unto thy holy name - Unto thee; a holy God. That we may
praise thee in the place where thou art accustomed to be worshipped - in
the sanctuary.

And to triumph in thy praise - To exult; to rejoice; to be glad in
praising thee - in thy worship.

[Psalms 106:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">psa 106:48</span></span>

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting -
Forever. As he has been adored in the past - even from the beginning of
the creation - so let him be adored and praised in all periods to come -
forever and forever. See the notes at [Psa
41:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#013.md).

And let all the people say, Amen - In [Psa
41:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#013.md), this is, "Amen and amen." The
idea is, Let all the people join in this; let them all express and
declare their assent to this: let them all say, "Be it so." The word
"Amen" is a word expressing assent - meaning verily, truly, certainly.

Praise ye the Lord - Hebrew, "Hallelu-jah." See [Psa
104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 107](psa107.md)

</div>
