<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa124)  [Next](psa126) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 125](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 125:0</span></span>

This psalm is entitled merely "A Song of Degrees." Its author, and the
occasion on which it was composed, are unknown. The contents of the
psalm accord well with the supposition that it may have been written
after the return from the Babylonian captivity, and may have been
designed to strengthen and comfort those who were engaged in rebuilding
the city, and restoring the ancient worship, either against the
Samaritans and those who opposed them [Neh
6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#012), or against the lukewarmness
of a part of the people themselves. There is nothing, however, so
exclusively applicable to that time as to make it necessary to suppose
that it was composed on that occasion. There is, indeed, evidence in the
psalm [Psa 125:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#005), that there were some
among the people who were disposed to turn away from the service of
Yahweh, or who were perverse and rebellious; but such a state of things
was not special to the time of the return from the captivity, nor was it
special to the Jews, for it has occurred often; it exists still. The
psalm is designed to encourage those who were disposed to trust in the
Lord, by the assurance that they would be safe; that the blessing of God
would be upon them; and that the church was firm and secure.

[Psalms 125:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 125:1</span></span>

They that trust in the Lord - His people; his friends. It is, and has
been always, a characteristic of the people of God that they trust or
confide in him.

Shall be as mount Zion - The mountain which David fortified, and on
which the city was at first built, [Sa2
5:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006). The name Zion became also the
name by which the entire city was known.

Which cannot be removed, but abideth for ever - A mountain is an emblem
of firmness and stability; and it is natural to speak of it as that
which could not be removed. There is something more than this, however,
intended here, as there is some ground of comparison especially in
regard to Mount Zion. This must have been either the idea that Zion was
particularly strong by position, or that it was under the divine
protection, and was therefore safe. Most probably it refers to Zion as a
place secure by nature, and rendered more so by art.

[Psalms 125:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 125:2</span></span>

As the mountains are round about Jerusalem - Hebrew, "Jerusalem - the
mountains are round about her." Jerusalem, except on the north, is
encompassed with hills or mountains, so that although the city was built
on hills - Zion, Moriah, Bezethah, Acra - it was itself surrounded by
hills higher than any of these, and was, in a certain sense, in a
valley. See the notes at [Mat 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001).
Compare the notes at [Psa 48:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001).

So the Lord is round about his people ... - As Jerusalem is thus
protected by the hills around, so the people of God are protected by
Yahweh. He surrounds the church; he is exalted far above the church; he
guards the approaches to the church; he can defend it from all its foes.
Under his protection it is safe. Jerusalem, as surrounded by hills and
mountains, has thus become an emblem of the church at all times; its
security was an emblem of the security of all who trust in the Lord.

[Psalms 125:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 125:3</span></span>

For the rod of the wicked - Margin, as in Hebrew, "wickedness." The word
"rod" - the staff, the scepter, the instrument of inflicting punishment
- here means dominion, power, that condition in which the wicked are
commonly found, as one of prosperity or power. God will not deal with
the righteous as the wicked are often dealt with: that is, God will not
give his people prosperity as he does them. The righteous will be
afflicted, and will be placed in circumstances to keep them from putting
forth their hands to iniquity; that is, from indulging in iniquity. They
will be afflicted; they will be kept in the ways of virtue and religion
by trial; they will not be left to act out the depravity of the heart as
the wicked are.

Shall not rest upon - Permanently abide; or, be the constant condition
of the righteous. They may be prospered, but they must expect that there
will be changes, and that God will so deal with them as to keep them
from putting forth their hands to iniquity.

The lot of the righteous - The righteous, considered as the "lot" or
portion of the Lord. The language is derived from dividing a land by lot
(compare [Psa 105:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#011); [Psa
74:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#002)); and the idea is, that the "lot"
pertaining to the Lord, or his "portion" among people, is the righteous.

Lest the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity - Lest the effect
of prosperity should be to lead them away from God - like the wicked.
Hence, they are dealt with in a different manner. They are afflicted;
they are thus kept under proper discipline, and their hearts and lives
are made what they should be. The statement in this verse, therefore,
accords with the uniform statements in the Scriptures, that prosperity
is dangerous to the spiritual interests of people, and that, therefore,
people are often afflicted in order that they may be led to seek higher
interests than those which pertain to this life. The connection here
seems to be, that God will defend his people, even as Jerusalem was
defended by hills and mountains; but that the real welfare and
prosperity of his people was not what the wicked seek - wealth and honor
- but the favor of the Lord. Another meaning may, however, be suggested
in regard to this verse, which to some may appear more probable than the
one above. It is this: that the "rod" - the dominion of the wicked - of
bad rulers - of a harsh and oppressive government - will not always be
upon the people of God, lest, being crushed, they should be led to acts
of iniquity; or lest, being kept from the free service of God, they
should abandon themselves to sin.

[Psalms 125:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 125:4</span></span>

Do good, O Lord, unto those that be good ... - To the good; to the
pious. Let them be under the divine protection. Possibly this is not
merely a prayer, but is expressive of the belief of the psalmist as to
what would occur under the divine administration - that the favor of God
would rest upon his people.

[Psalms 125:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 125:5</span></span>

As for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways - The wicked. Those
who leave the right or straight path, and wander in forbidden ways. The
word here rendered "crooked ways" occurs nowhere else except in [Jdg
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#006), where it is rendered "by-ways,"
meaning unfrequented paths or roads; narrow and crooked paths, remote
from the highways, or the ways commonly traversed. Hence, the word means
also paths of sin - as deviations from the straight road which man
should travel.

The Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity - They shall
be dealt with as sinners. They shall be punished. The allusion is to
backsliders; to those who forsake the worship of God; who cease to do
"good;" who, though among the professed people of God, wander from him
in by-paths and forbidden ways. The idea is, that their profession of
religion will not save them; that they will not obtain the divine
blessing merely because they are avowedly the people of God, or are
numbered among them, but that they will be treated as all other sinners
are: they will be led forth with all the wicked, and will be treated
like them. Compare [Eze 33:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#012); [Mat
7:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022); [Mat
25:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#011).

But peace shall be upon Israel - Upon the real Israel; upon the true
people of God. [Gal 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016); [Isa
54:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#013); [Isa
55:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#012); [Isa
57:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#002); [Isa
66:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#012); [Joh
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027); [Joh
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033); [Eph
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#017); [Phi
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 126](psa126)

</div>
