<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa099)  [Next](psa101.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 100](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 100:0</span></span>

This psalm - so beautiful - so grand - so often sung in all lands and
languages - completes this "group" of psalms respecting the reign of
God, or the reasons for praise as derived from the fact that he reigns.
In the previous psalms in this group Ps. 95-99 the call to praise had
been in some respects local and particular; in this, it is universal.
All lands are called on to praise him; all people to worship him as God.
The "ground" of this, as stated in the psalm, is that he is their
"Maker;" that he is the Creator of all. As all have derived their being
from him, they are called on to praise him as their common Creator and
Father. So far as the reason here referred to is a ground for praise and
worship, it applies to all people now. The nations - the people of the
earth - are one. However much they may differ in complexion, in
language, in customs, in religion, they have all been formed by the same
God; they are all of one family; they are all entitled to the same
privileges; they may all have the same access to his throne. The races
of people are one; and all should gather around the throne of their
common Creator, and render him united praise. This psalm has been sung
by million and hundreds of million; it will continue to be sung to the
end of time.

The psalm is entitled "A Psalm of praise In the margin, "thanksgiving."
The Septuagint is, "A Psalm of Confession" - εἰς ἐξομολόγησιν eis
homologēsin. So the Latin Vulgate, and the Chaldee. The Syriac version
is, "anonymous," or, without a name; "concerning Joshua the son of Nun,
when he subdued the Ammonites." Luther: "A Psalm of Thanksgiving."

[Psalms 100:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 100:1</span></span>

Make a joyful noise unto the Lord - See the notes at [Psa
95:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#001.md).

All ye lands - Margin, as in Hebrew, "all the earth." The margin
expresses the sense. The idea in the psalm is, that praise did not
pertain to one nation only; that it was not appropriate for one people
merely; that it should not be confined to the Hebrew people, but that
there was a proper ground of praise for "all;" there was that in which
all nations, of all languages and conditions, could unite. The ground of
that was the fact that they had one Creator, [Psa
100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003.md). The psalm is based on the unity
of the human race; on the fact that there is one God and Father of all,
and one great family on earth.

[Psalms 100:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 100:2</span></span>

Serve the Lord with gladness - That is, In your worship, and in all your
acts of obedience. Let there be joy in this service. Let it not be with
the fear of slaves; not as a matter of compulsion and force; not with
reluctance, moroseness, or gloom. Let it be a cheerful, happy service;
let it be freely rendered, let it be an occasion of joy to the soul. The
service of God is a source of the highest joy that man knows.

Come before his presence with singing - As expressive of joy. So the
birds sing; so nature rejoices; so should man - intelligent, redeemed,
immortal man, be joyful.

[Psalms 100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 100:3</span></span>

Know ye that the Lord, he is God - That is, Let all the nations know
that Yahweh is the true God. The idols are vanity. They have no claim to
worship; but God is the Creator of all, and is entitled to universal
adoration.

It is he that hath made us - The Hebrew is, "He made us," and this
expresses the exact idea. The fact that he is the Creator proves that he
is God, since no one but God can perform the work of creation. The
highest idea that we can form of power is that which is evinced in an
act of creation; that is, in causing anything to exist where there was
nothing before. Every created thing, therefore, is a proof of the
existence of God; the immensity of the universe is an illustration of
the greatness of his power.

And not we ourselves - Margin, "And his we are." The difference between
the text and the margin is owing to a different reading in the Hebrew,
varying only in a single letter. The reading in the text is, "And not
(לא lo') we;" in the margin, "And to him (לו lô) we." These words would
be pronounced in the same manner, and either of them would convey good
sense. The weight of authority is in favor of the common reading, "And
not we;" that is, We are not self-created; we derive our being from him.
All that we have and are, we owe to him.

We are his people - By virtue of creation. The highest "property" which
can exist is that derived from an act of creation. He that has brought
anything into existence has a right to it, and may dispose of it as he
pleases. It is on this idea essentially that all idea of "property" is
founded.

And the sheep of his pasture - As the shepherd owns the flock, so God is
our owner; as the shepherd guards his flock and provides for it, so God
guards us and provides for us. See the notes at [Psa
95:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#007.md).

[Psalms 100:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 100:4</span></span>

Enter into his gates ... - The gates which lead to his temple, or to the
place of public worship.

Into his courts ... - The "courts" were literally the open spaces which
surrounded the tabernacle or temple. It was in these that worship was
celebrated, and not in the tabernacle or temple. See [Psa
65:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#004.md), note; [Psa
84:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#002.md), note; [Psa
92:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#013.md), note.

Be thankful unto him - That is, Offer thanksgiving and praise. Come
before him with a grateful heart. See the notes at [Psa
50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014.md).

Bless his name - Bless him; praise him; ascribe honor to him;
acknowledge him as God.

[Psalms 100:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 100:5</span></span>

For the Lord is good - For good is Yahweh. That is, He is not a being of
mere "power;" he is not merely the Creator; but he is benevolent, and
is, therefore, worthy of universal praise. In the former verses, his
claim to adoration is founded on the fact that he is the "Creator," and
has, as such, a right to our service; in this verse, the claim is
asserted on account of his moral character:

\(1\) his benevolence;

\(2\) his mercy;

\(3\) his truth;

\(a\) the fact that he is a God of truth; and

\(b\) the fact that his truth endures, or that in all generations he
shows himself to be faithful to his promises.

The first of these is his "benevolence:" "The Lord is good." As such,
assuredly, God is worthy of praise and honor. A being of "mere" power we
could not love or praise; a being whose power was united with malignity
or malevolence, could only be the object of hatred and terror; but a
being whose power is united with goodness or benevolence ought to he
loved.

His mercy is everlasting - This is the "second" reason, drawn from his
moral character, why he should be praised and adored. A being of mere
"justice" may be feared and respected; but a character of "mere" justice
would be to man an object of dread - and may be so anywhere. There are
other attributes than the one of "justice," high and valuable as that
may be, which are necessary to constitute a perfect character; and man,
in order to find happiness and security, must find some other attribute
in God than mere "justice," for man is a sinner, and needs pardon; he is
a sufferer, and needs compassion; he is to die, and needs support and
consolation. Besides, mere "justice" may drive its decisions over some
of the kindest and tenderest feelings of human nature, for there are
cases, under all administrations, where pardon is desirable and mercy is
proper. It is, therefore, a ground of unspeakable joy for man that God
is not a Being of "mere justice," but that there is mingled in his
character the attribute of mercy and kindness. But for this, man could
have no hope; for, as a sinner, he has no claim on God, and all his hope
must be derived from God's infinite compassion. To all this as a ground
of praise is to be added the fact that this mercy of God is
"everlasting." Its fruits - its results - will extend to the vast
eternity before us; and in all that eternity we shall never cease to
enjoy the benefits of that mercy; never be suffered to fall back on the
mere "justice" of God.

And his truth endureth to all generations - Margin, as in Hebrew, "to
generation and generation." That is, forever. It is the same in every
generation of the world. This is the third reason derived from the moral
character of God for praising him; and this is a just ground of praise.
We could not love and honor a God who was not true to his promises, and
who did not himself love the truth; we could not honor one who was
changeable and flexible - who loved one thing in one generation and a
different thing in the next; who in one age was the friend of truth, and
in the next the patron of falsehood. It is the just foundation for
praise to God - our God - that he is essentially and always - in all
worlds, and in all the generations of people - toward all in the
universe - a Being of unchangeable benevolence, mercy, and truth. Such a
God is worthy to be had in universal reverence; such a God is worthy of
universal praise.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 101](psa101.md)

</div>
