<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa103)  [Next](psa105) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 104](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 104:0</span></span>

This psalm in the Syriac, the Arabic, the Greek, and the Latin versions,
is ascribed to David, but on what authority is now unknown. That it
"may" have been composed by him cannot be doubted, but there is no
certain evidence that he was the author. In the Hebrew, it has no title,
and there is nothing in the psalm itself which would furnish any
indication as to its authorship.

The occasion on which the psalm was composed is unknown, and cannot now
be ascertained. Rosenmuller and Hengstenberg suppose that it was at the
time of the return from the Babylonian exile, and that it was intended
to be used at the re-dedication of the temple. But it has no special
applicability to such a service; it has no such local references as
would fix it to that time; it has nothing which would make it
inappropriate at "any" time, or in "any public service. It is such a
psalm as might be composed at any period of the world, or in any
country, where there was an intelligent view and a careful observation
of the works of God. It implies, indeed, such a knowledge of the fact
that God made the world as could be obtained only by revelation; but it
evinces also a power of close observation; a large acquaintance with the
creation around us; a relish for the scenes of nature; as well as a rich
poetic faculty, and a power of description, adapted to place such scenes
before the mind as realities, and to make us feel, in reading it, that
we are in the very midst of the things which are described - so that
they seem to live and move before our eyes.

The psalm was probably founded on the record of the creation in Gen. 1;
with a design to show that the order of the creation, as there
described, "was adapted to the purposes which were intended, and was
carried out in the providential arrangements now existing on the earth;"
or, that, taking the order of the creation as described there, the
existing state of things furnished an illustration of the wisdom and
benevolence of that order. Accordingly, in the psalm, it was convenient
for the writer to follow substantially the "order" observed in Gen. 1 in
narrating the creation of the world; and he states, under each part, the
"acting out" of that order in existing things; creation in its being
actually carried out, or in its results - the creation "developing
itself" in the varied and wonderful forms of being - of vegetable and
animal life - of beauty, of harmonious movement, of ceaseless activity -
on the land, in the air, and in the waters. Accordingly there is in the
psalm:

I. An allusion to the work of the "first" day, [Psa
104:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002) (compare [Gen
1:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)): to the stretching out of the
heavens as a curtain; to the source of light - "who coverest thyself
with light as with a garment;" - to the laying of the foundations of the
earth to abide forever; to God as Creator of all things, with the
additional ideas of his being clothed with honor and majesty; making the
clouds his chariot; walking upon the wings of the wind; making the winds
his messengers, and flames of fire his ministers.

II\. An allusion to the work of the "second" day, [Psa
104:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#006) (compare [Gen
1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006)). Here it is the separation of
the waters - the power exerted on the waters of the earth; in Genesis,
the dividing of the waters above from those on the earth; in the psalm,
the poetic images of the deep covering the earth as with a garment; the
waters climbing up the mountains, and rolling down into the valleys,
until they found the place appointed for them, a boundary which they
could not pass so as to return again and cover the earth.

III\. An allusion to the work of the "third" day, [Psa
104:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#010) (compare [Gen
1:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009)). In Genesis, the waters
gathering together; the dry land appearing, and the earth yielding
grass, and herbs, and fruit trees - the creation of vegetables; in the
psalm, the springs running into the valleys, and winding among the hills
- giving drink to the beasts, and quenching the thirst of wild asses -
furnishing a lace for the fowls to build their nests, causing the grass
to grow for the cattle, and herbs for the service of man - supplying him
wine to make him glad, and oil to make his face shine, and bread to
strengthen his heart - bringing forth the trees of the Lord, the cedars
of Lebanon for the birds to make their nests, and the fir trees for the
stork - making the hills a refuge for the wild goats, and the rocks for
the conies: that is, the work of creation on the third day is seen by
the eye of the psalmist not "as" mere "creation," but in the "result,"
as enlivened and animated by all these varied forms of life, activity,
and beauty which had been spread over the earth as the "consequence" of
this part of the work of creation.

IV\. An allusion to the work of the "fourth" day, [Psa
104:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#019) (compare [Gen
1:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014)). Here, as in the previous
divisions of the psalm, it is not a reference to the mere "creation" -
to the power evinced - but to the creation of the sun and moon "as seen
in the effects" produced by them - the living world as it is influenced
by the sun and moon: the seasons - the alternations of day and night.
Thus [Psa 104:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#020), at night, when the
sun has gone down, all the beasts of the forest are seen creeping forth;
the lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God; and again
when the sun arises [Psa 104:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#022),
they are seen gathering themselves together, and retiring to their dens,
and man is seen going forth to his work and to his labor until the
evening. It is thus not the original act of creation which is before the
mind of the psalmist, but that act in its development, or when it is
seen what God contemplated by it, or what he intended that in this
respect the world should be when he made the sun, the moon, and the
stars.

V. An allusion to the work of the "fifth" day, [Psa
104:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024) (compare [Gen
1:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020)); the creation of "life" in
the waters, and in the air; as the fowls of heaven - the whales, etc.
Here, too, the psalmist sees all this as it is - or developed on the
sea, and in the air. In the sea there are things creeping innumerable,
small and great; there are the ships; there is leviathan; there is
everywhere animated life; there are beings innumerable all dependent on
God; there are the processes of renewing, creating, destroying,
continually going on - a moving scene, showing the "effect of life" as
it is produced by God.

VI\. It is remarkable, however, that the allusion to the successive days
of the work of creation, so obvious in the other parts of the psalm,
seems to close here, and there is no distinct reference to the sixth
day, or the seventh - to the creation of "man" as the crowning work, and
to the "rest" provided for man in the appointment of the Sabbath. The
purpose of the psalmist seems to have been to celebrate the praises of
God in the varied scene - the panorama passing before the eye in the
works of "nature." The purpose did not seem to be to contemplate "man" -
his creation - his history - but "nature," as seen around us. The
remainder of the psalm, therefore, is occupied with a description of the
glory of the Lord "as thus manifested;" the works of God as suited to
fill the mind with exalted views of his greatness, and with a desire
that his reign may be universal and perpetual, [Psa
104:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#031).

[Psalms 104:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 104:1</span></span>

Bless the Lord, O my soul - See [Psa
103:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#001).

O Lord my God, thou art very great - This is a reason why the psalmist
calls on his soul to bless God; namely, for the fact that he is so
exalted; so vast in his perfections; so powerful, so wise, so great.

Thou art clothed with honor and majesty - That is, with the emblems of
honor and majesty, as a king is arrayed in royal robes. Creation is the
garment with which God has invested himself. Compare the notes at [Psa
93:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001).

[Psalms 104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 104:2</span></span>

Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment - Referring to the
first work of creation [Gen 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003), "And
God said, Let there be light, and there was light." He seemed to put on
light as a garment; he himself appeared as if invested with light. It
was the first "manifestation" of God. He seemed at once to have put on
light as his robe.

Who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain - As an expanse spread
over us. The word used here means a curtain or hanging, so called from
its tremulous motion, from a word meaning to tremble. Thus it is applied
to a curtain before a door; to a tent, etc. It is applied here to the
heavens, as they seem to be "spread out" like the curtains of a tent, as
if God had spread them out for a tent for himself to dwell in. See the
notes at [Isa 40:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022).

[Psalms 104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 104:3</span></span>

Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters - The word here
rendered "layeth" - from קרה qârâh - means properly to meet; then, in
Hiphil, to cause to meet, or to fit into each other, as beams or joists
do in a dwelling. It is a word which would be properly applied to the
construction of a house, and to the right adjustment of the different
materials employed in building it. The word rendered "beams" - עליה
‛ălı̂yâh - means "an upper chamber, a loft," such as rises, in Oriental
houses, above the flat roof; in the New Testament, the ὑπερῷον huperōon,
rendered "upper room," [Act 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#013); [Act
9:37](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#037), [Act
9:39](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#039); [Act
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#008). It refers here to the chamber -
the exalted abode of God - as if raised above all other edifices, or
above the world. The word "waters" here refers to the description of the
creation in [Gen 1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006) - the waters
"above the firmament," and the waters "below the firmament." The
allusion here is to the waters above the firmament; and the meaning is,
that God had constructed the place of his own abode - the room where he
dwelt - in those waters; that is, in the most exalted place in the
universe. It does not mean that he made it of the waters, but that his
home - his dwelling-place - was in or above those waters, as if he had
built his dwelling not on solid earth or rock, but in the waters, giving
stability to that which seems to have no stability, and making the very
waters a foundation for the structure of his abode.

Who maketh the clouds his chariot - Who rides on the clouds as in a
chariot. See the notes at [Isa 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001).
Compare the notes at [Psa 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011).

Who walketh upon the wings of the wind - See the notes at [Psa
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#010).

[Psalms 104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 104:4</span></span>

Who maketh his angels spirits - The meaning here literally would be,
"Who makes the winds his messengers," or "his angels;" that is, who
employs them to execute his purpose; who sends them out as messengers or
angels to do his will.

His ministers a flaming fire - That is, Fire is employed by him - in
lightnings - to accomplish his purpose as his ministers or his servants.
They are entirely under his command. They are sent by him to do his
will; to carry out his designs. This is intended to describe the majesty
and the power of God - that he can employ wind and lightning - tempest
and storm - to go on errands such as he commands; to fulfill his plans;
to do his bidding. For the application of this to the angels, and as
employed by the apostle Paul to prove the inferiority of the angels to
the Messiah, see the notes at [Heb
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#007).

[Psalms 104:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 104:5</span></span>

Who laid the foundations of the earth - Referring still to the creation
of the earth. The margin is, "He hath founded the earth upon her bases."
The Hebrew word rendered in the margin "her bases" means properly a
place; then a basis or foundation. The idea is, that there wes
something, as it were, placed under the earth to support it. The idea is
not uncommon in the Scriptures. Compare the notes at [Job
38:4](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#004).

That it should not be removed for ever - So that it cannot be shaken out
of its place. That is, It is fixed, permanent, solid. Its foundations do
not give way, as edifices reared by man. but it abides the same from age
to age - the most fixed and stable object of which we have any
knowledge. Compare the notes at [Psa
78:69](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#069).

[Psalms 104:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 104:6</span></span>

Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment - Compare the notes at
[Job 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#009). The meaning is, that God
covered the earth with the sea - the waters - the abyss - as if a
garment had been spread over it. The reference is to [Gen
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002); where, in the account of the work
of creation, what is there called "the deep" - the abyss - (the same
Hebrew word as here - תהום tehôm - covered the earth, or was what
"appeared," or was manifest, before the waters were collected into seas,
and the dry land was seen.

The waters stood above the mountains - Above what are now the mountains.
As yet no dry land appeared. It seemed to be one wide waste of waters.
This does not refer to the Deluge, but to the appearance of the earth at
the time of the creation, before the gathering of the waters into seas
and oceans, [Gen 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009). At that stage in
the work, all that appeared was a wide waste of waters.

[Psalms 104:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 104:7</span></span>

At thy rebuke they fled - At thy command; or when thou didst speak to
them. The Hebrew word also implies the notion of "rebuke," or "reproof,"
as if there were some displeasure or dissatisfaction. [Pro
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#001); [Pro
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#010); [Ecc
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#005); [Isa
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#017); [Psa
76:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#006). It is "as if" God had been
displeased that the waters prevented the appearing or the rising of the
dry land, and had commanded them to "hasten" to their beds and channels,
and no longer to cover the earth. The allusion is to [Gen
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009), and there is nowhere to be found
a more sublime expression than this. Even the command, "And God said,
Let there be light; and there was light," so much commended by Longinus
as an instance of sublimity, does not surpass this in grandeur.

At the voice of thy thunder they hasted away - They fled in dismay. The
Hebrew word - חפז châphaz - contains the idea of haste, trepidation,
consternation, alarm, "as if" they were frightened; [Psa
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#022). God spake in tones of thunder,
and they fled. It is impossible to conceive anything more sublime than
this.

[Psalms 104:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 104:8</span></span>

They go up by the mountains ... - That is, when they were gathered
together into seas. They seemed to roll and tumble over hills and
mountains, and to run down in valleys, until they found the deep hollows
which had been formed for seas, and where they were permanently
collected together. The margin here is, "The mountains ascend, the
valleys descend." So it is translated in the Septuagint, in the Latin
Vulgate, by Luther, and by DeWette. The more natural idea, however, is
that in our translation: "They (the waters) go up mountains; they
descend valleys."

Unto the place - The deep hollows of the earth, which seem to have been
scooped out to make a place for them.

Which thou hast founded for them - Where thou hast laid a permanent
foundation for them on which to rest; that is, which thou hast prepared
for them.

[Psalms 104:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 104:9</span></span>

Thou hast set a bound that they may not pass over - See [Job
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#010), note; [Job
38:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#010), note.

That they turn not again to cover the earth - As it was before the dry
land appeared; or as the earth was when "darkness was upon the face of
the deep" [Gen 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002), and when all was
mingled earth and water. It is "possible" that in connection with this,
the psalmist may also have had his eye on the facts connected with the
deluge in the time of Noah, and the promise then made that the world
should no more be destroyed by a flood, [Gen
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#011), [Gen
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#015).

[Psalms 104:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 104:10</span></span>

He sendeth the springs into the valleys - Though the waters are gathered
together into seas, yet God has taken care that the earth shall not be
dry, parched, and barren. He has made provision for watering it, and by
a most wise, wonderful, and benevolent arrangement, he has formed
springs among the valleys and the hills. It is now animated nature which
comes before the eye of the psalmist; and all this he traces to the fact
that the earth is "watered," and that it is not a waste of rocks and
sands. The allusion in this part of the psalm (see the Introduction) is
to the earth as covered with vegetation - or, to the third day of the
week of creation [Gen 1:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009), which,
in Genesis, is connected with the gathering of the waters into seas.
This description continues in [Psa
104:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#018). The literal rendering here
would be, "sending springs into the valleys." He conducts the waters
from the great reservoirs - lakes and seas - in such a way that they
form springs in the valleys. The way in which this is done is among the
most wonderful and the most benevolent in nature - by that power,
derived from heat, by which the waters of the ocean, contrary to the
natural law of gravitation, are lifted up in small particles - in vapor
- and carried by the clouds where they are needed, and let fall upon the
earth, to water the plants, and to form fountains, rivulets, and streams
- and borne thus to the highest mountains, to be filtered through the
ground to form springs and streams below.

Which run among the hills - Margin, "walk." That is, they go between the
hills. The streams of water flow along in the natural valleys which have
been made for them.

[Psalms 104:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 104:11</span></span>

They give drink to every beast of the field - All are thus kept alive.
The wild beasts that roam at large, find water thus provided for them.

The wild donkeys quench their thirst - Margin, as in Hebrew, "break."
The meaning is, that the most wild and ungovernable of beasts - those
which are farthest from the habits of domesticated animals, and the most
independent of any aid derived from man, find abundance everywhere. On
the word rendered "wild asses," and on the habits of the animals here
referred to, see the notes at [Job
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#012).

[Psalms 104:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 104:12</span></span>

By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation - Among them
the fowls of the air dwell. That is, among the trees which spring up by
the fountains and water-courses. The whole picture is full of animation
and beauty.

Which sing among the branches - Margin, as in Hebrew, "give a voice."
Their voice is heard - their sweet music - in the foliage of the trees
which grow on the margin of the streams and by the fountains. There is
scarcely to be found a more beautiful poetic image than this.

[Psalms 104:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 104:13</span></span>

He watereth the hills from his chambers - The waters, as stated before,
run in the valleys - in the natural channels made for them among the
hills, [Psa 104:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#010). But still, it was
a fact that the hills themselves were watered; that there were springs
far up their heights; and that vegetation was sustained above the reach
of the fountains and streams below; and it was a proof of the divine
skill and beneficence that, in some way, water was furnished on the
summits and sides of the hills themselves. This was caused, the psalmist
says, by God's pouring water on them, as it were, from his own
"chambers" - his abode on high. The allusion is, doubtless, to rain,
which seems to be poured down from the very abode of God. The word
rendered "chambers" means "upper rooms," (see the notes at [Psa
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003)); and the reference is to the
dwelling-place of God, as far above the earth.

The earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works - Thy doings; with
what thou hast done. All the needs of the earth seem to be met and
"satisfied;" all that it could desire to make it fertile and beautiful;
and the proper abode of man, of beast, and of fowl, has been granted. It
has no cause of complaint; nothing has been left undone, in the valleys
or on the hills, on the dry land or in the waters, that was needful to
be done to carry out the purpose for which it has been called into
being.

[Psalms 104:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 104:14</span></span>

He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle - Out of the earth there is
caused to grow every variety of food necessary for the various orders of
beings that are placed upon it. The idea here is not merely that of
"abundance;" it is also that of "variety:" the needs and tastes of all
have been consulted in the productions of the earth. The one earth - the
same earth - has been made to produce the endless varieties of food
required for the creatures that have been placed on it. The word "grass"
here refers to all the vegetable productions needful for cattle.

And herb for the service of man - [Gen
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#029). The word "herb" here would
include every green plant or vegetable; or all that the earth produces
for the food of man. This, of course, refers to the earth as it came
from the hand of God, and to the original arrangement, before permission
was given to man to eat the flesh of animals, [Gen
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#003). The word translated "service"
might be rendered "culture," as if man was to cultivate it for his use,
not that it was to be produced, as the food for cattle, spontaneously.

That he may bring forth food out of the earth - Hebrew, "bread." That
is, that by culture he may bring forth that which would make bread.

[Psalms 104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 104:15</span></span>

And wine that maketh glad the heart of man ... - literally, "And wine
(it) gladdens the heart of man to make his face to shine more than oil."
Margin, "to make his face shine with oil, or more than oil." The latter
expresses the idea most accurately. So DeWette renders it. The meaning
is, that the earth is made to produce wine (or grapes which produce
wine), and this exhilarates the heart, so that the effect is seen on the
countenance, making it more bright and cheerful than it is when anointed
with oil. On the use of oil, see the notes at [Psa
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005). The reference here, in the
original, is not to wine and oil as produced by the earth, as would seem
to be implied in our translation, but to wine that makes the heart glad,
and the face brighter than if anointed with oil. The psalmist here
states a fact about the use of wine - a wellknown fact that it
exhilarates the heart, and brightens the countenance; and he states it
merely as a fact. He says nothing on the question whether the use of
wine as a beverage is, or is not, proper and safe. Compare the notes at
[Joh 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#010).

And bread which strengtheneth man's heart - That is, Which sustains the
heart - that being regarded as the seat of life. Compare [Gen
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#005).

[Psalms 104:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 104:16</span></span>

The trees of the Lord - From the grass, from the herb, from the vine,
and from bread, as adapted to sustain the living beings upon the earth,
the psalmist passes to the more lofty and grand productions of the
vegetable world - to those which display more manifestly the power of
God, and which furnish abodes and retreats for the various orders of
living beings. The phrase "the trees of the Lord" means great and
magnificent trees - as the expression "mountains of God" means great and
lofty mountains - as if they seemed to "approach" God, or as if no
appellation would so well describe their nature as that which was
derived from the Infinite One. See [Psa
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006), note; [Psa
65:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#009), note; [Psa
80:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#010), note.

Are full of sap - The word so rendered means merely to be full, to be
saturated - the words "of sap" being supplied by the translators. The
idea is, that, lofty as they are, they are abundantly supplied with that
which is necessary to their growth. There is no want - no lack - of that
which is needful to supply them. They flourish, sustained abundantly by
that which is derived from the earth and the waters.

The cedars of Lebanon - As among the loftiest and most magnificent
productions of the earth. See [Psa
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#005), note; [Psa
92:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#012), note; [Isa
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#013), note.

Which he hath planted - So lofty and large, that it would seem as if
none could plant them but the Almighty.

[Psalms 104:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 104:17</span></span>

Where the birds make their nests - Furnishing a home for the birds where
they may breed their young. In [Psa
104:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#012), the birds are introduced as
singing among the foliage of trees and shrubs by the water-courses; here
they are introduced as having their home in the lofty cedars in places
which God had made for them. The word rendered "birds" here is the word
which in [Psa 84:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#003) is translated
"sparrow," and which is commonly used to denote "small birds." Compare
[Lev 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#004) (margin), and [Lev
14:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#005), [Lev
14:49-53](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#049). It is used, however, to
denote birds of any kind. See [Gen
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#014); [Psa
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#008); [Psa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001); [Psa
148:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#010).

As for the stork - See the notes at [Job
39:13](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#013).

The fir trees are her house - Her retreat; her abode. The stork here is
used to represent the larger class of birds. The meaning is, that they
build their nests among the fir-trees or cypresses. See the notes at
[Isa 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#008); notes at [Isa
41:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#019). So Milton says:

"The eagle and the stork

On cliffs and cedar-tops their eyries build."

They build their nests, however, not only on fir and pine trees, but on
houses and castles. Dr. Thomson ("Land and the Book," vol. i. p. 504),
says of them, "These singular birds do not breed in Syria, but pass over
it to Asia Minor, and into Northwestern Europe, where they not only
build in fir and pine trees upon the mountains, but also enter cities
and villages, and make their nests on houses, castles, and minarets."

[Psalms 104:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 104:18</span></span>

The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats - Still keeping up the
description of animated nature - the carrying out of the work of
creation. The idea is, that nature is full of life. Even the most
inaccessible places - the rocks - the high hills - have their
inhabitants. Where man cannot climb or dwell, there are abodes of
animals which God has made to dwell there, and which find there a refuge
- a shelter - a home. On the word used here, and rendered "wild goats,"
see the notes at [Job 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#001). The word
occurs elsewhere only in [Sa1 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#002).

And the rocks for the conies - The word here "employed" - שׁפן shâphân -
denotes a quadruped that chews the cud, in the manner of a hare [Lev
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#005); [Deu
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#007), and living in flocks. The rabbis
render it the "coney," or rabbit, as our translators have done. The
habits of the rabbit accord with this description. The word occurs
nowhere else, except in [Pro 30:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#026),
where it is rendered, as here, "conies."

[Psalms 104:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 104:19</span></span>

He appointed the moon for seasons - [Gen
1:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014). That is, The moon, as well as
the sun, is appointed to divide time; to determine its progress; to
indicate the return of festival occasions, or appointed times to be
observed in any manner. It is, in fact, the foundation of the division
of the year into "months," and consequently the indication of all that
is to be observed in the "months" of the year. But for this, there would
be no natural divisions of time except those of day and night, and of
the year. How great an advantage it is for the purpose of life, to have
time broken up into brief intervals or periods which can be marked and
remembered, both in our private life and in history, it is not necessary
to say. God has been pleased to add to the natural divisions of time
into days, and years, and months, an "artificial" division - the
"fourth" part of the moon's course - "a week," indicated by the Sabbath,
thus greatly facilitating the plans of life in regard to stated times or
"seasons," and especially in regard to religious observances. The idea
in the passage before us is, that the whole arrangement is one of
benevolence, promoting the comfort of man, and bringing the ideas of
succession, variety, and beauty into the system.

The sun knoweth his going down - As if conscious of what he is doing, he
knows the exact time of setting, and never varies, but always obeys the
divine command; never sets "before" his time - unexpectedly shortening
the day, and leaving man in sudden darkness in the midst of his toil;
and never lingers above the horizon "after" the moment has come for his
setting, but withdraws at the exact time, enabling man to close his
toil, and seek repose, and giving an opportunity for another class of
creatures to come forth on the animated scene. Their good is regarded as
well as that of man; and the operations of nature are so arranged as to
promote the welfare of all.

[Psalms 104:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 104:20</span></span>

Thou makest darkness, and it is night - Thou hast made arrangements for
the return of night - for the alternations of day and night. The Hebrew
word rendered "makest," means "to place;" and the idea is, that God
constitutes the darkness, or so disposes things that it occurs.

Wherein all the beasts of the forest - The margin is, "the beasts
thereof do trample on the forest." The reference is to the beasts which
seek their prey at night.

Do creep forth - The Hebrew word used here means properly "to creep," as
the smaller animals do, which have feet, as mice, lizards, crabs, or as
those do which glide or drag themselves upon the ground, having no feet,
as worms and serpents. [Gen 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#021), [Gen
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026), [Gen
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028), [Gen
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#030); [Gen
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#002). The allusion here is to the quiet
and noiseless manner in which the animals come forth at night in search
of their prey, or seem to crawl out of their hiding-places - the places
where they conceal themselves in the day-time. The idea is, that the
arrangements which God has made in regard to day and night are wisely
adapted to the animals which he has placed on the earth. The earth is
full of animated beings, accomplishing by day and night the purposes of
their existence.

[Psalms 104:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 104:21</span></span>

The young lions roar after their prey - This is a continuation of the
description in the previous verse. At night the beasts which had been
hidden in the daytime crawl forth and seek their food. The lion is
particularly specified as one of the beasts that in a general survey
would attract attention. The psalmist hears his "roar" as he goes forth
in the forest in pursuit of his prey.

And seek their meat from God - Their food. That is, God bestows it on
them, and they act as if they sought it at his hand. They seek it where
he has placed it; they are dependent on him for it. It is a beautiful
idea that even the brute creation act as if they called on God, and
sought the supply of their needs at his hands.

[Psalms 104:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 104:22</span></span>

The sun ariseth - A new scene in this endless variety of incidents in a
world full of life and beauty. The psalmist sees the light break in the
east, and the sun appear above the horizon - and the whole scene is
changed. The animals that had gone forth at night are seen to return
again to their hiding-places, and man in his turn [Psa
104:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#023) is seen to go forth to his
daily toil.

They gather themselves together - Though scattered in the night, when
light returns, they all bend their steps to the places where they are
accustomed to repose in the daytime. The scene is most beautiful. At
night they sally forth for their prey; when the morning light returns,
they all retrace their steps to the places in dens and caverns where
they pass the day, and there they repose in silence until night returns
again.

[Psalms 104:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 104:23</span></span>

Man goeth forth ... - Man is now seen to go forth from his dwelling, and
he appears on the stage to perform his daily toil, until evening comes,
and then again he gives way for the beasts of night. Thus the scene is
ever varying - showing how full of animated existence the earth is; how
varied are the occupations of its different inhabitants; and how the
varieties of being are adapted to its own varied condition in the
alternations of day and night.

[Psalms 104:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 104:24</span></span>

O Lord, how manifold are thy works! - literally, "how many." The
reference is to the "number" and the "variety" of the works of God, and
to the wisdom displayed in them all. The earth is not suited up merely
for one class of inhabitants, but for an almost endless variety; and the
wisdom of God is manifested alike in the number and in the variety. No
one can estimate the "number" of beings God has made on the earth; no
one can comprehend the richness of the variety. By day the air, the
earth, the waters swarm with life - life struggling everywhere as if no
placc was to be left unoccupied; even for the dark scenes of night
countless numbers of beings have been created; and, in all this
immensity of numbers, there is an endless variety. No two are alike.
Individuality is everywhere preserved, and the mind is astonished and
confounded alike at the numbers and the variety.

In wisdom hast thou made them all - That is, Thou hast adapted each and
all to the different ends contemplated in their creation. Anyone of
these beings shows the wisdom of God in its formation, and in its
adaptations to the ends of its existence; how much more is that wisdom
displayed in these countless numbers, and in this endless variety!

The earth is full of thy riches - Hebrew, "possessions." So the
Septuagint and the Vulgate. That is, these various objects thus created
are regarded as the "possession" of God; or, they belong to him, as the
property of a man belongs to himself. The psalmist says that this wealth
or property abounds everywhere; the earth is full of it.

[Psalms 104:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 104:25</span></span>

So is this great and wide sea ... - Our translation here does not quite
express the beauty and the force of the original; "This sea! Great and
broad of hands! There is the creeping thing - and there is no number;
animals - the little with the great." The reference here is, undoubtedly
to the Mediterranean Sea, which not improbably was in sight when the
psalm was composed - as it is in sight not only along the coast, but
from many of the elevations in Palestine. The phrase "wide of hands"
applied to the sea, means that it seems to stretch out in all
directions. Compare the notes at [Isa
33:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#021). The "creeping things" refer to
the variety of inhabitants of the deep that glide along as if they
crept. See the notes at [Psa 104:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#020).
The word "beasts" refers to any of the inhabitants of the deep, and the
idea is that there is an endless variety "there." This reflection cannot
but impress itself on the mind of anyone when looking on the ocean: What
a countless number, and what a vast variety of inhabitants are there in
these waters - all created by God; all provided for by his bounty!

[Psalms 104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 104:26</span></span>

There go the ships - There the vessels move along - objects that would,
of course, attract the attention of one looking at the sea, and admiring
its wonders. The psalmist is describing the active scenes on the surface
of the globe, and, of course, on looking at the ocean, these would be
among the objects that would particularly attract his attention.

There is that leviathan - The Septuagint and the Vulgate render this,
dragon. On the meaning of the word "leviathan," see the notes at [Job
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#001).

Whom thou hast made - Margin, as in Hebrew, "formed." The idea of
creation is implied in the word.

To play therein - As his native element. To move about therein; to make
quick and rapid motions, as if in sport.

[Psalms 104:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 104:27</span></span>

These wait all upon thee - That is, These are all dependent on thee. It
does not, of course, mean that they "wait" in the sense that they are
conscious of their dependence on God, but that they are "actually"
dependent. The original word implies the idea of "expecting" or
"hoping," and is so rendered in the Septuagint and Vulgate. They have no
other ground of expectation or hope but in thee.

That thou mayest give them their meat in due season - Their food at the
proper time. That is, They are constantly dependent on thee, that thou
mayest give them food from day to day. Perhaps there is also the idea
that they do not lay up or hoard anything; or that they cannot
anticipate their own needs, but must receive from one day to another all
that they want directly from God.

[Psalms 104:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 104:28</span></span>

That thou givest them they gather - What thou dost place before them
they collect. They have no resources of their own. They can invent
nothing; they cannot vary their food by art, as man does; they cannot
make use of reason, as man does, or of skill, in preparing it, to suit
and pamper the appetite. It comes prepared for them direct from the hand
of God.

Thou openest thine hand - As one does who bestows a gift on another. The
point in the passage is, that they receive it immediately from God, and
that they are wholly dependent on him for it. They have not to labor to
prepare it, but it is made ready for them, and they have only to gather
it up. The allusion in the "language" may be to the gathering of manna
in the wilderness, when it was provided by God, and people had only to
collect it for their use. So it is with the brute creation on land and
in the waters.

They are filled with good - They are "satiated" with good; that is, They
are satisfied with what to them is good, or with what supplies their
needs.

[Psalms 104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">psa 104:29</span></span>

Thou hidest thy face - As if God turned away from them; as if he was
displeased with them; as if he withdrew from them the tokens of his
friendship and favor.

They are troubled - They are confounded; they are overwhelmed with
terror and amazement. The word "troubled" by no means conveys the sense
of the original word - בהל bâhal - which means properly to tremble; to
be in trepidation; to be filled with terror; to be amazed; to be
confounded. It is that kind of consternation which one has when all
support and protection are withdrawn, and when inevitable ruin stares
one in the face. So when God turns away, all their support is gone; all
their resources "fail, and they must die." They are represented as
conscious of this; or, this is what would occur if they were conscious.

Thou takest away their breath - Withdrawing that which thou gavest to
them.

They die, and return to their dust - Life ends when thou dost leave
them, and they return again to earth. So it is also with man. When God
withdraws from him, nothing remains for him "but to die."

[Psalms 104:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">psa 104:30</span></span>

Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created - That is, New races are
created in their place, or start up as if they were created directly by
God. They derive their being from him as really as those did which were
first formed by his hand, and the work of creation is constantly going
on.

And thou renewest the face of the earth - The earth is not suffered to
become desolate. Though one generation passes off, yet a new one is made
in its place, and the face of the earth constantly puts on the aspect of
freshness and newness.

[Psalms 104:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">psa 104:31</span></span>

The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever - Margin, as in Hebrew,
"shall be." It might be rendered, "Let the glory of the Lord be for
ever," implying a strong desire that it should be so. But the language
may denote a strong conviction that it would be so. The mind of the
writer was filled with wonder at the beauty and variety of the works of
God on the land, in the air, and in the waters; and he exclaims, with a
heart full of admiration, that the glory of a Being who had made all
these things could never cease, but must endure forever. All the glory
of man would pass away; all the monuments that he would rear would be
destroyed; all the works of art executed by him must perish; but the
glory of One who had made the earth, and filled it with such wonders,
could not but endure forever and ever.

The Lord shall rejoice in his works - See [Gen
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#031). The idea here is, that God finds
pleasure in the contemplation of his own works; in the beauty and order
of creation; and in the happiness which he sees as the result of his
work of creation. There is no impropriety in supposing that God finds
pleasure in the manifestation of the wisdom, the power, the goodness,
the mercy, and the love of his own glorious nature.

[Psalms 104:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">psa 104:32</span></span>

He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth - There is great sublimity in
this expression, as indicating the power and the majesty of God. He has
only to "look" upon his works, and they stand in awe and tremble. The
most mighty and fearful convulsions of nature occur as if they were the
mere effect of God's "looking" on the earth. Compare [Hab
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#010) - "The mountains saw thee, and
they trembled."

He toucheth the hills, and they smoke - That is, as Mount Sinai did when
God came down upon it. [Exo 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018). It
is as if the hills were conscious of his presence, and were awed.

[Psalms 104:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">psa 104:33</span></span>

I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live - That is, I will continue
to praise him; I will never cease to adore him. The result of the
psalmist's meditations on the wonderful works of God is to awaken in his
mind a desire to praise God forever. He is so filled with a sense of his
greatness and glory that he sees that there would be occasion for
eternal praise; or that the reason for praise could never be exhausted.
He who has any proper sense of the greatness, the majesty, and the glory
of God "intends" to praise him forever. He sees that there is enough in
the character of God to demand eternal praise, and he does not
anticipate that a period can ever occur in all the future when he will
feel that the causes for praise have come to an end, or when his heart
will be indisposed to celebrate that praise.

[Psalms 104:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">psa 104:34</span></span>

My meditation of him shall be sweet - That is, I will find pleasure in
meditating on his character and works. See the notes at [Psa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002). It is one of the characteristics
of true piety that there is a "disposition" to think about God; that the
mind is "naturally" drawn to that subject; that it does not turn away
from it, when it is suggested; that this fills up the intervals of
business in the day-time, and that it occupies the mind when wakeful at
night. [Psa 63:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#006). It is also a
characteristic of true piety that there is "pleasure" in such
meditations; happiness in thinking of God. The sinner has no such
pleasure. The thought of God is painful to him; he does not desire to
have it suggested to him; he turns away from it, and avoids it. Compare
the notes at [Isa 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#011). It is one of
the evidences of true piety when a man "begins" to find pleasure in
thinking about God; when the subject, instead of being unpleasant to
him, becomes pleasant; when he no longer turns away from it, but is
sensible of a desire to cherish the thought of God, and to know more of
him.

I will be glad in the Lord - That is, I will rejoice that there is such
a Being; I will seek my happiness in him as my God.

[Psalms 104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">psa 104:35</span></span>

Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth - Compare [Psa
37:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#038). This might with propriety be
rendered, "Consumed are the sinners out of the earth," expressing a fact
and not a desire; and it may have been prompted by the feeling of the
psalmist that such an event would occur; that is, that the time would
come when sin would no more abound, but when the world would be filled
with righteousness, and all the dwellers on the earth would praise God.
The word translated "consumed" - from תמם tâmam - means properly to
complete, to perfect, to finish, to cease. It does not mean "consume" in
the sense of being burned up - as our word means - or destroyed, but
merely to come to an end, to cease, to pass away: that is; Let the time
soon come - or, the time will soon come - when there will be no sinners
on the earth, but when all the inhabitants of the earth will worship and
honor God. The "connection" here seems to be this: The psalmist was
himself so filled with the love of God, and with admiration of his
works, that he desired that all might partake of the same feeling; and
he looked forward, therefore, as those who love God must do, to the time
when all the dwellers on earth would see his glory, and when there
should be none who did not adore and love him. All that is "fairly"
implied in the wish of the psalmist here would be accomplished if all
sinners were converted, and if, in that sense, there were to be no more
transgressors in the world.

And let the wicked be no more - Let there not be anymore wicked persons;
let the time come when there shall be no bad people on the earth, but
when all shall be righteous. In this prayer all persons could properly
unite.

Bless thou the Lord, O my soul - The psalm closes (as Ps. 103 does) as
it began. The psalmist commenced with the expression of a purpose to
bless God; it closes with the same purpose, confirmed by a survey of the
wonderful works of God.

Praise ye the Lord - Hebrew, Hallelu-jah. The psalmist expresses the
earnest desire of a truly pious heart (in looking upon a world so
beautiful, so varied in its works, so full of the expressions of the
wisdom and goodness of God - a world where all the inferior creation so
completely carries out the purpose of the Creator), that man, the
noblest of all the works of God, might unite with the world around and
beneath him in carrying out the great purpose of the creation - so that
he might, in his own proper place, and according to the powers with
which he is endowed, acknowledge God. How beautiful - how sublime -
would be the spectacle on earth, if man accomplished the purpose of his
creation, and filled his place, as well as the springs, the hills, the
trees, the fowls, the wild goats, the moon, the sun, the young lions,
and the inhabitants of the "great and wide sea" do in their spheres! Oh,
come the time when on earth there shall be harmony in all the works of
God, and when all creatures here shall carry out the purpose which was
contemplated when God called the earth into existence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 105](psa105)

</div>
