<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa121)  [Next](psa123.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 122](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 122:0</span></span>

This psalm is expressly ascribed to David, though it is not known why it
should be classed among the "Songs of Degrees." On the supposition that
these were used by the pilgrims in "going up" to Jerusalem to worship,
and that they were sung by the way, this psalm would be particularly
appropriate, and is one of the very few, in the entire collection of
fifteen, that would be appropriate. This psalm evidently was used on
some such occasion, and is beautifully suited to such a design. There is
no reason to doubt that it is a composition of David, but it is not now
possible to ascertain at what period of his life, or on what particular
occasion, it was composed. DeWette has endeavored to show that the psalm
must have been composed at a later period in the Jewish history than the
time of David. His arguments are:

\(1\) that these "Psalms of Degrees" mostly pertain to a later period,
and yet that they are closely connected together in sense;

\(2\) that the language indicates a later period than the time of David;

\(3\) that the pilgrimage to Jerusalem was not instituted until a later
age than that of David;

\(4\) that the mention of the "thrones of the house of David" [Psa
122:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#005.md) indicates a later age; and

\(5\) that Jerusalem is represented [Psa
122:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#003.md) as a city already built -
probably, as DeWette thinks, referring to Jerusalem as rebuilt after the
captivity.

It will be found, however, in the exposition of the psalm, that there is
no part of it which is not applicable to David and his times.

[Psalms 122:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 122:1</span></span>

I was glad - It was a subject; of joy to me. The return of the happy
season when we were to go up to worship filled me with joy. The language
is expressive of the, happiness which is felt by those who love God and
his sanctuary, when the stated season of worship returns. The heart is
drawn to the house of prayer; the soul is filled with peace at the
prospect of being again permitted to worship God. Who the speaker here
is, is not known. It may have been David himself; more probably,
however, it was designed by him to be used by those who should go up to
worship, as expressive of their individual joy.

When they said unto me - When it was said unto me. When the time
arrived. When I was invited by others to go. The announcement was
joyful; the invitation was welcome. It met the desires of my heart, and
I embraced the invitation cheerfully and joyfully.

Let us go into the house of the Lord - Up to the place where God dwells;
the house which he has made his abode. If the psalm was composed in the
time of David, this would refer to the tabernacle as fixed by him on
Mount Zion; if at a later period, to the temple. The language will admit
of either interpretation. Compare the notes at [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003.md).

[Psalms 122:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 122:2</span></span>

Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem - We shall enter the
sacred city. It appears now in full view before us - its walls, its
palaces, its sacred places. We shall not stand and gaze upon it at a
distance; we shall not merely be charmed with its beauty as we approach
it; we shall accomplish the object of our desire, and enter within its
walls and gates. So the believer approaches heaven - the New Jerusalem
above. he will not merely admire its exterior, and look upon it at a
distance; but he will enter in. He draws nearer and nearer to it, and as
he approaches it when he is dying, its beauty becomes the more charming
to his view, and the joy of his heart increases as he now feels the
assurance that he will "stand within its gates:" that he will enter
there, and dwell there forever. So said Dr. Payson, when approaching the
end of life: "The celestial city is full in my view. Its glories beam
upon me, its breezes fan me, its odors are wafted to me, its sounds
strike upon my ears, and its spirit is breathed into my heart. Nothing
separates me from it but the river of death, which now appears but as an
insignificant rill, that may be crossed at a single step, whenever God
shall give permission. The Sun of Righteousness has been gradually
drawing nearer and nearer, appearing larger and brighter as he
approached, and now he fills the whole hemisphere - pouring forth a
flood of glory, in which I seem to float like an insect in the beams of
the sun; exulting, yet almost trembling, while I gaze on this excessive
brightness, and wondering with unutterable wonder why God should deign
thus to shine upon a sinful worm." Works, i. 407. See also the exquisite
description of the glories of heaven, familiar to all, as described by
Bunyan, as the Christian pilgrims were about to cross the river of
death.

[Psalms 122:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 122:3</span></span>

Jerusalem is builded as a city that is compact together - literally,
"joined to itself together;" that is, when one part is, as it were,
bound closely to another part; not scattered or separate. The walls are
all joined together; and the houses are all united to one another so as
to make a compact place. The ground occupied by Jerusalem never could be
large, as it was surrounded with valleys, except on the north, and
hemmed in with hills, so that, from the necessity of the case, when it
became the capital of the nation, it was densely crowded. This,
moreover, was usual in ancient cities, when they were made compact for
the sake of defense and protection.

[Psalms 122:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 122:4</span></span>

Whither the tribes - The twelve tribes of the children of Israel.

Go up - To the great feasts and festivals of the nation. See [Exo
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#017.md). This language of going up is
such as would be used anywhere respecting the capital of a nation - as
it is now of London; but it was literally true of Jerusalem, since it
was elevated far above most parts of the land.

The tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of Israel - The "ark of
testimony;" the ark within which were the tables of stone, containing
the law considered as God's testimony or witnessing as to justice,
right, equity, duty, truth. See [Exo
16:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#034.md); [Exo
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#016.md), [Exo
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#021.md); [Exo
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#003.md), [Exo
40:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#020.md); [Exo
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#006.md), [Exo
30:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#036.md); [Exo
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#018.md).

To give thanks unto the name of the Lord - To worship Yahweh - the name
often being put for the Being himself. A main part of Hebrew worship was
praise, and hence, this is often put for the whole of worship.

[Psalms 122:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 122:5</span></span>

For there are set - Margin, Do sit. The Hebrew is, "For there sit
thrones for judgment." They are established there; or, That is the
appointed place for administering justice.

Thrones of judgment - Seats for dispensing justice. The word throne is
now commonly appropriated to the seat or chair of a king, but this is
not necessarily the meaning here. The word may denote a seat or bench
occupied by a judge. The meaning here is, that Jerusalem was the supreme
seat of justice; the place where justice was dispensed for the nation.
It was at once the religious and the civil capital of the nation.

The thrones of the house of David - Of the family of David, who
performed the office of magistrates, or who administered justice. The
family of David would naturally be employed in such a service as this.
This office, Absalom - who had not been appointed to it - earnestly
desired, in order that he might secure popularity in his contemplated
rebellion. "Oh that I were made a judge in the land, that every man
which hath any suit or cause might come unto me, and I would do him
justice!" [Sa2 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#004.md).

[Psalms 122:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 122:6</span></span>

Pray for the peace of Jerusalem - The prosperity, the welfare of
Jerusalem - for peace is everywhere the image of prosperity and
happiness. Compare [Psa 51:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#018.md). This is
the language which those who were going up to the city - to the house of
the Lord - addressed to each other, expressing the joyful feelings of
their hearts at their own near approach to the city. It breathes the
desire that all would pray for the peace and prosperity of a city so
dear to their own souls; where the worship of God was celebrated; where
God himself dwelt; where justice was administered: a city of so much
importance and so much influence in the land. To us now it inculcates
the duty of praying for the church: its peace; its unity; its
prosperity; its increase; its influence on our country and on the world
at large. It is a prayer that the church may not be divided by schism or
heresy; that its members may cherish for each other right feelings; that
there may be no jealousies, no envyings, and no jars; that the different
branches of the church may regard and treat each other with kindness,
with respect, and with mutual recognition; that prosperity may attend
them all.

The shall prosper that love thee - Or rather, They shall have peace that
love thee; or, May they have peace that love thee. The word prosper
conveys an idea which is not in the original. The Hebrew word means to
be "secure," "tranquil," "at rest," spoken especially of one who enjoys
quiet prosperity, [Job 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#026.md); [Job
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#006.md). The essential idea is that of
quietness or rest; and the meaning here is, that those who love Zion
will have peace; or, that the tendency of that love is to produce peace.
See [Rom 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001.md). The prayer was for
"peace;" the thought in connection with that was naturally that those
who loved Zion would have peace. It is indeed true, in general, that
they who love Zion, or who serve God, will "prosper" (compare the notes
at [Ti1 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008).md), but that is not the
truth taught here. The idea is that they will have peace: peace with
God; peace in their own consciences; peace in the prospect of death and
of the future world; peace amidst the storms and tempests of life; peace
in death, in the grave, and forever.

[Psalms 122:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 122:7</span></span>

Peace be within thy walls - The word here rendered walls, means properly
an host, an army; then a fortification, an entrenchment, especially the
ditch or trench with the low wall or breastwork which surrounds it.
Gesenius, Lexicon. It refers here to the fortifications or defenses
around Jerusalem.

And prosperity - Peace; the same word which is used in the previous
verse, and expressing the same idea - that of tranquility.

Within thy palaces - This word properly means a "fortress," "castle;"
then, a palace, a residence of a king or a prince, [Kg1
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#018.md); [Kg2
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#025.md); [Isa
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#002.md). The idea is, that such places
abounded in Jerusalem; and the prayer is, that in those abodes of power,
where the rulers of the land resided, there might be peace. The
particular reason for this prayer is suggested in the following verse.

[Psalms 122:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 122:8</span></span>

For my brethren and companions' sakes - Because they dwell there; or,
because they go up there to worship; or, because they love thee, and
find their happiness in thee; or, because they are unconverted, and all
my hope of their salvation is to be derived from thee - from the church,
from the influence of religion.

I will now say, Peace be within thee - I will pray for thy peace, for
thy prosperity, for the blessing of God upon thee - because their good,
their comfort, their hope of salvation, depends on thee - on the
influence which shall go out from thee. So the Christian prays that the
church may prosper - that the divine blessing may rest upon it - that
there may be in it harmony, peace, love, and zeal - that a blessing may
attend the preaching of the gospel - not only because he loves it, and
seeks his own comfort and edification in it, but that his friends and
kindred - his wife, his parents, his children, his neighbors - those
whom he loves, and whose salvation he desires, may be saved. This
expresses the true feelings of piety all over the world; this is one of
the grounds of the strong love which the friends of God have for the
church - because they hope and desire that through the church those most
dear to their hearts will find salvation.

[Psalms 122:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 122:9</span></span>

Because of the house of the Lord our God I will seek thy good - Because
of the sanctuary within thee; because that is the place where God is
worshipped. The principal attraction in thee is the fact that in thee is
the place where the worship of God is celebrated. It is this which gives
its main importance in my view to the place; it is for this, and because
I desire its influence to be perpetuated and extended, that I seek thy
prosperity. This expresses a deep feeling in the mind of a pious man. To
him the church of God is the most important of all objects, gives the
principal interest to a place, and is everywhere to him the chief
attraction. The church does more to adorn a place than anything else; it
is that which exerts the best influence on a place, and sends the best
influence abroad; it is that which to him is the source of chief comfort
and delight. His heart is there; his main delight is there; his
arrangements will be made so as best to enjoy the privileges of the
sanctuary; and his plans of life will all contemplate the welfare, the
extension, and the influence of the church of God. It is religion which
in his view is the chief ornament of a place; religion which in any
community is the principal fountain of its happiness and prosperity;
religion which is the central and controlling influence on the private
dwellings, and the public institutions, of a nation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 123](psa123.md)

</div>
