<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa130)  [Next](psa132) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 131](../../../bib/kjv/psa131.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 131:0</span></span>

This brief psalm is entitled "A Song of Degrees of David." There is
nothing in it to forbid the idea that it was composed by him, for it is
wholly in his spirit and manner. It is not known, however, on what
occasion it was written, nor why it has a place among the "Songs of
Degrees." It would seem to have been prepared on some occasion when the
author had been charged with being of a lofty and proud spirit; with
meddling in matters that were above him, or above his condition in life;
or with making such suggestions about public affairs as were considered
to indicate a self-confident, or an aspiring mind. Without being able to
determine this by any certain facts, the supposition which would seem
most to accord with the contents of the psalm would be that it was
written when he was a young man; when he had expressed, in the presence
of others, some sentiments on public affairs which were interpreted by
them as denoting a forward and self confident spirit.

If so, then this psalm was probably a private meditation on what he had
done, and was of the nature of a personal examination of his spirit and
motives. Knowing, as we do, what David was afterward - his great talents
as a warrior and a king, and his ability to manage public affairs - it
would not, in itself, be strange or improbable that, in early life, and
even when a shepherdboy, he might have advanced opinions which would be
regarded as beyond his age, as unbecoming his condition, and as
manifesting a disposition to meddle with matters above him; and that he
might have been rebuked for this. If it were so, we may suppose that a
pious and a modest youth would give himself to self-examination, to
determine whether that was the spirit which actuated him, and this psalm
may have been the result of such an examination: a deep
self-consciousness that such was not the spirit which influenced him;
that these were not the motives which prompted him to do what he had
done.

The psalm, therefore, may, perhaps, without impropriety, be regarded as
furnishing evidence of the early manifestation of a disposition on the
part of David to study public affairs, and of an early manifestation of
a knowledge on that subject which was regarded as above his years and
his station; and, at the same time, of his readiness to profit by
rebuke, and to examine his real motives; and of his consciousness that
he was not actuated by self-confident and aspiring views. The psalm
manifests a humble spirit, and a spirit of confident trust in God. If
the interpretation thus suggested could be confirmed - or if it may be
allowed - the psalm would be one of the most valuable records of the
early life and character of David. It would add to the interest of this
conjecture, if we might suppose that this psalm was left among the
effusions of his early years - among, as we should say, his "private
papers," and was discovered after he was dead, and was then arranged and
published among these "Songs of Degrees."

[Psalms 131:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa131.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 131:1</span></span>

Lord, my heart is not haughty - Though this is charged upon me; though I
may have said things which seem to imply it; though this might appear a
just inference from my conduct - yet I am conscious that this is not my
real character. What I have said was not the result of ambition.

Nor mine eyes lofty - I am conscious that I am not ambitious and
aspiring - as I am accused of being. What I have said is not the result
of such a feeling, nor should such a charge be brought against me.

Neither do I exercise myself - Margin, as in Hebrew, walk. I do not walk
about among such things; I do not pry into them; I do not meddle with
them. What I have said or done is not, as has been said concerning me,
the result of a meddlesome and interfering spirit. It may seem to be so;
my own consciousness tells me it is not so. The interpretation put upon
my conduct may be natural; but I am conscious to myself that it is not
the right interpretation.

In great matters, or in things too high for me - Margin, as in Hebrew,
wonderful. The word wonderful would apply to matters suited to excite
astonishment by their vastness, or their unusual nature - as prodigies
or miracles; and then, great and lofty truths. It would apply also to
things which might be regarded as far above the capacity of a child, or
of one in obscure life, and with slight advantages of education; and, as
above suggested, it may have been the accusation brought against him,
that, in respect to public matters, matters of state - or to the more
elevated doctrines of religion - he had manifested a spirit unbecoming
one in early years, and of humble rank, and that this indicated a desire
to meddle with matters which he could not understand, and which could
not pertain to him. He was conscious, he says, that he was not actuated
by that spirit.

[Psalms 131:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa131.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 131:2</span></span>

Surely I have behaved and quieted myself - Margin, as in Hebrew, my
soul. The Hebrew is, "If I have not soothed and quieted my soul." This
is a strong mode of affirming that he had done it. The negative form is
often thus used to denote a strong affirmation. The full form would be,
"God knows if I have not done this;" or, "If I have not done this, then
let me bear the consequences; let me be punished." The idea is that he
was conscious he had done this. Instead of being arrogant, proud, and
ambitious - instead of meddling with matters above him, and which did
not belong to him, he had known his proper place. He had been gentle,
calm, retiring. The word rendered behaved means properly to be even or
level; then, in the form used here, to make even, smooth, or level; and
it is used here in the sense of calming the mind; smoothing down its
roughnesses; keeping it tranquil. Compare the notes at [Isa
38:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#013), in our version, "I reckoned"
(the same word as here) "till morning," but where the correct
translation would be, "I composed or calmed myself until morning." So
the meaning here is, that he had kept his mind calm, and even, and
gentle.

As a child that is weaned of his mother - See [Isa
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#009). There have been very various
interpretations of this passage. See Rosenmuller in loc. Perhaps the
true idea is that of a child, when weaned, as leaning upon its mother,
or as reclining upon her breast. As a weaned child leans upon its
mother. That is, as a child, accustomed to the breast, and now deprived
of it, lays its head gently where it had been accustomed to derive its
nutriment, feeling its dependence, hoping to obtain nourishment again:
not angry, but gently grieved and sad. A little child thus clinging to
its mother - laying its head gently down on the bosom - languishing -
looking for nourishment - would be a most tender image of meekness and
gentleness.

My soul is even as a weaned child - literally, "As a weaned child upon
me my soul;" that is probably, My soul leans upon me as a weaned child.
My powers, my nature, my desires, my passions, thus lean upon me, are
gentle, unambitious, confiding. The Septuagint renders this in a
different manner, and giving a different idea, "Had I not been humble,
but exalted myself as a weaned child doth against its mother, how
wouldst thou have retributed against my soul!" The Hebrew, however,
requires that it should be otherwise interpreted. The idea is, that he
had been gentle; that he had calmed down his feelings; that whatever
aspirations he might have had, he had kept them under; that though he
might have made inquiries, or offered suggestions that seemed to savor
of pride or ambition, he had been conscious that this was not so, but
that he had known his proper place, and had kept it. The sentiment here
is, that religion produces a child-like spirit; that it disposes all to
know and keep their right place; that to whatever inquiries or
suggestions it may lead among the young, it will tend to keep them
modest and humble; and that whatever suggestions one in early life may
be disposed to make, they will be connected with a spirit that is
humble, gentle, and retiring. Religion produces self-control, and is
inconsistent with a proud, an arrogant, and an ambitious spirit.

[Psalms 131:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa131.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 131:3</span></span>

Let Israel hope in the Lord ... - The connection would seem to require
us to understand this as the assertion of him who had been accused of
thoughts which seemed to be too lofty. As the result of all his
reflections (of those reflections for which he was rebuked and charged
with pride, but which were really conceived in a modest spirit) - as
expressing what he saw that seemed to be in advance of what others saw,
or to indicate a habit of thought beyond his years - he says that there
were reasons why Israel should hope in the Lord; that there was a
foundation for confident trust; that there was that in the divine
character which was a just ground of reliance; that there was that in
the course of events - in the tendencies of things - which made it
proper for the people of God, for the church, to hope, to confide, to
feel assured of its ultimate and permanent safety. This would indicate
the nature of the suggestions which he had expressed, and which had
exposed him to the charge of arrogance; and it would also indicate a
ripe and mature habit of thinking, beyond what might be expected from
one in very early life. All this was, probably, applicable to David in
his early years, as to the reflections which might have foreshadowed
what he would be in future; this was eminently applicable to David's
Descendant - greater than he - who, at twelve years of age, astonished
the Hebrew doctors in the temple with "his understanding and answers"
[Luk 2:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#047); this gives a beautiful view
of modesty joined with uncommon gifts in early life; this shows what is
always the nature of true religion - as producing modesty, and as
prompting to hope.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 132](psa132)

</div>
