<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa113)  [Next](psa115) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 114](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 114:0</span></span>

This psalm, a part of the Hallel (see the notes at the Introduction to
[Psa 113:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#001)), is occupied in
celebrating the praises of God for what he had done in the delivering of
his people from Egyptian bondage, and in conducting them to the promised
land. It is the language of exultation, joy, and triumph, in view of the
gracious interpositions of God in their deliverance. The psalmist sees
the mountains and hills seized as it were with consternation, leaping
and skipping like sheep; Jordan, as it were, frightened and fleeing
back; the very earth trembling - at the presence of God. Everything is
personified. Everything is full of life; everything recognizes the
presence and the power of the Most High. It would be appropriate to use
such a psalm on the great festivals of the Jewish nation, for nothing
could be more proper than to keep these events in their history before
the minds of the people. The author of the psalm is unknown; and the
occasion on which it was composed cannot now be determined. It is a most
animated, elevated, cheering psalm, and is proper to be used at all
times to make the mind rejoice in God, and to impress us with the
feeling that it is easy for God to accomplish his purposes.

[Psalms 114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 114:1</span></span>

When Israel went out of Egypt - literally, "In the going out of Israel
from Egypt." This is not to be confined to the exact act of the exodus,
but embraces all that properly entered into that migration - the whole
train of events which resuited in their being brought into the promised
land.

The house of Jacob - The family of Jacob - a name appropriately used
here, since it was the family of Jacob that had gone down into Egypt,
and that had increased to these great numbers.

From a people of strange language - Speaking a foreign or a barbarian
tongue. See the notes at [Psa 81:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#005).

[Psalms 114:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 114:2</span></span>

Judah was his sanctuary - His home; his abode; his sacred
dwelling-place. Judah was the principal or leading tribe, recognized as
the tribe where power was to be concentrated, and from which the Messiah
was to proceed [Gen 49:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#008); and
hence, the name was early used to denote the entire people, and
ultimately, as modified in the word Jews, became the common name of the
nation.

And Israel his dominion - The nation that he ruled; the nation that had
his law; the nation that he governed by his presence - or, of which he
was the recognized king. There can be no doubt that the reference here
is to God, but it is remarkable that the name "God" is not used. Perhaps
the reason may be that this psalm was designed to be employed in
connection with the preceding one, and as that consists entirely of the
praises of God, it was not necessary to repeat the name when his praise
was to be continued under another form, and in connection with another
line of thought.

[Psalms 114:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 114:3</span></span>

The sea saw it - The word it is supplied, not very properly, by our
translators. It would be more expressive to say, "The sea saw:" that is,
The sea - (the Red Sea) - saw the mighty movement - the marshalled hosts
- the moving masses - the cattle - the pursuing enemies - the commotion
- the agitation - on its usually quiet shores. We are to conceive of the
usual calmness of the desert - the waste and lonely solitudes on the
banks of the Red Sea - and then all this suddenly broken in upon by vast
hosts of men, women, children, and cattle, fleeing in consternation,
followed by the embattled strength of Egypt - all rolling on
tumultuously to the shore. No wonder that the sea is represented as
astonished at this unusual spectacle, and as fleeing in dismay.

And fled - As if affrighted at the approach of such an host, coming so
suddenly upon its shores.

Jordan was driven back - Referring to the dividing of the waters of the
Jordan when the children of Israel passed over to the promised land.
[Jos 3:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#013). They also seemed
astonished at the approach of the Hebrews, and retired to make a way for
them to pass over.

[Psalms 114:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 114:4</span></span>

The mountains skipped like rams - As flocks in their gambols. They
seemed to move from place to place; everything seemed to be unsettled,
and acknowledged the presence of the Omnipotent One. The word rendered
"skipped" means to leap for joy; to dance. See the notes at [Psa
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#006). The reference here is to the
agitations and commotions of the peaks of Sinai, when God came down to
deliver the law. [Exo 19:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016).

And the little hills like lambs - Hebrew, Like the sons of the flock.
The reference here is to the less prominent eminences of Sinai. The
lofty hills, and the smaller hills surrounding, seemed to be all in a
state of commotion.

[Psalms 114:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 114:5</span></span>

What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest?... - literally, "What
to thee, O sea," etc. That is, What influenced thee - what alarmed thee
- what put thee into such fear, and caused such consternation? Instead
of stating the cause or reason why they were thus thrown into dismay,
the psalmist uses the language of surprise, as if these inanimate
objects had been smitten with sudden terror, and as if it were proper to
ask an explanation from themselves in regard to conduct that seemed so
strange.

[Psalms 114:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 114:7</span></span>

Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the Lord ... - This is at the
same time an explanation of the facts referred to in the previous
verses, and the statement of an important truth in regard to the power
of God. The true explanation - as here implied - of what occurred to the
sea, to the Jordan, to the mountains, and to the hills, was the fact
that God was there; the inference from that, or the truth which followed
from that, was, that before that God in whose presence the very
mountains shook, and from whom the waters of the sea fled in alarm the
whole earth should tremble.

[Psalms 114:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 114:8</span></span>

Which turned the rock into a standing water - That is, Before him who
could do this, the earth should tremble; the inhabited world should
stand in awe of such amazing power. The words rendered "a standing
water," mean properly a pool of water. They indicate nothing in regard
to the permanency of that pool; they do not imply that it remained as a
standing pool during the sojourn of the Israelites in the wilderness -
whatever may have been the fact in regard to that. The simple idea is,
that, at the time referred to, the rock was converted into a pool; that
is, the waters flowed from the rock, constituting such a pool.

The flint - Another name for the rock - used here to describe the
greatness of the miracle.

Into a fountain of waters - That is, The waters flowed from the rock as
from a fountain. The Bible is a book of miracles, and there is nothing
more improbable in this miracle than in any other.

In the Septuagint, the Latin Vulgate, the Syriac, the Arabic, and in
many manuscripts, there is no division of the psalm here, but the
following psalm is united with this, as if they were a single poem. Why,
in those versions, the division of the Heb. was not followed, cannot now
be ascertained. The division in the Hebrew is a natural division, and
was evidently made in the original composition.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 115](psa115)

</div>
