<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa123)  [Next](psa125.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 124](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 124:0</span></span>

This psalm, one of the "Songs of Degrees," is, like [Psa
122:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#001.md), ascribed to David. See the
Introductory Notes to that psalm. There is nothing in the one before us
to render it improbable that it was composed by him, but it is now
impossible to ascertain on what occasion it was written. It would be
appropriate to be sung on the return from Babylon, and there is no
improbability in the supposition that it may have been used on that
occasion. But there is nothing in it to prove that it was composed then,
or to make it applicable to that occasion alone. Very many were the
occasions in the Jewish history when such a psalm was applicable; very
many have been the occasions in the history of the Christian church;
very many, also, in the lives of individual believers.

The idea in the psalm is, that deliverance from trouble and danger is to
be ascribed wholly to God; that the people of God are often in such
circumstances that there is no human help for them, and that the praise
of theft deliverance is due to God alone.

[Psalms 124:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 124:1</span></span>

If it had not been the Lord who was on our side - Unless it was Yahweh
who was with us. The idea is, that someone had been with them, and had
delivered them, and that such was the nature of the interposition that
it could be ascribed to no one but Yahweh. It bore unmistakeable
evidence that it was his work. The deliverance was of such a kind that
it could have been accomplished by him only. Such things often occur in
life, when the intervention in our behalf is so remarkable that we can
ascribe it to no one else but God.

Now may Israel say - May well and truly say. The danger was so great,
their helplessness was so manifest, and the deliverance was so clearly
the work of God, that it was proper to say that if this had not
occurred, ruin would have been inevitable and entire.

[Psalms 124:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 124:2</span></span>

If it had not been the Lord who was on our side - Repeating the idea,
since the mind was full of it, and carrying the thought forward. This is
one of the instances of an ascent of thought in these psalms, from which
it has been supposed that the title "Songs of Degrees" was given to this
collection. See, however, Introduction to [Psa
120:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#001.md).

When men rose up against us - When we were assailed by our enemies. On
what occasion this occurred, it is now impossible to determine.

[Psalms 124:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 124:3</span></span>

Then they had swallowed us up quick - There was no other help, and ruin
- utter ruin - would have soon come upon us. The word quick here means
alive; and the idea is derived from persons swallowed up in an
earthquake, or by the opening of the earth, as in the case of Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram. [Num 16:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#032.md).
Compare [Psa 106:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#017.md). The meaning here
is, that they would have been destroyed as if they were swallowed up by
the opening of the earth; that is, there would have been complete
destruction.

When their wrath was kindled against us - Hebrew, In the kindling of
their wrath against us. Wrath is often represented in the Scriptures as
burning or heated - as that which consumes all before it.

[Psalms 124:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 124:4</span></span>

Then the waters had overwhelmed us - Our destruction would have been as
if the waves of the ocean had overwhelmed us.

The stream had gone over our soul - The torrent would have swept us
away. Compare [Psa 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#004.md), [Psa
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#016.md).

[Psalms 124:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 124:5</span></span>

Then the proud waters had gone over our soul - Over us. The word proud
here is applied to the waters as if raging, swelling, rolling,
tumultuous; as if they were self-confident, arrogant, haughty. Such
raging billows, as they break and dash upon the shore, are a striking
embIem of human passions, whether in an individual, or in a gathering of
men - as an army, or a mob. Compare [Psa
65:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#007.md). This is again an amplification,
or an ascent of thought. See the notes at [Psa
124:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#002.md). It is, however, nothing more
than a poetical embellisment, adding intensity to the expression.

[Psalms 124:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 124:6</span></span>

Blessed be the Lord - The Lord be praised; or, We have reason to praise
the Lord because we have been delivered from these calamities.

Who hath not given us as a prey to their teeth - The figure is here
changed, though the same idea is retained. The imago is now that of
destruction by wild beasts - a form of destruction not less fearful than
that which comes from overflowing waters. Such changes of imagery
constantly occur in the Book of Psalms, and in impassioned poetry
everywhere. The mind is full of a subject; numerous illustrations occur
in the rapidity of thought; and the mind seizes upon one and then upon
another as best suited to express the emotions of the soul. The next
verse furnishes another instance of this sudden transition.

[Psalms 124:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 124:7</span></span>

Our soul is escaped - We have escaped; our life has been preserved.

As a bird out of the snare of the fowlers - By the breaking of the
snare, or the gin. The bird is entangled, but the net breaks, and the
bird escapes. See the notes at [Psa
91:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#003.md).

The snare is broken ... - It was not strong enough to retain the
struggling bird, and the captive broke away. So we seemed to be caught.
The enemy appeared to have us entirely in his power, but escape came to
us as it does to the bird when it finds the net suddenly break, and
itself again at large.

[Psalms 124:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 124:8</span></span>

Our help is in the name of the Lord - In the Lord; in the great Yahweh.
See [Psa 121:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#002.md).

Who made heaven and earth - The great Creator; the true God. Our
deliverances have led us up to him. They are such as can be ascribed to
him alone. They could not have come from ourselves; from our fellow-men;
from angels; from any or all created beings. Often in life, when
delivered from danger, we may feel this; we always may feel this, and
should feel this, when we think of the redemption of our souls. That is
a work which we of ourselves could never have performed; which could not
have been done for us by our fellow-men; which no angel could have
accomplished; which all creation combined could not have worked out;
which could have been effected by no one but by him who "made heaven and
earth;" by him who created all things. See [Col
1:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 125](psa125.md)

</div>
