<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa111)  [Next](psa113) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 112](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 112:0</span></span>

The author of this psalm, as of the preceding, is unknown, and equally
with that it is impossible now to ascertain the time or the occasion of
its composition. It is a psalm of the same structure as that, with the
same number of verses; like that, it is alphabetical in its form, and
composed in the same manner - the first eight verses with two clauses
each, beginning with successive letters of the Hebrew alphabet - and the
last two verses with "three" clauses, beginning, in like manner, with
three letters of the alphabet in succession. This peculiarity of
structure makes it highly probable that it was composed by the same
author.

It is further to be noticed that this psalm "begins" where the other
"ends," with the happiness or blessedness of "fearing God," and is
designed to set forth that blessedness, or to show what are the
advantages of true religion. This fact makes it further probable that
the two psalms were composed by the same author.

This psalm is very simple in its structure. It sets forth the advantages
or benefits of the fear of the Lord, or of religion in respect

\(a\) to the posterity of the man, [Psa
112:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#002);

\(b\) in securing wealth, [Psa 112:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#003);

\(c\) in the light which springs up in darkness, [Psa
112:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#004);

\(d\) in the discretion with which such a man is enabled to manage his
affairs, [Psa 112:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#005);

\(e\) in the firmness and composure of his mind in times of danger and
trouble, [Psa 112:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#006);

\(f\) in his being so prosperous, and so exalted, that he will become an
object of envy to the wicked, [Psa
112:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#009).

[Psalms 112:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 112:1</span></span>

Praise ye the Lord - Margin, as in Hebrew, "Hallelujah." See the notes
at [Psa 106:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#001).

Blessed is the man - Hebrew, "The blessings of the man." See the notes
at [Psa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001). That is, Blessed, or
happy, is such a one.

That feareth the Lord - In [Psa
111:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#010), the psalmist had referred to
"the fear of the Lord" as "the beginning of wisdom," and had "alluded"
to the success, prosperity, or happiness which attends the fear of the
Lord, or true religion. This psalm is designed more fully "to
illustrate" that thought.

That delighteth greatly in his commandments - See the notes at [Psa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002). It is a characteristic of true
piety to find pleasure in the commands of God; in the commandments
themselves, and in obedience to them.

[Psalms 112:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 112:2</span></span>

His seed shall be mighty upon earth - His children; his posterity. That
is, they shall be prospered; honored; distinguished among people:
distinguished for their virtues, for their influence, for their success
in life. This refers to what was regarded among the Hebrews as an object
of great desire, and is in accordance with the promises everywhere found
in their Scriptures. See [Psa 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#013),
note; [Psa 37:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#025), notes. Compare
[Gen 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#002); [Gen
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#006); [Exo
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#006). It is in accordance, also, with
a general fact in the course of events. The best security for the virtue
and success of children is the virtue and the piety of parents; the
surest inheritance as pertaining to happiness, respectability, and
usefulness in life, is that which is derived from the example, the
prayers, the counsel of a pious father and mother.

The generation of the upright shall be blessed - The family; the
children. Such promises are to be expected to be fulfilled in general;
it is not required by any proper rules of interpreting language that
this should be universally and always true.

[Psalms 112:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 112:3</span></span>

Wealth and riches shall be in his house - The Septuagint and the Vulgate
render this, "glory and riches shall be in his house." The word,
however, properly means riches or wealth, and the two terms are used
apparently to convey the idea that wealth or property in "varied forms"
would be in his house; that is, not merely gold and silver, but all that
was understood to constitute wealth - variety of garments, articles of
furniture, etc. This promise is of the same nature as that of the
previous verse. It pertains to a general truth in regard to the
influence of religion in promoting prosperity. Compare the notes at [Ti1
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008).

And his righteousness endureth for ever - That is, The effects of it
shall be transmitted from age to age in the prosperity, the
respectability, the wealth, the happiness of his descendants. It travels
on from age to age, and blesses distant generations.

[Psalms 112:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 112:4</span></span>

Unto the upright - The just; the pious; the man who fears God.

There ariseth light in the darkness - This is a new form of the blessing
which follows the fear of the Lord, or another of the benefits which
spring from true religion, and by which the pious man is distinguished
from other people. The distinction is not that days of darkness will not
come upon him as well as upon others, for he may be sick as others are,
he may be bereaved as others are, he may lose his property as others do
- since there are general laws that affect mankind in these respects.
God has not promised that he will interpose to save his people from
these things, but that he will save them in them. The peculiarity in
regard to those who fear God is, that these things will not always
continue; that they shall not be overwhelmed by them; that it will not
be uninterrupted and unmitigated gloom; that the sky shall not be always
overcast. Compare [Psa 97:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#011), note;
[Job 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#017), note.

He is gracious, and full of compassion, and righteous - These words are
designed to be applied to the "upright" man, and are intended more fully
to designate his character, and to show "why" light shall spring up to
him when he is in darkness. It is because his character is "really" pure
and holy, so that whatever cloud may come over it for a time, however it
may be temporarily obscured, however he may be calumniated by men, or
however God may for a time seem to forsake him and to treat him as if he
were a bad man, yet ultimately his character will appear as it really
is. Light will come in upon the darkness. The clouds will break away.
The prejudices against him will be dispersed. Full justice will be done
to his character both by man and by God, and the world will see that he
is a just and pious man. See the notes at [Psa
37:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#005). Every man will ultimately be
seen as he is; every man will attain the position, and have the
reputation which he "ought" to have.

[Psalms 112:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 112:5</span></span>

A good man showeth favor - He has the means to show favor to others, or
to promote their welfare, and he is disposed to do this. It is the
characteristic of a good man - of a heart that is truly pious - to do
good to others; to promote their welfare here, and to assist them in
their endeavor to secure happiness in the world to come.

And lendeth - The original word here - לוה lâvâh - means to join oneself
to anyone; to cleave to him; then, to form the union which is
constituted between debtor and creditor, borrower and lender. Here it is
used in the latter sense, and it means that a good man will accommodate
another - a neighbor - with money, or with articles to be used
temporarily and returned again. A man who always "borrows" is not a
desirable neighbor; but a man who never lends - who is never willing to
accommodate - is a neighbor that no one would wish to live near - a
crooked, perverse, bad man. True religion will always dispose a man to
do acts of kindness in any and every way possible.

He will guide his affairs - The word used here means literally to hold,
contain; to hold up, or sustain; to nourish, to furnish the means of
living. [Gen 45:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#011); [Gen
47:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#012); [Gen
50:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#021). Here it means that he would
uphold or manage his business.

With discretion - Margin, "judgment;" so the Hebrew. He would do it
prudently, sensibly, economically, wisely. This is, or should be, one of
the characteristics of a good man. Religion prompts to this; religion
will aid a man in doing this; religion will tend to check everything of
a contrary nature. A man who neglects his "affairs," who pays no
attention to his business, who is indifferent whether he is successful
or fails, is a man who gives "just so evidence" that he is a stranger to
true religion.

[Psalms 112:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 112:6</span></span>

Surely he shall not be moved for ever - Luther, "For he shall remain
always." He shall be fixed, stable, firm, prosperous. He shall not be
driven from place to place. He shall have a permanent home. He shall
have a steady reputation. He shall have a constant influence. He shall
be a firm, establislied, prosperous man. Of course this is to be taken
in the general, and should not be pressed to mean that it will be, in
the most literal sense, and always, true, for a good man "may" be
"unfortunate in business," and suffer with others; he may be sick; he
may see reason to change his residence; he will certainly die. But still
it is true that religion "tends" to produce this permanency, and that in
this respect there is a marked difference between people who are truly
pious, and those who are not.

The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance - In [Pro
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#007), it is said that "the name of the
wicked shall rot;" and the meaning here is, that the way to secure a
grateful remembrance among people after we are dead is to be righteous -
to do something that shall deserve to be remembered. It cannot mean that
a man who is righteous will "never" be forgotten, or that his name and
deeds will never pass from the recollection of mankind - for that would
not be true; but that people will delight to cherish the memory of the
righteous; that they will be disposed to do justice to their character
after they are dead; that the benevolent and the upright will be
remembered when the names of the wicked shall be forgotten. The world
has no interest in keeping up the memory of bad people, and as soon as
it can be done hastens to forget them. Wicked people are remembered only
when their deeds are enormous, and then their memory is cherished only
to admonish and to warn. The world has no interest in keeping up the
memory of Benedict Arnold, or Alexander VI, or Caesar Borgia except to
warn future generations of the guilt and baseness of treason and
profligacy; it "has" an interest in never suffering the names of Howard,
of Wilberforce, of Henry Martyn, to die, for those names excite to noble
feelings and to noble efforts wherever they are known. Such names are to
be had "in everlasting remembrance."

[Psalms 112:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 112:7</span></span>

He shall not be afraid of evil tidings - Of bad news; of reverses and
losses; of the destruction of his ship at sea, or his property by land;
of disaster by flood, by famine, by war. His heart will so fully confide
in God that he can commit all calmly into his hands. He will feel
assured that all will be well; that nothing occurs but that which the
wisest and the best Being in the universe sees it best should occur; and
that in all which "does" take place he is able to sustain the sufferer.
There is nothing so well suited to make the mind calm as trust in God.
What has a man to be afraid of who does trust in him? Compare [Psa
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#003); [Psa
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#002); [Psa
56:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#003); [Heb
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#006); [Pro
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#033).

His heart is fixed - Is firm; is established. See the notes at [Psa
57:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#007).

Trusting in the Lord - This is the reason "why" his heart is "fixed" or
firm. It is not any native courage or resolution; it is not any firmness
of his own; it is simply because he has confidence in God, and feels
assured that all things will be well.

[Psalms 112:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 112:8</span></span>

His heart is established - Sustained; upheld. This is the same idea,
though somewhat varied in form. The word means to sustain; to support;
and the idea is, that there is some basis of support - some strength -
which is not his own.

He shall not be afraid - When he is assailed by enemies.

Until he see his desire upon his enemies - This implies that he had
nothing really to fear. He would certainly overcome his foes; and in the
meantime he might look calmly on all their efforts to destroy him, for
those efforts would be vain. So the believer now looks calmly on all his
spiritual foes. He has nothing to fear, for he will overcome them all;
he will certainly triumph; he will trample them all under his feet. He
may well, therefore, endure these conflicts for a brief period, for the
issue is certain, and the conflict will soon come to an end.

[Psalms 112:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 112:9</span></span>

He hath dispersed ... - This is another characteristic of a righteous
man, and another reason of the permanent honor which will be rendered to
him. The meaning is, that he is liberal; he freely scatters what he has;
he divides it with those who are needy and unfortunate. One part of
mankind have an overplus - have more than they need for themselves and
their families - and that overplus is what is designed to meet the needs
of the unfortunate, the weak, the aged, the imbecile, the infirm, who
have "not" enough. It is the "treasury" of God - the "reservoir" where
that is gathered which is to be distributed for the needs of the
helpless and the dependent. The righteous man is one who enters fully
into this arrangement, and who feels that all this overplus belongs to
God, and is to be appropriated as he shall direct.

His righteousness endureth for ever - His acts of charity are constant.
His piety is not fitful, spasmodic, uncertain; it is steady principle;
it is firm and solid; it may always be relied on. See [Psa
112:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#003).

His horn shall be exalted with honor - See the notes at [Psa
75:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#010).

[Psalms 112:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 112:10</span></span>

The wicked shall see it, and be grieved - They shall see his prosperity;
shall see the evidence that God approves his character and his conduct.
The word rendered "grieved" means rather to be angry or enraged. Perhaps
the word "fret" would best express the sense.

He shall gnash with his teeth - As indicative of hatred and wrath. See
the notes at [Psa 37:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#012).

And melt away - Disappear - as snow does that melts; or as a snail (see
the notes at [Psa 58:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#008)); or as waters
that run away (see the notes at [Psa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#007)); or as wax (see the notes at
[Psa 68:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#002)). Their wrath shall be of no
avail, for they themselves shall soon disappear.

The desire of the wicked shall perish - He shall not be able to
accomplish his desire, or to carry out his purposes. He shall be
disappointed, and all his cherished plans will come to nought. This is
in strong contrast with what is said in the psalm would occur to the
righteous. They would be prospered and happy; they would be able to
carry out their plans; they would be respected while living, and
remembered when dead; they would find God interposing in their behalf in
the darkest hours; they would be firm and calm in the day of danger and
of trouble; they would put their trust in the Lord, and all would be
well. Surely there is an advantage in our world in being a friend of
God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 113](psa113)

</div>
