<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev007)  [Next](rev009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#001.md)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 8:0</span></span>

Analysis Of The Chapter

One seal of the mysterious roll [Rev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001.md) remains to be broken - six having
already disclosed the contents of the volume relating to the future. It
was natural that the opening of the seventh, and the last, should be
attended with circumstances of special solemnity, as being all that
remained in this volume to be unfolded, and as the events thus far had
been evidently preparatory to some great catastrophe. It would have been
natural to expect that, like the six former, this seal would have been
opened at once, and would have disclosed all that was to happen at one
view. But, instead of that, the opening of this seal is followed by a
series of events, seven also in number, which succeed each other,
represented by new symbols - the blowing of as many successive trumpets.
These circumstances retard the course of the action, and fix the mind on
a new order of events - events which could be appropriately grouped
together, and which, for some reason, might be thus more appropriately
represented than they could be in so many successive seals. What was the
reason of this arrangement will be more readily seen on an examination
of the particular events referred to in the successive trumpet-blasts.
The points in the chapter are the following:

\(1\) The opening of the seventh seal, [Rev
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#001.md). This is attended, not with an
immediate exhibition of the events which are to occur, as in the case of
the former seals, but with a solemn silence in heaven for the space of
half an hour. The reason of this silence, apparently, is found in the
solemn nature of the events which are anticipated. At the opening of the
sixth seal ([Rev 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012) ff.md) the grand
catastrophe of the world's history seemed about to occur. This had been
suspended for a time, as if by the power of angels holding the winds and
the storm Rev. 7, and now it was natural to expect that there would be a
series of overwhelming calamities. In view of these apprehended terrors,
the inhabitants of heaven are represented as standing in awful silence,
as if anticipating and apprehending what was to occur. This circumstance
adds much to the interest of the scene, and is a forcible illustration
of the position which the mind naturally assumes in the anticipation of
dreaded events. Silence - solemn and awful silence - is the natural
state of the mind under such circumstances. In accordance with this
expectation of what was to come, a series of new representations is
introduced, adapted to prepare the mind for the fearful disclosures
which are yet to be made.

\(2\) seven angels appear, on the opening of the seal, to whom are given
seven trumpets, as if they were appointed to perform an important part
in introducing the series of events which was to follow, [Rev
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#002.md).

\(3\) as a still further preparation, another angel is introduced,
standing at the altar with a golden censer, [Rev
8:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003.md). He is represented as engaged in
a solemn act of worship, offering incense and the prayers of the saints
before the throne. This unusual representation seems to be designed to
denote that some extraordinary events were to occur, making it proper
that incense should ascend, and prayer be offered to deprecate the wrath
of God. After the offering of the incense, and the prayers, the angel
takes the censer and casts it to the earth; and the effect is, that
there are voices, and thunderings, and lightnings, and an earthquake.
All these would seem to be symbolical of the fearful events which are to
follow. The silence; the incense-offering; the prayers; the fearful
agitations produced by the casting of the censer upon the earth, as if
the prayer was not heard, and as if the offering of the incense did not
avail to turn away the impending wrath - all are appropriate symbols to
introduce the series of fearful calamities which were coming upon the
world on the sounding of the trumpets.

\(4\) the first angel sounds, [Rev
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#007.md). Hail and fire follow, mingled
with blood. The third part of the trees and of the green grass - that
is, of the vegetable world - is consumed.

\(5\) the second angel sounds, [Rev
8:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#008.md). A great burning mountain is
cast into the sea, and the third part of the sea becomes blood, and a
third part of all that is in the sea - fishes and ships - is destroyed.

\(6\) the third angel sounds, [Rev
8:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#010.md). A great star, burning like a
lamp, falls from heaven upon a third part of the rivers, and upon the
fountains of waters, and the waters become bitter, and multitudes of
people die from drinking the waters.

\(7\) the fourth angel sounds, [Rev
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#012.md). The calamity falls on the
sources of light - the sun, the moon, and the stars - and the third part
of the light is extinguished, and for the third part of the day there is
no light, and for the third part of the night also there is no light.

\(8\) at this stage of things, after the sounding of the four trumpets,
there is a pause, and an angel flies through the midst of heaven, thrice
crying woe, by reason of the remaining trumpets which are to sound, [Rev
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#013.md). Here would seem to be some
natural interval, or something which would separate the events which had
occurred from those which were to follow. These four, from some cause,
are grouped together, and are distinguished from those which are to
follow - as if the latter pertained to a new class of events, though
under the same general group introduced by the opening of the seventh
seal. A few general remarks are naturally suggested by the analysis of
the chapter, which may aid us in its exposition and application:

\(a\) These events, in their order, undoubtedly succeed those which are
referred to under the opening of the first six seals. They are a
continuation of the series which is to occur in the history of the
world. It has been supposed by some that the events here symbolized are
substantially the same as those already referred to under the first six
seals, or that, at the opening of the sixth seal, there is a
catastrophe; and, one series being there concluded, the writer, by a new
set of symbols, goes back to the same point of time, and passes over the
same period by a new and parallel set of symbols. But this is manifestly
contrary to the whole design. At the first [Rev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001.md) a volume was exhibited, sealed
with seven seals, the unrolling of which would manifestly develop
successive events, and the whole of which would embrace all the events
which were to be disclosed. When all these seven seals were broken, and
the contents of that volume were disclosed, there might indeed be
another set of symbols going over the same ground with another design;
or giving a representation of future events in some other point of view;
but clearly the series should not be broken until the whole seven seals
are opened, nor should it be supposed that there is, in the opening of
the same volume, an arresting of the course of events, in order to go
back again to the same beginning.

The representation in this series of symbols is like drawing out a
telescope. A telescope might be divided into seven parts, as well as
into the usual number, and the drawing out of the seventh part, for
example, might be regarded as a representation of the opening of the
seventh seal. But the seventh part, instead of being one unbroken piece
like the other six, might be so constructed as to be subdivided into
seven minor parts, each representing a smaller portion of the seventh
part. In such a case, the drawing out of the seventh division would
succeed that of the others, and would be designed to represent a
subsequent order of events.

\(b\) There was some reason, manifestly, why these seven last events, or
the series represented by the seven trumpets, should be grouped
together, as coming under the same general classification. They were
sufficiently distinct to make it proper to represent them by different
symbols, and yet they had so much of the same general character as to
make it proper to group them together. If this had not been so it would
have been proper to represent them by a succession of seals extending to
thirteen in number, instead of representing six seals in succession, and
then, under the seventh, a new series extending also to the number
seven. In the fulfillment, it will be proper to look for some events
which have some such natural connection and bearing that, for some
reason, they can be classed together, and yet so distinct that, under
the same general symbol of the seal, they can be represented under the
particular symbol of the trumpets.

\(c\) For some reason there was a further distinction between the events
represented by the first four trumpets and those which were to follow.
There was some reason why they should be more particularly grouped
together, and placed in close connection, and why there should be an
interval [Rev 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#013.md) before the other
trumpet should sound. In the fulfillment of this we should naturally
look for such an order of events as would be designated by four
successive symbols, and then for such a change, in some respects, as to
make an interval proper, and a proclamation of woe, before the sounding
of the other three, [Rev 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#013.md). Then it
would be natural to look for such events as could properly be grouped
under the three remaining symbols - the three succeeding trumpets.

\(d\) It is natural, as already intimated, to suppose that the entire
group would extend, in some general manner at least, to the consummation
of all things; or that there would be under the last one, a reference to
the consummation of all things - the end of the world. The reason for
this has already been given, that the apostle saw a volume [Rev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001.md), which contained a sealed account
of the future, and it is natural to suppose that there would be a
reference to the great leading events which were to occur in the history
of the church and of the world. This natural anticipation is confirmed
by the events disclosed under the sounding of the seventh trumpet ([Rev
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015) ff.md): "And the seventh angel
sounded; and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of
this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and
he shall reign forever and ever. And the four and twenty elders, which
sat before God on their seats, fell upon their faces, and worshipped
God, saying, We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art, and
wast, and art to come; because thou hast taken thy great power, and hast
reigned," etc. At all events, this would lead us on to the final triumph
of Christianity - to the introduction of the millennium of glory - to
the period when the Son of God should reign on the earth. After that
([Rev 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#019) ff.md) a new series of
visions commences, disclosing, through the same periods of history, a
new view of the church to the time also of its final triumph: the church
internally; the rise of Antichrist, and the effect of the rise of this
formidable power. See the Analysis of the Book, part fifth.

[Revelation 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 8:1</span></span>

And when he had opened the seventh seal - See the notes on [Rev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001.md).

There was silence in heaven - The whole scene of the vision is laid in
heaven [Rev 4:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001.md), and John
represents things as they seem to be passing there. The meaning here is,
that on the opening of this seal, instead of voices, thunderings,
tempests, as perhaps was expected from the character of the sixth seal
([Rev 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012) ff.md), and which seemed only
to have been suspended for a time Rev. 7, there was an awful stillness,
as if all heaven was reverently waiting for the development. Of course
this is a symbolical representation, and is designed not to represent a
pause in the events themselves, but only the impressive and fearful
nature of the events which are now to be disclosed.

About the space of half an hour - He did not profess to designate the
time exactly. It was a brief period - yet a period which in such
circumstances would appear to be long - about half an hour. The word
used here - ἡμιώριον hēmiōrion - does not occur elsewhere in the New
Testament. It is correctly rendered "half an hour"; and, since the day
was divided into twelve parts from the rising to the setting of the sun,
the time designated would not vary much from half an hour with us. Of
course, therefore, this denotes a brief period. In a state, however, of
anxious suspense, the moments would seem to move slowly; and to see the
exact force of this, we are to reflect on the scenes represented - the
successive opening of seals disclosing most important events -
increasing in interest as each new one was opened; the course of events
which seemed to be leading to the consummation of all things, arrested
after the opening of the sixth seal; and now the last in the series to
be opened, disclosing what the affairs of the world would be at the
consummation of all things.

John looks on this; and in this state of suspense the half hour may have
seemed an age. We are not, of course, to suppose that the silence in
heaven is produced by the character of the events which are now to
follow - for they are as yet unknown. It is caused by what, from the
nature of the previous disclosures, was naturally apprehended, and by
the fact that this is the last of the series - the finishing of the
mysterious volume. This seems to me to be the obvious interpretation of
this passage, though there has been here, as in other parts of the Book
of Revelation, a great variety of opinion as to the meaning. Those who
suppose that the whole book consists of a triple series of visions
designed to prefigure future events, parallel with each other, and each
leading to the consummation of all things - the series embracing the
seals, the trumpets, and the vials, each seven in number - regard this
as the proper ending of the first of this series, and suppose that we
have on the opening of the seventh seal the beginning of a new
symbolical representation, going over the same ground, under the
representations of the trumpets, in a new aspect or point of view.

Eichorn and Rosenmuller suppose that the silence introduced by the
apostle is merely for effect, and that, therefore, it is without any
special signification. Grotius applies the whole representation to the
destruction of Jerusalem, and supposes that the silence in heaven refers
to the restraining of the winds referred to in [Rev
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#001.md) - the wrath in respect to the
city, which was now suspended for a short time. Prof. Stuart also refers
it to the destruction of Jerusalem, and supposes that the seven trumpets
refer to seven gradations in the series of judgments that were coming
upon the persecutors of the church. Mr. Daubuz regards the silence here
referred to as a symbol of the liberty granted to the church in the time
of Constantine; Vitringa interprets it of the peace of the millennium
which is to succeed the overthrow of the beast and the false prophet;
Dr. Woodhouse and Mr. Cunninghame regard it as the termination of the
series of events which thee former seals denote, and the commencement of
a new train of revelations; Mr. Elliott, as the suspension of the winds
during the sealing of the servants of God; Mr. Lord, as the period of
repose which intervened between the close of the persecution by
Diocletian and Galerius, in 311, and the commencement, near the close of
that year, of the civil wars by which Constantine the Great was elevated
to the imperial throne.

It will be seen at once how arbitrary and unsatisfactory most of those
interpretations are, and how far from harmony expositors have been as to
the meaning of this symbol. The most simple and obvious interpretation
is likely to be the true one; and that is, as above suggested, that it
refers to silence in heaven as expressive of the fearful anticipation
felt on opening the last seal that was to close the series, and to wind
up the affairs of the church and the world. Nothing would be more
natural than such a state of solemn awe on such an occasion; nothing
would introduce the opening of the seal in a more impressive manner;
nothing would more naturally express the anxiety of the church, the
probable feelings of the pious on the opening of these successive seals,
than the representation that incense, accompanied with their prayers,
was continually offered in heaven.

[Revelation 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 8:2</span></span>

And I saw the seven angels which stood before God - Prof. Stuart
supposes that by these angels are meant the "presence-angels" which he
understands to be referred to, in [Rev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004.md), by the "seven spirits which are
before the throne." If, however, the interpretation of that passage
above proposed, that it refers to the Holy Spirit, with reference to his
multiplied agency and operations, be correct, then we must seek for
another application of the phrase here. The only difficulty in applying
it arises from the use of the article - "the seven angels" - τοὺς tous
as if they were angels already referred to; and as there has been no
previous mention of "seven angels," unless it be in the phrase "the
seven spirits which are before the throne," in [Rev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004.md), it is argued that this must have
been such a reference. But this interpretation is not absolutely
necessary. John might use this language either because the angels had
been spoken of before; or because it would be sufficiently understood,
from the common use of language, who would be referred to - as we now
might speak of "the seven members of the cabinet of the United States,"
or "the thirty-one governors of the states of the Union," though they
had not been particularly mentioned; or he might speak of them as just
then disclosed to his view, and because his meaning would be
sufficiently definite by the circumstances which were to follow - their
agency in blowing the trumpets.

It would be entirely in accordance with the usage of the article for one
to say that he saw an army, and the commander-in-chief, and the four
staff-officers, and the five bands of music, and the six companies of
sappers and miners, etc. It is not absolutely necessary, therefore, to
suppose that these angels had been before referred to. There is, indeed,
in the use of the phrase "which stood before God," the idea that they
are to be regarded as permanently standing there, or that that is their
proper place - as if they were angels who were particularly designated
to this high service. Compare [Luk
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#019.md); "I am Gabriel, that stand in the
presence of God." If this idea is involved in the phrase, then there is
a sufficient reason why the article is used, though they had not before
been mentioned.

And to them were given seven trumpets - One to each. By whom the
trumpets were given is not said. It may be supposed to have been done by
Him who sat on the throne. Trumpets were used then, as now, for various
purposes; to summon an assembly; to muster the hosts of battle; to
inspirit and animate troops in conflict. Here they are given to announce
a series of important events producing great changes in the world as if
God summoned and led on his hosts to accomplish his designs.

[Revelation 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 8:3</span></span>

And another angel came - Who this angel was is not mentioned, nor have
we any means of determining. Of course a great variety of opinion has
been entertained on the subject (see Poole's Synopsis) - some referring
it to angels in general; others to the ministry of the church; others to
Constantine; others to Michael; and many others to the Lord Jesus. All
that we know is, that it was an angel who thus appeared, and there is
nothing inconsistent in the supposition that anyone of the angels in
heaven may have been appointed to perform what is here represented. The
design seems to be, to represent the prayers of the saints as ascending
in the anticipation of the approaching series of wonders in the world -
and there would be a beautiful propriety in representing them as offered
by an angel, feeling deep interest in the church, and ministering in
behalf of the saints.

And stood at the altar - In heaven - represented as a temple with an
altar, and with the usual array of things employed in the worship of
God. The altar was the appropriate place for him to stand when about to
offer the prayers of the saints for that is the place where the
worshipper stood under the ancient dispensation. Compare the [Mat
5:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023.md) notes; [Luk
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#011.md) note. In the latter place an
angel is represented as appearing to Zacharias "on the right side of the
altar of incense."

Having a golden censer - The firepan, made for the purpose of carrying
fire, on which to burn incense in time of worship. See it described and
illustrated in the notes on [Heb 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#004.md).
There seems reason to suppose that the incense that was offered in the
ancient worship was designed to be emblematic of the prayers of saints,
for it was the custom for worshippers to be engaged in prayer at the
time the incense was offered by the priest. See [Luk
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#010.md).

And there was given unto him much incense - See the notes on [Luk
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#009.md). A large quantity was here given
to him, because the occasion was one on which many prayers might be
expected to be offered.

That he should offer it with the prayers - Margin, "add it to." Greek,
"that he should give it with" - δώση dōsē. The idea is plain, that, when
the prayers of the saints ascended, he would also burn the incense, that
it might go up at the same moment, and be emblematic of them. Compare
the notes on [Rev 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008.md).

Of all saints - Of all who are holy; of all who are the children of God.
The idea seems to be, that, at this time, all the saints would unite in
calling on God, and in deprecating his wrath. As the events which were
about to occur were a matter of common interest to the people of God, it
was to be supposed that they would unite in common supplication.

Upon the golden altar - The altar of incense. This in the tabernacle and
in the temple was overlaid with gold.

Which was before the throne - This is represented as a temple-service,
and the altar of incense is, with propriety, placed before his seat or
throne, as it was in the tabernacle and temple. In the temple, God is
represented as occupying the mercy-seat in the holy of holies, and the
altar of incense is in the holy place before that. See the description
of the temple in the notes on [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012.md).

[Revelation 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 8:4</span></span>

And the smoke of the incense ... - The smoke caused by the burning
incense. John, as he saw this, naturally interpreted it of the prayers
of the saints. The meaning of the whole symbol, thus explained, is that,
at the time referred to, the anxiety of the church in regard to the
events which were about to occur would naturally lead to much prayer. It
is not necessary to attempt to verify this by any distinct historical
facts, for no one can doubt that, in a time of such impending
calamities, the church would be earnestly engaged in devotion. Such has
always been the case in times of danger; and it may always be assumed to
be true, that when danger threatens, whether it be to the church at
large or to an individual Christian, there will be a resort to the
throne of grace.

[Revelation 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 8:5</span></span>

And the angel took the censer - [Rev
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003.md). This is a new symbol, designed to
furnish a new representation of future events. By the former it had been
shown that there would be much prayer offered; by this it is designed to
show that, notwithstanding the prayer that would be offered, great and
fearful calamities would come upon the earth. This is symbolized by
casting the censer upon the earth, as if the prayers were not heard any
longer, or as if prayer were now in vain.

And filled it with fire of the altar - An image similar to this occurs
in [Eze 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#002.md), where the man clothed in
linen is commanded to go between the wheels under the cherub, and fill
his hands with coals of fire from between the cherubims, and to scatter
them over the city as a symbol of its destruction. Here the coals are
taken, evidently, from the altar of sacrifice. Compare the notes on [Isa
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001.md). On these coals no incense was
placed, but they were thrown at once to the earth. The new emblem,
therefore, is the taking of coals, and scattering them abroad as a
symbol of the destruction that was about to ensue.

And cast it into the earth - Margin, upon. The margin expresses
undoubtedly the meaning. The symbol, therefore, properly denoted that
fearful calamities were about to come upon the earth. Even the prayers
of saints did not prevail to turn them away, and now the symbol of the
scattered coals indicated that terrible judgments were about to come
upon the world.

And there were voices - Sounds, noises. See the notes on [Rev
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#005.md). The order is not the same here as
there, but lightnings, thunderings, and voices are mentioned in both.

And an earthquake - [Rev 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012.md). This is
a symbol of commotion. It is not necessary to look for a literal
fulfillment of it, anymore than it is for literal "voices,"
"lightnings," or "thunderings."

[Revelation 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 8:6</span></span>

And the seven angels which had the seven trumpets prepared themselves to
sound - [Rev 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#007.md). Evidently in
succession, perhaps by arranging themselves in the order in which they
were to sound. The way is now prepared for the sounding of the trumpets,
and for the fearful commotions and changes which would be indicated by
that. The last seal is opened; heaven stands in suspense to know what is
to be disclosed; the saints, filled with solicitude, have offered their
prayers; the censer of coals has been cast to the earth, as if these
judgments could be no longer stayed by prayer; and the angels prepare to
sound the trumpets indicative of what is to occur.

[Revelation 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 8:7</span></span>

The first angel sounded - The first in order, and indicating the first
in the series of events that were to follow.

And there followed hail - Hail is usually a symbol of the divine
vengeance, as it has often been employed to accomplish the divine
purposes of punishment. Thus, in [Exo
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#023.md), "And the Lord sent thunder and
hail, and the fire ran along the ground; and the Lord rained hail upon
the land of Egypt." So in [Psa 105:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#032.md),
referring to the plagues upon Egypt, it is said, "He gave them hail for
rain, and flaming fire in their land." So again, [Psa
78:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#048.md), "He gave up their cattle also
to the hail, and their flocks to hot thunderbolts." As early as the time
of Job hail was understood to be an emblem of the divine displeasure,
and an instrument in inflicting punishment:

"Hast thou entered into the treasures of the snow,

Or hast thou seen the treasure of the hail?

Which I have reserved against the time of trouble,

Against the day of battle and war!"

[Job 38:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#022.md).

So also the same image is used in [Psa
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#013.md);

"The Lord also thundered in the heaven,

And the Most High gave forth his voice,

Hailstones and coals of fire."

Compare [Hag 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#017.md). The destruction of
the Assyrian army, it is said, would be accomplished in the same way,
[Isa 30:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#030.md). Compare [Eze
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#011.md); [Eze
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#022.md).

And fire - Lightning. This also is an instrument and an emblem of
destruction.

Mingled with blood - By blood "we must naturally understand," says Prof.
Stuart, "in this case, a shower of colored rain; that is, rain of a
rubidinous aspect, an occurrence which is known sometimes to take place,
and which, like falling stars, eclipses, etc., was viewed with terror by
the ancients, because it was supposed to be indicative of blood that was
to be shed." The appearance, doubtless, was that of a red shower,
apparently of hail or snow - for rain is not mentioned. It is not a
rain-storm, it is a hail-storm that is the image here; and the image is
that of a driving hail-storm, where the lightnings flashed, and where
there was the intermingling of a reddish substance that resembled blood,
and that was an undoubted symbol of blood that was to be shed. I do not
know that there is red rain, or red hail, but red snow is not very
uncommon; and the image here would be complete if we suppose that there
was an intermingling of red snow in the driving tempest.

This species of snow was found by Captain Ross at Baffin's Bay on the
17th of August, 1819. The mountains that were dyed with the snow were
about 8 miles long, and 600 feet high. The red color reached to the
ground in many places 10 or 12 feet deep, and continued for a great
length of time. Although red snow had not until this attracted much
notice, yet it had been long before observed in Alpine countries.
Saussure discovered it on Mount Bernard in 1778. Ramoud found it on the
Pyrenees; and Summerfield discovered it in Norway. "In 1818 red snow
fell on the Italian Alps and Apennines. In March, 1808, the whole
country about Cadore, Belluno, and Feltri was covered with a red-colored
snow to the depth of six and a half feet; but a white snow had fallen
both before and after it, the red formed a stratum in the middle of the
white. At the same time a similar fall took place in the mountains of
the Valteline, Brescia, Carinthia, and Tyrol" (Edin. Encyclo. art.
"Snow"). These facts show that what is referred to here in the symbol
might possibly occur. Such a symbol would be properly expressive of
blood and carnage.

And they were cast upon the earth - The hail, the fire, and the blood -
denoting that the fulfillment of this was to be on the earth.

And the third part of trees was burnt up - By the fire that came down
with the hail and the blood.

And all green grass was burnt up - Wherever this lighted on the earth.
The meaning would seem to be, that wherever this tempest beat the effect
was to destroy a third part - that is, a large portion of the trees, and
to consume all the grass. A portion of the trees - strong and mighty -
would stand against it; but what was so tender as grass is, would be
consumed. The sense does not seem to be that the tempest would be
confined to a third part of the world, and destroy all the trees and the
grass there; but that it would be a sweeping and general tempest, and
that wherever it spread it would prostrate a third part of the trees and
consume all the grass. Thus understood, it would seem to mean, that in
reference to those things in the world which were firm and established
like trees it would not sweep them wholly away, though it would make
great desolation; but in reference to those which were delicate and
feeble - like grass - it would sweep them wholly away.

This would not be an inapt description of the ordinary effects of
invasion in time of war. A few of those things which seem most firm and
established in society - like trees in a forest - weather out the storm;
while the gentle virtues, the domestic enjoyments, the arts of peace,
like tender grass, are wholly destroyed. The fulfillment of this we are
undoubtedly to expect to find in the terrors of invasion; the evils of
war; the effusion of blood; the march of armies. So far as the language
is concerned, the symbol would apply to any hostile invasion; but in
pursuing the exposition on the principles on which we have thus far
conducted it, we are to look for the fulfillment in one or more of those
invasions of the northern hordes that preceded the downfall of the Roman
empire and that contributed to it. In the Analysis of the chapter, some
reasons were given why these four trumpet signals were placed together,
as pertaining to a series of events of the same general character, and
as distinguished from those which were to follow.

The natural place which they occupy, or the events which we should
suppose, from the views taken above of the first six seals, would be
represented, would be the successive invasions of the northern hordes
which ultimately accomplished the overthrow of the Roman empire. There
are four of these "trumpets," and it would be a matter of inquiry
whether there were four events of sufficient distinctness that would
mark these invasions, or that would constitute periods or epochs in the
destruction of the Roman power. At this point in writing, I looked on a
chart of history, composed with no reference to this prophecy, and found
a singular and unexpected prominence given to four such events extending
from the first invasion of the Goths and Vandals at the beginning of the
fifth century, to the fall of the Western empire, 476 a.d. The first was
the invasion of Alaric, king of the Goths, 410 a.d.; the second was the
invasion of Attila, king of the Huns, "scourge of God," 447 a.d.; a
third was the sack of Rome by Genseric, king of the Vandals, 455 a.d.;
and the fourth, resulting in the final conquest of Rome, was that of
Odoacer, king of the Heruli, who assumed the title of King of Italy, 476
a.d. We shall see, however, on a closer examination, that although two
of these - Attila and Genseric - were, during a part of their career,
contemporary, yet the most prominent place is due to Genseric in the
events that attended the downfall of the empire, and that the second
trumpet probably related to him; the third to Attila. These were, beyond
doubt, four great periods or events attending the fall of the Roman
empire, which synchronize with the period before us.

If, therefore, we regard the opening of the sixth seal as denoting the
threatening aspect of these invading powers - the gathering of the dark
cloud that hovered over the borders of the empire, and the consternation
produced by that approaching storm; and if we regard the transactions in
the seventh chapter - the holding of the winds in check, and the sealing
of the chosen of God - as denoting the suspension of the impending
judgments in order that a work might be done to save the church, and as
referring to the divine interposition in behalf of the church; then the
appropriate place of these four trumpets, under the seventh seal, will
be when that delayed and restrained storm burst in successive blasts
upon different parts of the empire - the successive invasions which were
so prominent in the overthrow of that vast power. History marks four of
these events - four heavy blows - four sweepings of the tempest and the
storm - under Alaric, Genseric, Attila, and Odoacer, whose movements
could not be better symbolized than by these successive blasts of the
trumpet.

The first of these is the invasion of Alaric; and the inquiry now is,
whether his invasion is such as would be properly symbolized by the
first trumpet. In illustrating this, it will be proper to notice some of
the movements of Alaric, and the alarm consequent on his invasion of the
empire; and then to inquire how far this corresponds with the images
employed in the description of the first trumpet. For these
illustrations I shall be indebted mainly to Mr. Gibbon. Alaric, the
Goth, was at first employed in the service of the emperor Theodosius, in
his attempt to oppose the usurper Arbogastes, after the murder of
Valentinian, emperor of the West. Theodosius, in order to oppose the
usurper, employed, among others, numerous barbarians - Iberians, Arabs,
and Goths. One of them was Alaric, who, to use the language of Mr.
Gibbon (ii. 179), "acquired in the school of Theodosius the knowledge of
the art of war, which he afterward so fatally exerted for the
destruction of Rome," 392-394 a.d. After the death of Theodosius (395
a.d.) the Goths revolted from the Roman power, and Alaric, who had been
disappointed in his expectations of being raised to the command of the
Roman armies, became their leader (Decline and Fall, ii. 213). "That
renowned leader was descended from the noble race of the Balti; which
yielded only to the royal dignity of the Amali; he had solicited the
command of the Roman armies; and the imperial court provoked him to
demonstrate the folly of their refusal, and the importance of their
loss. In the midst of a divided court and a discontented people the
emperor Arcadius was terrified by the aspect of the Gothic arms," etc.

Alaric then invaded and conquered Greece, laying it waste in his
progress, until he reached Athens, ii. 214, 215. "The fertile fields of
Phocis and Boeotia were instantly covered by a deluge of barbarians, who
massacred the males of age to bear arms, and drove away the beautiful
females, with the spoil and cattle of the flaming villages." Alaric then
concluded a treaty with Theodosius, the emperor of the East (ii. 216);
was made master-general of Eastern Illyricum, and created a magistrate
(ii. 217); soon united under his command the barbarous nations that had
made the invasion, and was solemnly declared to be the king of the
Visigoths, ii. 217. "Armed with this double power, seated on the verge
of two empires, he alternately sold his deceitful promises to the courts
of Arcadius and Honorius, until he declared and executed his purpose of
invading the dominions of the West. The provinces of Europe which
belonged to the Eastern empire were already exhausted; those of Asia
were inaccessible; and the strength of Constantinople had resisted his
attack. But he was tempted by the beauty, the wealth, and the fame of
Italy, which he had twice visited; and he secretly aspired to plant the
Gothic standard on the walls of Rome; and to enrich his army with the
accumulated spoils of 300 triumphs," ii. 217, 218.

In describing his march to the Danube, and his progress toward Italy,
having increased his army with a large number of barbarians, Mr. Gibbon
uses the remarkable language expressive of the general consternation,
already quoted in the description of the sixth seal. Alaric approached
rapidly toward the imperial city, resolved to "conquer or die before the
gates of Rome." But he was checked by Stilicho, and compelled to make
peace, and retired (Decline and Fall, ii. 222), and the threatening
storm was for a time suspended. See the notes on [Rev
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#001.md) ff. So great was the
consternation, however, that the Roman court, which then had its seat at
Milan, thought it necessary to remove to a safer place, and became fixed
at Ravenna, ii. 224. This calm, secured by the retreat of Alaric, was,
however, of short continuance. In 408 a.d. he again invaded Italy in a
more successful manner, attacked the capital, and more than once
pillaged Rome. The following facts, for which I am indebted to Mr.
Gibbon, will illustrate the progress of the events, and the effects of
this blast of the "first trumpet" in the series that announced the
destruction of the Western empire:

\(a\) The effect, on the destiny of the empire, of removing the Roman
court to Ravenna from the dread of the Goths. As early as 303 a.d. the
court of the emperor of the West was, for the most part, established at
Milan. For some time before, the "sovereignty of the capital was
gradually annihilated by the extent of conquest," and the emperors were
required to be long absent from Rome on the frontiers, until in the time
of Diocletian and Maximian the seat of government was fixed at Milan,
"whose situation at the foot of the Alps appeared far more convenient
than that of Rome for the important purpose of watching the motions of
the barbarians of Germany" (Gibbon, i. 213). "The life of Diocletian and
Maximian was a life of action, and a considerable portion of it was
spent in camps, or in their long and frequent marches; but whenever the
public business allowed them any relaxation, they seem to have retired
with pleasure to their favorite residences of Nicomedia and Milan. Until
Diocletian, in the twentieth year of his reign, celebrated his Roman
triumph, it is extremely doubtful whether he ever visited the ancient
capital of the empire" (Gibbon, i. 214).

From this place the court was driven away, by the dread of the northern
barbarians, to Ravenna, a safer place, which thenceforward became the
seat of government, while Italy was ravaged by the northern hordes, and
while Rome was besieged and pillaged. Mr. Gibbon, under date of 404
a.d., says, "The recent danger to which the person of the emperor had
been exposed in the defenseless palace of Milan (from Alaric and the
Goths) urged him to seek a retreat in some illaccessible fortress in
Italy, where he might securely remain, while the open country was
covered by a deluge of barbarians" (vol. ii. p. 224). He then proceeds
to describe the situation of Ravenna, and the removal of the court
thither, and then adds (p. 225), "The fears of Honorius were not without
foundation, nor were his precautions without effect. While Italy
rejoiced in her deliverance from the Goths, a furious tempest was
excited among the nations of Germany, who yielded to the irresistible
impulse that appears to have been gradually communicated from the
eastern extremity of the continent of Asia." That mighty movement of the
Huns is then described, as the storm was preparing to burst upon the
Roman empire, ii. 225. The agitation and the removal of the Roman
government were events not inappropriate to be described by symbols
relating to the fall of that mighty power.

\(b\) The particulars of that invasion, the consternation, the siege of
Rome, and the capture and pillage of the imperial city, would confirm
the propriety of this application to the symbol of the first trumpet. It
would be too long to copy the account - for it extends through many
pages of the History of the Decline and Fall of the Empire; but a few
selected sentences may show the general character of the events, and the
propriety of the symbols, on the supposition that they referred to these
things. Thus, Mr. Gibbon (ii. 226, 227) says, "The correspondence of
nations was, in that age, so imperfect and precarious, that the
revolutions of the North might escape the knowledge of the court of
Ravenna, until the dark cloud which was collected along the coast of the
Baltic burst in thunder upon the banks of the Upper Danube. The king of
the confederate Germans passed, without resistance, the Alps, the Po,
and the Apennines; leaving on the one hand the inaccessible palace of
Honorius securely buried among the marshes of Ravenna; and on the other
the camp of Stilicho, who had fixed his headquarters at Ticinum, or
Pavia, but who seems to have avoided a decisive battle until he had
assembled his distant forces. Many cities of Italy were pillaged or
destroyed. The senate and people trembled at their approach within a
hundred and eighty miles of Rome; and anxiously compared the danger
which they had escaped with the new perils to which they were exposed,"
etc.

Rome was besieged for the first time by the Goths 408 a.d. Of this siege
Mr. Gibbon (ii. 252-254) has given a graphic description. Among other
things, he says, "That unfortunate city gradually experienced the
distress of scarcity, and at length the horrid calamities of famine." "A
dark suspicion was entertained, that some desperate wretches fed on the
bodies of their fellow-creatures whom they had secretly murdered; and
even mothers - such were the horrid conflicts of the two most powerful
instincts implanted by nature in the human breast - even mothers are
said to have tasted the flesh of their slaughtered infants. Many
thousands of the inhabitants of Rome expired in their houses, or in the
streets, for want of sustenance; and as the public sepulchres without
the walls were in the power of the enemy, the stench which arose from so
many putrid and unburied carcasses infected the air; and the miseries of
famine were succeeded and aggravated by a pestilential disease."

The first siege was raised by the payment of an enormous ransom (Gibbon,
ii. 254). The second siege of Rome by the Goths occurred 409 a.d. This
siege was carried on by preventing the supply of provisions, Alaric
having seized upon Ostia, the Roman port, where the provisions for the
capital were deposited. The Romans finally consented to receive a new
emperor at the hand of Alaric, and Attalus was appointed in the place of
the feeble Honorius, who was then at Ravenna, and who had abandoned the
capital. Attalus, an inefficient prince, was soon publicly stripped of
the robes of office, and Alaric, enraged at the conduct of the court at
Ravenna toward him, turned his wrath a third time on Rome, and laid
siege to the city. This occurred 410 a.d. "The king of the Goths, who no
longer dissembled his appetite for plunder and revenge, appeared in arms
under the walls of the capital; and the trembling senate, without any
hope of relief, prepared, by a desperate effort, to delay the ruin of
their country. But they were unable to guard against the conspiracy of
their slaves and domestics, who, either from birth or interest, were
attached to the cause of the enemy. At the hour of midnight the Salarian
Gate was silently opened, and the inhabitants were awakened by the
tremendous sound of the Gothic trumpet. Eleven hundred and sixty-three
years after the foundation of Rome, the imperial city, which had subdued
and civilized so considerable a part of mankind, was delivered to the
licentious fury of the tribes of Germany and Scythia" (Gibbon, ii. 260).

\(c\) It is, perhaps, only necessary to add that the invasion of Alaric
was in fact but one of the great events that led to the fall of the
empire, and that, in announcing that fall, where a succession of events
was to occur, it would properly be represented by the blast of one of
the trumpets. The expressions employed in the symbol are, indeed, such
as might be applied to any invasion of hostile armies, but they are such
as would be used if the design were admitted to be to describe the
invasion of the Gothic conqueror. For:

\(1\) that invasion, as we have seen, would be well represented by the
storm of hail and lightning that was seen in vision;

\(2\) by the red color mingled in that storm - indicative of blood;

\(3\) by the fact that it consumed the trees and the grass.

This, as we saw in the exposition, would properly denote the desolation
produced by war - applicable, indeed, to all war, but as applicable to
the invasion of Alaric as any war that has occurred, and it is such an
emblem as would be used if it were admitted that it was the design to
represent his invasion. The sweeping storm, prostrating the trees of the
forest, is an apt emblem of the evils of war, and, as was remarked in
the exposition, no more striking illustration of the consequences of a
hostile invasion could be employed than the destruction of the "green
grass." What is here represented in the symbol cannot, perhaps, be
better expressed than in the language of Mr. Gibbon, when describing the
invasion of the Roman empire under Alaric. Speaking of that invasion, he
says - "While the peace of Germany was secured by the attachment of the
Franks and the neutrality of the Alemanni, the subjects of Rome,
unconscious of their approaching calamities, enjoyed the state of quiet
and prosperity which had seldom blessed the frontiers of Gaul. Their
flocks and herds were permitted to graze in the pastures of the
barbarians; their huntsmen penetrated, without fear or danger, into the
darkest recesses of the Hercynian wood. The banks of the Rhine were
crowned, like those of the Tiber, with elegant houses and
well-cultivated farms; and if a poet descended the river, he might
express his doubt on which side was situated the territory of the
Romans. This scene of peace and plenty was suddenly changed into a
desert; and the prospect of the smoking ruins could alone distinguish
the solitude of nature from the desolation of man.

The flourishing city of Mentz was surprised and destroyed; and many
thousand Christians were inhumanly massacred in the church. Worms
perished after a long and obstinate siege; Strasburg, Spires, Rheims,
Tournay, Arras, Amiens, experienced the cruel oppression of the German
yoke; and the consuming flames of war spread from the banks of the Rhine
over the greatest part of the seventeen provinces of Gaul. That rich and
extensive country, as far as the ocean, the Alps, and the Pyrenees, was
delivered to the barbarians, who drove before them, in a promiscuous
crowd, the bishop, the senator, and the virgin, laden with the spoils of
their houses and altars," ii. 230. In reference, also, to the invasion
of Alaric, and the particular nature of thee desolation depicted under
the first trumpet, a remarkable passage which Mr. Gibbon has quoted from
Claudian, as describing the effects of the invasion of Alaric, may be
here introduced. "The old man," says he, speaking of Claudian, "who had
passed his simple and innocent life in the neighborhood of Verona, was a
stranger to the quarrels both of kings and of bishops; his pleasures,
his desires, his knowledge, were confined within the little circle of
his paternal farm; and a staff supported his aged steps on the same
ground where he had sported in infancy. Yet even this humble and rustic
felicity (which Claudian describes with so much truth and feeling) was
still exposed to the undistinguishing rage of war.

Ingentem meminit parvo qui germine quercum

Aequaevumque videt consenuisse nemus.

A neighboring wood born with himself he sees

And loves his old contemporary trees.

\- Cowley.

His trees, his old contemporary trees, must blaze in the conflagration
of the whole country; a detachment of Gothic cavalry must sweep away his
cottage and his family; and the power of Alaric could destroy this
happiness which he was not able either to taste or to bestow. 'Fame,'
says the poet, 'encircling with terror or gloomy wings, proclaimed the
march of the barbarian army, and filled Italy with consternation,'" ii.
218. And,

\(4\) as to the extent of the calamity, there is also a striking
propriety in the language of the symbol as applicable to the invasion of
Alaric. I do not suppose, indeed, that it is necessary, in order to find
a proper fulfillment of the symbol, to be able to show that exactly
one-third part of the empire was made desolate in this way; but it is a
sufficient fulfillment if desolation spread over a considerable portion
of the Roman world - as if a third part had been destroyed. No one who
reads the account of the invasion of Alaric can doubt that it would be
an apt description of the ravages of his arms to say that a third part
was laid waste. That the desolations produced by Alaric were such as
would be properly represented by this symbol may be fully seen by
consulting the whole account of that invasion in Gibbon, ii. 213-266.

[Revelation 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 8:8</span></span>

And the second angel sounded - Compare the notes on [Rev
8:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#002.md). This, according to the
interpretation proposed above, refers to the second of the four great
events which contributed to the downfall of the Roman empire. It will be
proper in this case, as in the former, to inquire into the literal
meaning of the symbol, and then whether there was any event that
corresponded with it.

And as it were a great mountain - A mountain is a natural symbol of
strength, and hence becomes a symbol of a strong and powerful kingdom;
for mountains arc not only places of strength in themselves, but they
anciently answered the purposes of fortified places, and were the seats
of power. Hence, they are properly symbols of strong nations. "The stone
that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled the whole
earth," [Dan 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035.md). Compare [Zac
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#007.md); [Jer
51:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#025.md). We naturally, then, apply this
part of the symbol to some strong and mighty nation - not a nation,
necessarily, that issued from a mountainous region but a nation that in
strength resembled a mountain.

Burning with fire - A mountain in a blaze; that is, with all its woods
on fire, or, more probably, a volcanic mountain. There would perhaps be
no more sublime image than such a mountain lifted suddenly from its base
and thrown into the sea. One of the sublimest parts of the Paradise Lost
is that where the poet represents the angels in the great battle in
heaven as lifting the mountains - tearing them from their base - and
hurling them on the foe:

"From their foundations heaving to and fro,

They plucked the seated hills, with all their load,

Rocks, waters, woods, and by the shaggy tops

Uplifting, bore them in their hands," etc.

Book vi.

The poet, however, has not, as John has, represented a volcano borne
along and cast into the sea. The symbol employed here would denote some
fiery, impetuous, destructive power. If used to denote a nation, it
would be a nation that was, as it were, burning with the desire of
conquest - impetuous, and fierce, and fiery in its assaults - and
consuming all in its way.

Cast into the sea - The image is very sublime; the scene, should such an
event occur, would be awfully grand. As to the fulfillment of this, or
the thing that was intended to be represented by it, there cannot be any
material doubt. It is not to be understood literally, of course; and the
natural application is to some nation, or army, that has a resemblance
in some respects to such a blazing mountain, and the effect of whose
march would be like casting such a mountain into the ocean. We naturally
look for agitation and commotion, and particularly in reference to the
sea, or to some maritime coasts. It is undoubtedly required in the
application of this, that we should find its fulfillment in some country
lying beyond the sea, or in some seacoast or maritime country, or in
reference to commerce.

And the third part of the sea became blood - Resembled blood; became as
red as blood. The figure here is, that as such a blazing mountain cast
into the sea would, by its reflection on the waters, seem to tinge them
with red, so there would be something corresponding with this in what
was referred to by the symbol. It would be fulfilled if there was a
fierce maritime warfare, and if in some desperate naval engagement the
sea should be tinged with blood.

[Revelation 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 8:9</span></span>

And the third part of the creatures which were in the sea, and had life,
died - The effect was as if one-third of all the fish in the sea were
cut off. Of course this is not to be taken literally. It is designed to
describe an effect, pertaining to the maritime portion of the world, as
if a third portion of all that was in the sea should perish. The natural
interpretation would be to apply it to some invasion or calamity
pertaining to the sea - to the islands, to the maritime regions, or to
commerce. If the whole description pertains to the Roman empire, then
this might be supposed to have particular reference to something that
would have a bearing on the maritime parts of that empire.

And the third part of the ships were destroyed - This also pertains to
the same general calamity, affecting the commerce of the empire. The
destruction of the "ships" was produced, in some way, by casting the
mountain into the sea - either by their being consumed by the contact
with the burning mass, or by being sunk by the agitation of the waters.
The essential idea is, that the calamity would be of such a nature as
would produce the destruction of vessels at sea - either naval
armaments, or ships of commerce. In looking now for the application or
fulfillment of this, it is necessary:

\(a\) to find some event or events which would have a particular bearing
on the maritime or commercial part of the world; and,

\(b\) some such event or events that, on the supposition that they were
the things referred to, would be properly symbolized by the image here
employed:

\(1\) If the first trumpet had reference to the invasion of Alaric and
the Goths, then in this we naturally look for the next succeeding act of
invasion which shook the Roman empire, and contributed to its fall.

\(2\) the next invasion was that under Genseric, at the head of the
Vandals (Gibbon, ii. 306ff). This occurred 428-468 ad.

\(3\) The symbol of a blazing or burning mountain, torn from its
foundation, and precipitated into the ocean, would well represent this
mighty nation moved from its ancient seat, and borne along toward the
maritime parts of the empire, and its desolations there - as will be
shown in the following remarks.

\(4\) the acts of the Vandals, under Genseric, corresponded with the
ideas expressed by the symbol. In illustrating this I shall be indebted,
as heretofore, principally to Mr. Gibbon:

\(a\) His general account of the Vandals is this: they are supposed (i.
138) to have been originally the same people with the Goths, the Goths
and Vandals constituting one great nation living on the shores of the
Baltic. They passed in connection with them over the Baltic; emigrated
to Prussia and the Ukraine; invaded the Roman provinces; received
tribute from the Romans; subdued the countries about the Bosphorus;
plundered the cities of Bithynia; ravaged Greece and Illyrium, and were
at last settled in Thrace under the emperor Theodosius (Gibbon, i.
136-166; ii. 110-150). They were then driven forward by the Huns, and
having passed through France and Spain into Africa, conquered the
Carthaginian territory, established an independent government, and
thence through a long period harassed the neighboring islands, and the
coasts of the Mediterranean by their predatory incursions, destroying
the ships and the commerce of the Romans, and were distinguished in the
downfall of the empire by their ravages on the islands and the sea.
Thus, they were moved along from place to place until the scene of their
desolations became more distinctly the maritime parts of the empire; and
the effect of their devastations might be well compared with a burning
mountain moved from its ancient base, and then thrown into the sea.

\(b\) This will be apparent from the statements of Mr. Gibbon in regard
to their ravages under their leader Genseric. "Seville and Carthagena
became the reward, or rather the prey of the ferocious conquerors"
(after they had defeated the Roman Castinus), "and the vessels which
they found in the harbor of Carthagena might easily transport them to
the isles of Majorca and Minorca, where the Spanish fugitives, as in a
secure recess, had vainly concealed their families and fortunes. The
experience of navigation, and perhaps the prospect of Africa, encouraged
the Vandals to accept the invitation which they received from Count
Boniface" (to aid him in his apprehended difficulties with Rome, and to
enter into an alliance with him by settling permanently in Africa
(Gibbon, ii. 305, 306)): "and the death of Goaderic" (the Vandal king)
"served only to forward and animate the bold enterprise. In the room of
a prince, not conspicuous for any superior powers of the mind or body,
they acquired his bastard brother, the terrible Genseric - a name which,
in the destruction of the Roman empire, has deserved an equal rank with
the names of Alaric and Attila." "The ambition of Genseric was almost
without bounds, and without scruples; and the warrior could dexterously
employ the dark engines of policy to solicit the allies who might be
useful to his success, or to scatter among his enemies the seeds of
enmity and contention. Almost in the moment of his departure he was
informed that Hermanric, king of the Suevi, had presumed to ravage the
Spanish territories, which he was resolved to abandon. Impatient of the
insult, Genseric pursued the hasty retreat of the Suevi as far as
Merida; precipitated the king and his army into the river Anas, and
calmly returned to the seashore to embark his troops. The vessels which
transported the Vandals over the modern Straits of Gibraltar, a channel
only twelve miles in breadth, were furnished by the Spaniards, who
anxiously wished for their departure; and by the African general who had
implored their formidable assistance" (Gibbon, ii. 306. Genseric, in the
accomplishment of his purposes, soon took possession of the northern
coast of Africa, defeating the armies of Boniface, and "Carthage, Cirta,
and Hippo Regius were the only cities that appeared to rise above the
general inundation" (Gibbon, ii. 308). "On a sudden," says Mr. Gibbon
(ii. 309), "the seven fruitful provinces, from Tangier to Tripoli, were
overwhelmed by the invasion of the Vandals; whose destructive rage has
perhaps been exaggerated by popular animosity, religious zeal, and
extravagant declamation. War in its fairest form implies a perpetual
violation of humanity and justice; and the hostilities of barbarians are
inflamed by the fierce and lawless spirit which perpetually disturbs
their peaceful and domestic society. The Vandals, where they found
resistance, seldom gave quarter; and the deaths of their valiant
countrymen were expiated by the ruin of the cities under whose walls
they had fallen," etc.

The result of the invasion was the conquest of all northern Africa; the
reduction of Hippo and Carthage, and the establishment of a government
under Genseric in Africa that waged a long war with Rome (Gibbon, ii.
310, 311). The symbol before us has particular reference to maritime or
naval operations and desolations, and the following extracts from Mr.
Gibbon will show with what propriety, if this symbol was designed to
refer to him, these images were employed. "The discovery and conquest of
the black nations (in Africa) that might dwell beneath the torrid zone
could not tempt the rational ambition of Genseric; but he east his eyes
toward the sea; he resolved to create a naval power, and his bold
resolution was executed with steady and active perseverance. The woods
of Mount Atlas afforded an inexhaustible supply of timber; his new
subjects were skilled in the arts of navigation and ship-building; he
animated his daring Vandals to embrace a mode of warfare which would
render every maritime country accessible to their arms; the Moors and
Africans were allured by the hope of plunder; and after an interval of
six centuries the fleets that issued from the port of Carthage again
claimed the empire of the Mediterranean. The success of the Vandals, the
conquest of Sicily, the sack of Palermo, and the frequent descents on
the coasts of Lucania, awakened and alarmed the mother of Valentinian
and the sister of Theodosius. Alliances were formed; and armaments,
expensive and ineffectual, were prepared for the destruction of the
common enemy, who reserved his courage to encounter those dangers which
his policy could not prevent or elude.

The revolutions of the palace, which left the Western empire without a
defender and without a lawful prince, dispelled the apprehension and
stimulated the avarice of Genseric. He immediately equipped a numerous
fleet of Vandals and Moors, and cast anchor at the mouth of the Tiber,"
etc. (Gibbon, ii. 352). "On the third day after the tumult (455 a.d., on
the death of Maximus) Genseric boldly advanced from the port of Ostia to
the gates of the defenseless city. Instead of a sally of the Roman
youth, there issued from the gates an unarmed and venerable procession
of the bishop at the head of the clergy. But Rome and its inhabitants
were delivered to the licentiousness of the Vandals and the Moors, whose
blind passions revenged the injuries of Carthage. The pillage lasted
fourteen days and nights; and all that yet remained of public or private
wealth, of sacred or profane treasure, was diligently transported to the
vessels of Genseric," etc.

See the account of this pillage in Gibbon, ii. 355-366. The emperor
Majorian (457 a.d.) endeavored to "restore the happiness of the Romans,"
but he encountered the arms of Genseric, from his character and
situation their most formidable enemy. A fleet of Vandals and Moors
landed at the mouth of the Liris, or Garigliano; but the imperial troops
surprised and attacked the disorderly barbarians, who were encumbered
with the spoils of Campania; they were chased with slaughter to their
ships; and their leader, the king's brother-in-law, was found in the
number of the slain. Such vigilance might announce the character of the
new reign; but the strictest vigilance, and the most numerous forces,
were insufficient to protect the long-extended coast of Italy from the
depredations of a naval war" (Gibbon, ii. 363). "The emperor had
foreseen that it was impossible, without a maritime power, to achieve
the conquest of Africa. In the first Punic war the republic had exerted
such incredible diligence, that within sixty days after the first stroke
of the axe had been given in the forest a fleet of one hundred and sixty
galleys proudly rode at anchor in the sea. Under circumstances much less
favorable Majorian equalled the spirit and perseverance of the ancient
Romans. The woods of the Apennines were felled, the arsenals and
manufactures of Ravenna and Misenium were restored, Italy and Gaul vied
with each other in liberal contributions to the public service; and the
imperial navy of 300 large galleys, with an adequate proportion of
transports and smaller vessels, was collected in the secure and
capacious harbor of Carthagena in Spain" (Gibbon, ii. 363, 364).

The fate of this large navy is thus described by Mr. Gibbon: "Genseric
was saved from impending and inevitable ruin by the treachery of some
powerful subjects; envious or apprehensive of their master's success.
Guided by their secret intelligence, he surprised the unguarded fleet in
the bay of Carthagena; many of the ships were sunk, or taken, or burnt;
and the preparations of three years were destroyed in a single day," ii.
364. The further naval operations and maritime depredations of the
Vandals under Genseric are thus stated by Mr. Gibbon: "The kingdom of
Italy, a name to which the Western empire was gradually reduced, was
afflicted, under the reign of Ricimer, by the incessant depredations of
Vandal pirates. In the spring of each year they equipped a formidable
navy in the port of Carthage; and Genseric himself, though in very
advanced age, still commanded in person the most important expeditions.
His designs were concealed with impenetrable secrecy until the moment
that he hoisted sail. When he was asked by the pilot what course he
should steer - 'Leave the determination to the winds,' replied the
barbarian, with pious arrogance; 'they will transport us to the guilty
coast whose inhabitants have provoked the divine justice;' but if
Genseric himself deigned to issue more precise orders, he judged the
most wealthy to be the most criminal.

The Vandals repeatedly visited the coasts of Spain, Liguria, Tuscany,
Campania, Lucania, Bruttium, Apulia, Calabria, Venetia, Dalmatia,
Epirus, Greece, and Sicily; they were tempted to subdue the island of
Sardinia, so advantageously placed in the center of the Mediterranean;
and their arms spread desolation, or terror, from the Columns of
Hercules to the mouth of the Nile. As they were more ambitious of spoil
than of glory, they seldom attacked any fortified cities, or engaged any
regular troops in the open field. But the celerity of their motions
enabled them, almost at the same time, to threaten and to attack the
most distant objects which attracted their desires; and as they always
embarked a sufficient number of horses, they had no sooner landed than
they swept the dismayed country with a body of light cavalry," ii. 366.
How far this description agrees with the symbol in the passage before us
- "a great mountain burning with fire cast into the sea"; "the third
part of the ships were destroyed" - must be left to the reader to judge.

It may be asked, however, with at least some show of reason, whether, if
it be admitted that it was the design of the author of the Book of
Revelation to refer to the movements of the Vandals under Genseric as
one of the important and immediate causes of the ruin of the Roman
empire, he could have found a more expressive symbol than this? Indeed,
is there now any symbol that would be more striking and appropriate? If
one should now undertake to represent this as one of the causes of the
(downfall of the empire by a symbol, could he easily find one that would
be more expressive? It is a matter that is in itself perhaps of no
importance, but it may serve to show that the interpretation respecting
the second trumpet was not forced, to remark that I had gone through
with the interpretation of the language of the symbol before I looked
into Mr. Gibbon with any reference to the application.

[Revelation 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 8:10</span></span>

And the third angel sounded - Indicating, according to the
interpretation above proposed, some important event in the downfall of
the Roman empire.

And there fell a great star from heaven - A star is a natural emblem of
a prince, of a ruler, of one distinguished by rank or by talent. Compare
the notes on [Rev 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#028.md). See [Num
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017.md), and the notes on [Isa
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#012.md). A star falling from heaven
would be a natural symbol of one who had left a higher station, or of
one whose character and course would be like a meteor shooting through
the sky.

Burning as it were a lamp - Or, as a torch. The language here is such as
would describe a meteor blazing through the air; and the reference in
the symbol is to something that would have a resemblance to such a
meteor. It is not a lurid meteor (livid, pale, ghastly) that is here
referred to, but a bright, intense, blazing star - emblem of fiery
energy; of rapidity of movement and execution; of splendor of appearance
- such as a chieftain of high endowments, of impetuousness of character,
and of richness of apparel, would be. In all languages, probably, a star
has been an emblem of a prince whose virtues have shone brightly, and
who has exerted a beneficial influence on mankind. In all languages
also, probably, a meteor flaming through the sky has been an emblem of
some splendid genius causing or threatening desolation and ruin; of a
warrior who has moved along in a brilliant but destructive path over the
world; and who has been regarded as sent to execute the vengeance of
heaven. This usage occurs because a meteor is so bright; because it
appears so suddenly; because its course cannot be determined by any
known laws; and because, in the apprehensions of people, it is either
sent as a proof of the divine displeasure, or is adapted to excite
consternation and alarm. In the application of this part of the symbol,
therefore, we naturally look for some prince or warrior of brilliant
talents, who appears suddenly and sweeps rapidly over the world; who
excites consternation and alarm; whose path is marked by desolation, and
who is regarded as sent from heaven to execute the divine purposes - who
comes not to bless the world by brilliant talents well directed, but to
execute vengeance on mankind.

And it fell upon the third part of the rivers, and upon the fountains of
waters - On the phrase, "the third part," see the notes on [Rev
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#007.md). This reference to the "rivers"
and to the "fountains of waters" seems, in part, to be for the purpose
of saying that everything would be affected by this series of judgments.
In the previous visions the trees and the green grass, the sea and the
ships, had been referred to. The rivers and the fountains of waters are
not less important than the trees, the grass, and the commerce of the
world, and hence this judgment is mentioned as particularly bearing on
them. At the same time, as in the case of the other trumpets, there is a
propriety in supposing that there would be something in the event
referred to by the symbol which would make it more appropriate to use
this symbol in this case than in the others. It is natural, therefore,
to look for some desolations that would particularly affect the portions
of the world where rivers abound, or where they take their rise; or, if
it be understood as having a more metaphorical sense, to regard it as
affecting those things which resemble rivers and fountains - the sources
of influence; the morals, the religion of a people, the institutions of
a country, which are often so appropriately compared with running
fountains or flowing streams.

[Revelation 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 8:11</span></span>

And the name of the star is called Wormwood - Is appropriately so
called. The writer does not say that it would be actually so called, but
that this name would be properly descriptive of its qualities. Such
expressions are common in allegorical writings. The Greek word - ἄψινθος
apsinthos - denotes "wormwood," a well-known bitter herb. That word
becomes the proper emblem of bitterness. Compare [Jer
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#015.md); [Jer
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#015.md); [Lam
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#015.md), [Lam
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#019.md).

And the third part of the waters became wormwood - Became bitter as
wormwood. This is doubtless an emblem of the calamity which would occur
if the waters should be thus made bitter. Of course they would become
useless for the purposes to which they are mostly applied, and the
destruction of life would be inevitable. To conceive of the extent of
such a calamity we have only to imagine a large portion of the wells,
and rivers, and fountains of a country made bitter as wormwood. Compare
[Exo 15:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#023.md).

And many men died of the waters, because they were made bitter - This
effect would naturally follow if any considerable portion of the
fountains and streams of a land were changed by an infusion of wormwood.
It is not necessary to suppose that this is intended to be literally
true; for as, by the use of a symbol, it is not to be supposed that
literally a part of the waters would be turned into wormwood by the
baleful influence of a falling meteor, so it is not necessary to suppose
that there is intended to be represented a literal destruction of human
life by the use of waters. Great destruction and devastation are
undoubtedly intended to be denoted by this - destruction that would be
well represented in a land by the natural effects if a considerable part
of the waters were, by their bitterness, made unfit to drink.

In the interpretation and application, therefore, of this passage, we
may adopt the following principles and rules:

\(a\) It may be assumed, in this exposition, that the previous symbols,
under the first and second trumpet-blasts, referred respectively to
Alaric and his Goths, and to Genseric and his Vandals.

\(b\) That the next great and decisive event in the downfall of the
empire is the one that is here referred to.

\(c\) That there would be some chieftain or warrior who might be
compared with a blazing meteor; whose course would be singularly
brilliant; who would appear suddenly like a blazing star, and then
disappear like a star whose light was quenched in the waters.

\(d\) That the desolating course of that meteor would be mainly on those
portions of the world that abounded with springs of water and running
streams.

\(e\) That an effect would be produced as if those streams and fountains
were made bitter; that is, that many persons would perish, and that wide
desolations would be caused in the vicinity of those rivers and streams,
as if a bitter and baleful star should fall into the waters, and death
should spread over the lands adjacent to them, and watered by them.

Whether any events occurred of which this would be the proper emblem is
now the question. Among expositors there has been a considerable degree
of unanimity in supposing that Attila, the king of the Huns, is referred
to; and if the preceding expositions are correct, there can be no doubt
on the subject. After Alaric and Genseric, Attila occupies the next
place as an important agent in the overthrow of the Roman empire, and
the only question is, whether he would be properly symbolized by this
baleful star. The following remarks may be made to show the propriety of
the symbol:

\(1\) As already remarked, the place which he occupies in history, as
immediately succeeding Alaric and Genseric in the downfall of the
empire. This will appear in any chronological table, or in the table of
contents of any of the histories of those times. A full detail of the
career of Attila may be found in Gibbon, vol. ii. pp. 314-351. His
career extended from 433 a.d. to 453 a.d. It is true that he was
contemporary with Genseric, king of the Vandals, and that a portion of
the operations of Genseric in Africa were subsequent to the death of
Attila (455 a.d. to 467 a.d.); but it is also true that Genseric
preceded Attila in the career of conquest, and was properly the first in
order, being pressed forward in the Roman warfare by the Huns, 428 a.d.
See Gibbon, ii. 306ff.

\(2\) In the manner of his appearance he strongly resembled a brilliant
meteor flashing in the sky. He came from the east, gathering his Huns,
and poured them down, as we shall see, with the rapidity of a flashing
meteor, suddenly on the empire. He regarded himself also as devoted to
Mars, the god of war, and was accustomed to array himself in a
especially brilliant manner, so that his appearance, in the language of
his flatterers, was such as to dazzle the eyes of beholders. One of his
followers perceived that a heifer that was grazing had wounded her foot,
and curiously followed the track of blood, until he found in the long
grass the point of an ancient sword, which he dug out of the ground and
presented to Attila. "That magnanimous, or rather that artful prince,"
says Mr. Gibbon, "accepted with pious gratitude this celestial favor;
and, as the rightful possessor of the sword of Mars, asserted his divine
and indefeasible claim to the dominion of the earth. The favorite of
Mars soon acquired a sacred character, which rendered his conquests more
easy and more permanent; and the barbarian princes confessed, in the
language of devotion or flattery, that they could not presume to gaze,
with a steady eye, on the divine majesty of the king of the Huns," ii.
317. How appropriate would it be to represent such a prince by the
symbol of a bright and blazing star - or a meteor flashing through the
sky!

\(3\) there may be propriety, as applicable to him, in the expression -
"a great star from heaven failing upon the earth." Attila was regarded
as an instrument in the divine hand in inflicting punishment. The common
appellation by which he has been known is "the scourge of God." This
title is supposed by the modern Hungarians to have been first given to
Attila by a hermit of Gaul, but it was "inserted by Attila among the
titles of his royal dignity" (Gibbon, ii. 321, foot-note). To no one
could the title be more applicable than to him.

\(4\) his career as a conqueror, and the effect of his conquests on the
downfall of the empire, were such as to be properly symbolized in this
manner:

\(a\) The general effect of the invasion was worthy of an important
place in describing the series of events which resulted in the overthrow
of the empire. This is thus stated by Mr. Gibbon: "The western world was
oppressed by the Goths and Vandals, who fled before the Huns; but the
achievements of the Huns themselves were not adequate to their power and
prosperity. Their victorious hordes had spread from the Volga to the
Danube, but the public force was exhausted by the discord of independent
chieftains; their valor was idly consumed in obscure and predatory
excursions; and they often degraded their national dignity by
condescending, for the hopes of spoil, to enlist under the banners of
their fugitive enemies. In the reign of Attila the Huns again became the
terror of the world; and I shall now describe the character and actions
of that formidable barbarian who alternately invaded and insulted the
East and the West, and urged the rapid downfall of the Roman empire,
'vol. ii. pp. 314, 315.

\(b\) The parts of the earth affected by the invasion of the Huns were
those which would be properly symbolized by the things specified at the
blowing of this trumpet. It is said particularly that the effect would
be on "the rivers," and on "the fountains of waters." If this has a
literal application, or if, as was supposed in the case of the second
trumpet, the language used was such as had reference to the portion of
the empire that would be particularly affected by the hostile invasion,
then we may suppose that this refers to those portions of the empire
that abounded in rivers and streams, and more particularly those in
which the rivers and streams had their origin - for the effect was
permanently in the "fountains of waters." As a matter of fact, the
principal operations of Attila were in the regions of the Alps, and on
the portions of the empire whence the rivers flow down into Italy. The
invasion of Attila is described by Mr. Gibbon in this general language:
"The whole breadth of Europe, as it extends above five hundred miles
from the Euxine to the Adriatic, was at once invaded, and occupied, and
desolated, by the myriads of barbarians whom Attila led into the field,"
ii. 319, 320.

After describing the progress and the effects of this invasion (pp.
320-331) he proceeds more particularly to detail the events in the
invasion of Gaul and Italy, pp. 331-347. After the terrible battle of
Chalons, in which, according to one account, one hundred and sixty-two
thousand, and, according to other accounts, three hundred thousand
persons were slain, and in which Attila was defeated, he recovered his
vigor, collected his forces, and made a descent on Italy. Under pretence
of claiming Honoria, the daughter of the Empress of Rome, as his bride,
"the indignant lover took the field, passed the Alps, invaded Italy, and
besieged Aquileia with an innumerable host of barbarians." After
endeavoring in vain for three months to subdue the city, and when about
to abandon the siege, Attila took advantage of the appearance of a stork
as a favorable omen to arouse his men to a renewed effort, "a large
breach was made in the part of the wall where the stork had taken her
flight; the Huns mounted to the assault with irresistible fury; and the
succeeding generation could scarcely discover the ruins of Aquileia.
After this dreadful chastisement Attila pursued his march; and as he
passed, the cities of Altinum, Concordia, and Padua were reduced into
heaps of stones and ashes. The inland towns, Vicenza, Verona, and
Bergamo, were exposed to the rapacious cruelty of the Huns; Milan and
Pavia submitted without resistance to the loss of their wealth, and
applauded the unusual clemency which preserved from the flames the
public as well as the private buildings, and spared the lives of the
captive multitude. The popular traditions of Comum, Turin, or Modena,
may be justly suspected, yet they concur with more authentic evidence to
prove that Attila spread his ravages over the rich plains of modern
Lombardy, which are divided by the Po, and bounded by the Alps and the
Apennines," ii. pp. 343, 344. "It is a saying worthy of the ferocious
pride of Attila, that the grass never grew on the spot where his horse
had trod" (ibid. p. 345). Anyone has only to look on a map, and to trace
the progress of those desolations and the chief seats of his military
operations to see with what propriety this symbol would be employed. In
these regions the great rivers that water Europe have their origin, and
are swelled by numberless streams that flow down from the Alps; and
about the fountains whence these streams flow were the principal
military operations of the invader.

\(c\) With equal propriety is he represented in the symbol as affecting
"a third" part of these rivers and fountains. At least a third part of
the empire was invaded and desolated by him in his savage march, and the
effects of his invasion were as disastrous on the empire as if a bitter
star had fallen into a third part of those rivers and fountains, and had
converted them into wormwood.

\(d\) There is one other point which shows the propriety of this symbol.
It is, that the meteor, or star, seemed to be absorbed in the waters. It
fell into the waters; embittered them; and was seen no more. Such would
be the case with a meteor that should thus fall upon the earth -
flashing along the sky, and then disappearing forever. Now, it was
remarkable in regard to the Huns, that their power was concentrated
under Attila; that he alone appeared as the leader of this formidable
host; and that when he died all the concentrated power of the Huns was
dissipated, or became absorbed and lost. "The revolution," says Mr.
Gibbon (ii. 348), "which subverted the empire of the Huns, established
the fame of Attila, whose genius alone had sustained the huge and
disjointed fabric. After his death the boldest chieftains aspired to the
rank of kings; the most powerful kings refused to acknowledge a
superior; and the numerous sons, whom so many various mothers bore to
the deceased monarch, divided and disputed, like a private inheritance,
the sovereign command of the nations of Germany and Scythia." Soon,
however, in the conflicts which succeeded, the empire passed away, and
the empire of the Huns ceased. The people that composed it were absorbed
in the surrounding nations, and Mr. Gibbon makes this remark, after
giving a summary account of these conflicts, which continued but for a
few years: "The Igours of the north, issuing from the cold Siberian
regions, which produced the most valuable furs, spread themselves over
the desert, as far as the Borysthenes and the Caspian gates, and finally
extinguished the empire of the Huns." These facts may, perhaps, show
with what propriety Attila would be compared with a bright but beautiful
meteor; and that, if the design was to symbolize him as acting an
important part in the downfall of the Roman empire, there is a fitness
in the symbol here employed.

[Revelation 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 8:12</span></span>

And the fourth angel sounded - See the notes at [Rev
8:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#006.md).

And the third part of the sea was smitten - On the phrase the third
part, see the notes on [Rev 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#007.md). The
darkening of the heavenly luminaries is everywhere an emblem of any
great calamity - as if the light of the sun, moon, and stars should be
put out. See the notes on [Rev
6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012.md). There is no certain evidence
that this refers to rulers, as many have supposed, or to anything that
would particularly affect the government as such. The meaning is, that
calamity would come as if darkness should spread over the sun, the moon,
and the stars, leaving the world in gloom. What is the precise nature of
the calamity is not indicated by the language, but anything that would
diffuse gloom and disaster would accord with the fair meaning of the
symbol. There are a few circumstances, however, in regard to this symbol
which may aid us in determining its application:

\(1\) It would follow in the series of calamities that were to occur.

\(2\) it would be separated in some important sense - of time, place, or
degree - from those which were to follow, for there is a pause here [Rev
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#013.md), and the angel proclaims that
more terrible woes are to succeed this series.

\(3\) like the preceding, it is to affect "one third part" of the world;
that is, it is to be a calamity as if a third part of the sun, the moon,
and the stars were suddenly smitten and darkened.

\(4\) it is not to be total. It is not as if the sun, the moon, and the
stars were entirely blotted out, for there was still some remaining
light; that is, there was a continuance of the existing state of things
- as if these heavenly bodies should still give an obscure and partial
light.

\(5\) perhaps it is also intended by the symbol that there would be
light again. The world was not to go into a state of total and permanent
night. For a third part of the day, and a third part of the night, this
darkness reigned; but does not this imply that there would be light
again - that the obscurity would pass away, and that the sun, and moon,
and stars would shine again? That is, is it not implied that there would
still be prosperity in some future period? Now, in regard to the
application of this, if the explanation of the preceding symbols is
correct, there can be little difficulty. If the previous symbols
referred to Alaric, to Genseric, and to Attila, there can be no
difficulty in applying this to Odoacer, and to his reign - a reign in
which, in fact, the Roman dominion in the West came to an end, and
passed into the hands of this barbarian. Anyone has only to open the
Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, to see that this is the next event
that should be symbolized if the design were to represent the downfall
of the empire.

These four great barbarian leaders succeed each other in order, and
under the last, Odoacer, the barbarian dominion was established; for it
is here that the existence of the Roman power, as such, ended. The
Western empire terminated, according to Mr. Gibbon (ii. p. 380), about
476 or 479 a.d. Odoacer was "King of Italy" from 476 a.d. to 490 a.d.
(Gibbon, ii. 379). The Eastern empire still lingered, but calamity, like
blotting out the sun, and moon, and stars, had come over that part of
the world which for so many centuries had constituted the seat of power
and dominion. Odoacer was the son of Edecon, a barbarian, who was in the
service of Attila, and who left two sons - Onulf and Odoacer. The former
directed his steps to Constantinople; Oloacer "led a wandering life
among the barbarians of Noricum, with a mind and fortune suited to the
most desperate adventures; and when he had fixed his choice, he piously
visited the cell of Severinus, the popular saint of the country, to
solicit his approbation and blessing. The lowness of the door would not
admit the lofty stature of Odoacer; he was obliged to stoop; but in that
humble attitude the saint could discern the symptoms of his future
greatness; and addressing him in a prophetic tone, 'Pursue,' said he,
'your design; proceed to Italy; you will soon cast away this coarse
garment of skins; and your wealth will be adequate to the liberality of
your mind.' The barbarian, whose daring spirit accepted and ratified
this prediction, was admitted into the service of the Western empire,
and soon obtained an honorable rank in the guards.

His manners were gradually polished, his military skill improved; and
the confederates of Italy would not have elected him for their general
unless the exploits of Odoacer had established a high opinion of his
courage and capacity. Their military acclamations saluted him with the
title of king; but he abstained during his whole reign from the use of
the purple and the diadem, lest he should offend those princes whose
subjects, by their accidental mixture, had formed the victorious army
which time and policy might insensibly unite into a great nation"
(Gibbon, ii. 379, 380). In another place Mr. Gibbon says: "Odoacer was
the first barbarian who reigned in Italy, over a people who had once
asserted their superiority above the rest of mankind. The disgrace of
the Romans still excites our respectful compassion, and we fondly
sympathize with the imaginary grief and indignation of their degenerate
posterity. But the calamities of Italy had gradually subdued the proud
consciousness of freedom and glory. In the age of Roman virtue the
provinces were subject to the arms, and the citizens to the laws, of the
republic; until those laws were subverted by civil discord, and both the
city and the provinces became the servile property of a tyrant. The
forms of the constitution which alleviated or disguised their abject
slavery were abolished by time and violence; the Italians alternately
lamented the presence or the absence of the sovereigns whom they
detested or despised; and the succession of five centuries inflicted the
various evils of military license, capricious despotism, and elaborate
oppression.

During the same period the barbarians had emerged from obscurity and
contempt, and the warriors of Germany and Scythia were introduced into
the provinces, as the servants, the allies, and at length the masters of
the Romans, whom they insulted or protected," ii. 381, 382. Of the
effect of the reign of Odoacer Mr. Gibbon remarks: "In the division and
decline of the empire the tributary harvests of Egypt and Africa were
withdrawn; the numbers of the inhabitants continually decreased with the
means of subsistence; and the country was exhausted by the irretrievable
losses of war, famine, and pestilence. Ambrose has deplored the ruin of
a populous district, which had been once adorned with the flourishing
cities of Bologna, Modena, Rhegium, and Placentia. Pope Gelasius was a
subject of Odoacer; and he affirms, with strong exaggeration, that in
Aemilia, Tuscany, and the adjacent provinces the human species was
almost extirpated. One-third of those ample estates, to which the ruin
of Italy is originally imputed, was extorted for the use of the
conquerors," ii. 383.

Yet the light was not wholly extinct. It was "a third part" of it which
was put out; and it was still true that some of the forms of the ancient
constitution were observed - that the light still lingered before it
wholly passed away. In the language of another, "The authority of the
Roman name had not yet entirely ceased. The senate of Rome continued to
assemble as usual. The consuls were appointed yearly, one by the Eastern
emperor, one by Italy and Rome. Odoacer himself governed Italy under a
title - that of Patrician - conferred on him by the Eastern emperor.
There was still a certain, though often faint, recognition of the
supreme imperial authority. The moon and the stars might seem still to
shine in the West, with a dim reflected light. In the course of the
events, however, which rapidly followed in the next half-century, these
too were extinguished. After above a century and a half of calamities
unexampled almost, as Dr. Robertson most truly represents it, in the
history of nations, the statement of Jerome - a statement couched under
the very Apocalyptic figure of the text, but prematurely pronounced on
the first taking of Rome by Alaric - might be considered at length
accomplished: 'Clarissimum terrarum lumen extincturn est' - 'The world's
glorious sun has been extinguished;' or, as the modern poet Byron
(Childe Harold, canto iv.) has expressed it, still under the Apocalyptic
imagery:

'She saw her glories star by star expire, '

Till not even one star remained to glimmer in the vacant and dark night"
(Elliott, i. 360, 361).

I have thus endeavored to explain the meaning of the four first trumpets
under the opening of the seventh seal, embracing the successive severe
blows struck on the empire by Alaric, Genseric, Attila, and Odoacer,
until the empire fell, to rise no more. I cannot better conclude this
part of the exposition than in the words of Mr. Gibbon, in his
reflections on the fall of the empire. "I have now accomplished," says
he, "the laborious narrative of the decline and fall of the Roman
empire, from the fortunate age of Trajan and the Antonines to its total
extinction in the West, about five centuries after the Christian era. At
that unhappy period the Saxons fiercely struggled with the natives for
the possession of Britain; Gaul and Spain were divided between the
powerful monarchies of the Franks and the Visigoths, and the dependent
kingdoms of the Suevi and the Burgundians; Africa was exposed to the
cruel persecution of the Vandals, and the savage insults of the Moors;
Rome and Italy, as far as the banks of the Danube, were afflicted by an
army of barbarian mercenaries, whose lawless tyranny was succeeded by
the reign of Theodoric the Ostrogoth. All the subjects of the empire,
who, by the use of the Latin language, more particularly deserved the
name and privileges of Romans, were oppressed by the disgrace and
calamities of foreign conquest; and the victorious nations of Germany
established a new system of manners and government in the western
countries of Europe. The majesty of Rome was faintly represented by the
princes of Constantinople, the feeble and imaginary successors of
Augustus" (vol. ii. pp. 440, 441). "The splendid days of Augustus and
Trajan were eclipsed by a cloud of ignorance (a fine illustration of the
language 'the third part of the sun was smitten, and the day shone not,
and the night likewise'); and the barbarians subverted the laws and
palaces of Rome" (ibid. p. 446).

Thus ended the history of the Gothic period, and, as I suppose, the
immediate symbolic representation of the affairs of the Western empire.
An interval now occurs [Rev 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#013.md) in
the sounding of the trumpets, and the scene is transferred, in the three
remaining trumpets, to the Eastern parts of the empire. After that the
attention is directed again to the West, to contemplate Rome under a new
form, and exerting a new influence in the nations, under the papacy, but
destined ultimately to pass away in its spiritual power, as its temporal
power had yielded to the elements of internal decay in its bosom, and to
the invasions of the northern hordes.

[Revelation 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 8:13</span></span>

And I beheld - My attention was attracted by a new vision.

And heard an angel flying, ... - I heard the voice of an angel making
this proclamation.

Woe, woe, woe - That is, there will be great woe. The repetition of the
word is intensive, and the idea is, that the sounding of the three
remaining trumpets would indicate great and fearful calamities. These
three are grouped together as if they pertained to a similar series of
events, as the first four had been. The two classes are separated from
each other by this interval and by this proclamation - implying that the
first series had been completed, and that there would be some interval,
either of space or time, before the other series would come upon the
world. All that is fairly implied here would be fulfilled by the
supposition that the former referred to the West, and that the latter
pertained to the East, and were to follow when those should have been
completed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 9](rev009.md)

</div>
