<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](jde001)  [Next](rev001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Revelation

Section 1. The Writer of the Book of Revelation

Much has been written on the question who was the author of this book.
To enter into an extended investigation of this would greatly exceed the
limits which I have, and would not comport with my design in these
notes. For a full examination of the question I must refer to others,
and would mention particularly, Prof. Stuart, Com. i. 283-427; Lardner,
Works, vi. 318-327; Hug, Introduction to the New Testament, pp. 650-673,
Andover, 1836; Michaelis, Introduction to the New Testament, iv.
457-544; and the article "Revelation," in Kitto's Cyclopaedia of
Biblical Literature. I propose to exhibit, briefly, the evidence that
the apostle John was the author, according to the opinion which has been
commonly entertained in the church; the proof of which seems to me to be
satisfactory. This may be considered under these divisions: the direct
historical evidence, and the insufficiency of the reason for doubting
it.

I. The Direct Historical Evidence

The sum of all that is to be said on this point is, that to the latter
half of the third century it was not doubted that the apostle John was
the author. Why it was ever doubted after that, and what is the force
and value of the doubt, will be considered in another part of this
Introduction.

There may be some convenience in dividing the early historical testimony
into three periods of half a century each, extending from the death of
John, about 98 a.d., to the middle of the third century.

1\. From the Death of JOHN, about 98 a.d. to 150 a.d.

This period embraces the last of those men who conversed, or who might
have conversed, with the apostles; that is, who were, for a part of
their lives, the contemporaries of John. The testimony of the writers
who lived then would, of course, be very important. Those embraced in
this period are Hermas, Ignatius, Polycarp, and Papias. The evidence of
this period is not indeed very direct, but it is such as it would be on
the supposition that John was the author, and there is nothing
contradictory to that supposition.

Hermas, about 100 ad - In the "Shepherd" or "Pastor," ascribed to this
writer, there are several allusions which are supposed to refer to this
book, and which resemble it so much as to make it probable that the
author was acquainted with it. Dr. Lardner thus expresses the result of
his examination of this point: "It is probable that Hermas had read the
Book of Revelation, and imitated it. He has many things resembling it"
(vol. ii. pp. 69-72). There is no "direct" testimony, however, in this
writer that is of importance.

Ignatius - He was Bishop of Antioch, and flourished 70-107 a.d. In the
latter year he suffered martyrdom, in the time of Trajan. Little,
however, can be derived from him in regard to the Apocalypse. He was a
contemporary of John, and it is not a little remarkable that he has not
more directly alluded to him. In the course of a forced and hurried
journey to Rome, the scene of his martyrdom, he wrote several epistles
to the Ephesians, Magnesians, Trallians, Romans, Philadelphians,
Smyrneans, and to Polycarp. There has been much controversy respecting
the authenticity of these epistles, and it is generally admitted that
those which we now possess have been greatly corrupted. There is no
direct mention of the Apocalypse in these epistles, and Michaelis makes
this one of the strong grounds of his disbelief of its genuineness. His
argument is, that the silence of Ignatius shows, either that he did not
know of the existence of this book, or did not recognize it as a part of
the sacred Scriptures. Little, however, can be ever inferred. from the
mere silence of an author; for there may have been many reasons why,
though the book may have been in existence, and recognized as the
writing of John, Ignatius did not refer to it.

The whole matter of the residence of John at Ephesus, of his banishment
to Patmos, and of his death, is unnoticed by him. There are, however,
two or three "allusions" in the epistles of Ignatius which have been
supposed to refer to the Apocalypse, or to prove that he was familiar
with that work - though it must be admitted that the language is so
general, that it furnishes no certain proof that he designed to quote
it. They are these: Epistle to the Romans - "In the patience of Jesus
Christ," compare [Rev 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009); and the
Epistle to the Ephesians - "Stones of the temple of the Father prepared
for the building of God," compare Rev. 21:2-19. To these Mr. John
Collyer Knight, of the British Museum, in a recent publication (Two New
Arguments in Vindication of the Genuineness and Authenticity of the
Revelation of John, London, 1842), has added a third: Epistle to the
Philadelphians - "If they do not speak concerning Jesus Christ, they are
but sepulchral pillars, and upon them are written only the names of
men." Compare [Rev 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#012), "Him that
overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God; and he shall go
no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God." It must be
admitted, however, that this coincidence of language does not furnish
any certain proof that Ignatius had seen the Apocalypse, though this is
such language as he might have used if he had seen it. There was no
known necessity, however, for his referring to this book if he was
acquainted with it, and nothing can be inferred from his silence.

Polycarp - He was Bishop of Smyrna, and suffered martyrdom, though at
what time is not certain. The "Chronicon Paschale" names 163 a.d.;
Eusebius, 167; Usher, 169; and Pearson, 148. He died at the age of
eighty-six, and consequently was contemporary with John, who died about
98 a.d. There is but one relic of his writings extant - his Epistle to
the Philippians. There is in Eusebius (iv. 15), an epistle from the
church in Smyrna to the churches in Pontus, giving an account of the
martyrdom of Polycarp. It is admitted that in neither of these is there
any express mention, or any certain allusion, to the Book of Revelation.
But from this circumstance nothing can be inferred respecting the
Apocalypse, either for or against it, since there may have been no
occasion for Polycarp or his friends, in the writings now extant, to
speak of this book; and from their silence nothing more should be
inferred against this book than against the epistles of Paul, or the
Gospel by John. There is, however, what may, without impropriety, be
regarded as an important testimony of Polycarp in regard to this book.
Polycarp was, as there is every reason to suppose, the personal friend
of John, and Irenaeus was the personal friend of Polycarp (Lardner, ii.
94-96). Now Irenaeus, as we shall see, on all occasions, and in the most
positive manner, gives his clear testimony that the Apocalypse was
written by the apostle John. It is impossible to suppose that he would
do this if Polycarp had not believed it to be true; and certainly he
would not have been likely to hold this opinion if one who was his own
friend, and the friend of John, had doubted or denied it. This is not
indeed absolute proof, but it furnishes strong presumptive evidence in
favor of the opinion that the Book of Revelation was written by the
apostle John. The whole history of Polycarp, and his testimony to the
books of the New Testament, may be seen in Lardner, ii. 94-114.

Papias - He was Bishop of Hierapolis, near Colosse, and flourished,
according to Cave, about 110 a.d.; according to others, about the year
115 a.d. or 116 a.d. How long he lived is uncertain. Irenaeus asserts
that he was the intimate friend - ἑτᾶίρος hetairos - of Polycarp, and
this is also admitted by Eusebius (Eccl. Hist. iii. 39). He was the
contemporary of John, and was probably acquainted with him. Eusebius
expressly says that he was "a hearer of John" (Lardner, ii. 117). Of his
writings there remain only a few fragments preserved by Eusebius, by
Jerome, and in the Commentary of Andrew, Bishop of Caesarea, in
Cappadocia. He was a warm defender of the Millennarian doctrines. In his
writings preserved to us (see Lardner, ii. 120-125), there is no express
mention of the Apocalypse, or direct reference to it; but the
commentator Andrew of Caesarea reckons him among the explicit witnesses
in its favor. In the Preface to his Commentary on the Apocalypse, Andrew
says, "In regard now to the inspiration of the book, we think it
superfluous to extend our discourse, inasmuch as the blessed Gregory,
and Cyril, and moreover the ancient (writers) "Papias, Irenaeus,
Methodius, and Hippolytus" bear testimony to its credibility." See the
passage in Hug, Introduction, p. 652; and Prof. Stuart, i. 305. And in
nearly the same words does Arethas, the successor of Andrew, bear the
like testimony. The evidence, therefore, in this case is the same as in
the case of Polycarp, and it cannot be supposed that Papias would have
been thus referred to unless it was uniformly understood that he
regarded the book as the production of the apostle John.

These are all the testimonies that properly belong to the first half
century after the death of John, and though not absolutely "positive and
conclusive" in themselves, yet the following points may be regarded as
established:

\(a\) The book was known;

\(b\) so far as the testimony goes, it is in favor of its having been
composed by John;

\(c\) the fact that he was the author is not called in question or
doubted;

\(d\) it was generally ascribed to him;

\(e\) it was "probably" the foundation of the Millennarian views
entertained by Papias - that is, it is easier to account for his holding
these views by supposing that the book was known, and that he founded
them on this book, than in any other way. See Prof. Stuart, i. 304.

2\. The Second Half Century after the Death of John, from 150 to 200
a.d.

This will include the names of Justin Martyr, the Narrator of the
Martyrs of Lyons, Irenaeus, Melito, Theophilus, Apollonius, Clement of
Alexandria and Tertullian.

Justin Martyr - He was a Christian philosopher, born at Flavia Neapolis,
anciently called Sichem, a city of Samaria, it is supposed about a.d.
103; was converted to Christianity about 133 a.d., and suffered
martyrdom about 165 a.d. (Lardner, ii. 125-140). He was partly
contemporary with Polycarp and Papias. He traveled in Egypt, Italy, and
Asia Minor, and resided some time at Ephesus. He was endowed with a bold
and inquiring mind, and was a man eminent for integrity and virtue.
Tatian calls him an "admirable man." Methodius says, that he was a man
"not far removed from the apostles in time or in virtue." Photius says,
that he was "well acquainted with the Christian philosophy, and
especially with the heathen; rich in the knowledge of history, and all
other parts of learning" (Lardner). He was, therefore, well qualified to
ascertain the truth about the origin of the Book of Revelation, and his
testimony must be of great value.

He was an advocate of the doctrine of "Chiliasm" - or, the doctrine that
Christ would reign a thousand years on the earth - and in defense of
this he uses the following language: "And a man from among us, by name
John, one of the Apostles of Christ, in a Revelation made to him - ἐν
Ἀποκάλυψει γενομένη αὐτῷ en Apokalupsei genomenē autō - has prophesied
that the believers in one Christ shall live a thousand years in
Jerusalem; and after that shall be the general, and, in a word, the
eternal resurrection and judgment of all men together." There can be no
doubt whatever that there is an allusion here to the Book of
"Revelation" - for the very name Revelation - Ἀποκάλυψις Apokalupsis -
is used; that Justin believed that it was written by the apostle John;
and that there is express reference to what is now John 20. The book
was, therefore, in existence in the time of Justin - that is, in about
50 years after the death of John; was believed to be the work of the
apostle John; was quoted as such, and by one who had lived in the very
region where John lived, and by a man whose character is unimpeached,
and who, in a point like this, could not have been mistaken. The
testimony of Justin Martyr, therefore, is very important. It is
positive; it is given where there was every opportunity for knowing the
truth, and where there was no motive for a false testimony; and it is
the testimony of one whose character for truthfulness is unimpeached.

The Narrative of the Martyrs of Vienne and Lyons - Lardner, ii. 160-165.
In the reign of Marcus Antoninus, Christians suffered much from
persecution. This persecution was particularly violent at Lyons, and the
country round about. The churches of Lyons and Vienne sent an account of
their sufferings, in an epistle, to the churches of Asia and Phrygia.
This, according to Lardner, was about 177 a.d. The epistle has been
preserved by Eusebius. In this epistle, among other undoubted allusions
to the New Testament, the following occurs. Speaking of Vettius
Epigathus, they say - "For he was indeed a genuine disciple of Christ,
following the Lamb whithersoever he goes." Compare [Rev
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#002); "These are they which follow the
Lamb whithersoever he goeth." There can be no doubt that this passage in
Revelation was referred to; and it proves that the book was then known,
and that the writers were accustomed to regard it as on a level with the
other sacred writings.

Irenaeus - The testimony of this father has already been referred to
when speaking of Polycarp. He was Bishop of Lyons, in Gaul. His country
is not certainly known, but Lardner supposes that he was a Greek, and,
from his early acquaintance with Polycarp, that he was from Asia. When a
youth, he was a hearer of Polycarp, and also a disciple of Papias. He
was born about the beginning of the second century, and it is commonly
supposed that he suffered martyrdom in extreme old age. He became Bishop
of Lyons after he was 70 years of age, and wrote his principal work,
"Contra Haereses," after this. His testimony is particularly valuable,
as he was in early life acquainted with Polycarp, who was a contemporary
and friend of the apostle John (Lardner, ii. 165-192). Of his reference
to the Book of Revelation, Lardner says: "The Apocalypse, or Revelation,
is often quoted by him as the Revelation of John, the disciple of the
Lord." In one place he says: "It was seen no long time ago, but almost
in our age, at the end of the reign of Domitian." And again, he spoke of
the exact and ancient copies of the book, as if it was important to
ascertain the true reading, and as if it were then possible to do this.

Thus, Eusebius (Lardner, ii. 167) says of him: "In his fifth book he
thus discourses of the Revelation of John, and the computation of the
name of antichrist: 'These things being thus, and this number being in
all the exact and ancient copies, and they who saw John attesting to the
same things, and reason teaching us that the number of the name of the
beast, according to the acceptation of the Greeks, is expressed by the
letters contained in it.' "Here is an undoubted reference to Revelation
Rev

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 1](rev001)

</div>
