<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Romans Index](rom.md)  
  [Previous](rom005)  [Next](rom007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001.md)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 6:0</span></span>

The argument commenced in this chapter is continued through the two
following. The general design is the same - "to show that the scheme of
justification which God had adopted does not lead people to sin, but on
the contrary to holiness." This is introduced by answering an objection,
[Rom 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001.md). The apostle pursues this
subject by various arguments and illustrations, all tending to show that
the design and bearing of the scheme of justification was to produce the
hatred of sin, and the love and practice of holiness. In this chapter,
the argument is mainly drawn from the following sources:

\(1\) From the baptism of Christians, by which they have professed to be
dead to sin, and to be bound to live to God, [Rom
6:2-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002.md).

\(2\) from the fact that they were now the servants of God, and under
obligation, by the laws of servitude, to obey him, [Rom
6:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#015.md).

\(3\) from their former experience of the evil of sin, from its tendency
to produce misery and death, and from the fact that by the gospel they
had been made ashamed of those things, and had now given themselves to
the pure service of God. By these various considerations, he repels the
charge that the tendency of the doctrine was to produce licentiousness,
but affirms that it was a system of purity and peace. The argument is
continued in the two following chapters, showing still further the
purifying tendency of the gospel.

[Romans 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 6:1</span></span>

What shall we say then? - This is a mode of presenting an objection. The
objection refers to what the apostle had said in [Rom
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020.md). What shall we say to such a
sentiment as that where sin abounded grace did much more abound?

Shall we continue in sin? ... - If sin has been the occasion of grace
and favor, ought we not to continue in it, and commit as much as
possible, in order that grace might abound? This objection the apostle
proceeds to answer. He shows that the consequence does not follow; and
proves that the doctrine of justification does not lead to it.

[Romans 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 6:2</span></span>

God forbid - By no means. Greek, It may not be; Note, [Rom
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004.md). The expression is a strong denial
of what is implied in the objection in [Rom
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001.md).

How shall we? ... - This contains a reason of the implied statement of
the apostle, that we should not continue in sin. The reason is drawn
from the fact that we are dead in fact to sin. It is impossible for
these who are dead to act as if they were alive. It is just as absurd to
suppose that a Christian should desire to live in sin as that a dead man
should put forth the actions of life.

That are dead to sin - That is, all Christians. To be dead to a thing is
a strong expression denoting that it has no influence over us. A man
that is dead is uninfluenced and unaffected by the affairs of this life.
He is insensible to sounds, and tastes, and pleasures; to the hum of
business, to the voice of friendship, and to all the scenes of commerce,
gaiety, and ambition. When it is said, therefore, that a Christian is
dead to sin, the sense is, that it has lost its influence ever him; he
is not subject to it; he is in regard to that, as the man in the grave
is to the busy scenes and cares of this life. The expression is not
infrequent in the New Testament; [Gal
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019.md), "For I ...am dead to the law;"
[Col 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003.md), "For ye are dead, and your
life is hid with Christ in God;" [Pe1
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024.md), "Who ...bare our sins ...that
we, being dead to sin," etc. The apostle does not here attempt to prove
that Christians are thus dead, nor to state in what way they become so.
He assumes the fact without argument. All Christians are thus in fact
dead to sin. They do not live to sin; nor has sin dominion over them.
The expression used here by the apostle is common in all languages. We
familiarly speak of a man's being dead to sensual pleasures, to
ambition, etc., to denote that they have lost their influence over him.

Live any longer therein - How shall we, who have become sensible of the
evil of sin, and who have renounced it by solemn profession, continue to
practice it? It is therefore abhorrent to the very nature of the
Christian profession. It is remarkable that the apostle did not attempt
to argue the question on metaphysical principles. He did not attempt to
show by abstruse argument that this consequence did not follow; but he
appeals at once to Christian feeling, and shows that the supposition is
abhorrent to that. To convince the great mass of people, such an appeal
is far better than labored metaphysical argumentation. All Christians
can understand that; but few would comprehend an abstruse speculation.
The best way to silence objections is, sometimes, to show that they
violate the feelings of all Christians, and that therefore the objection
must be wrong.

(Considerable difficulty exists in regard to the meaning of the
expression "dead to sin? Certainly the most obvious interpretation is
that given above in the Commentary, namely, that Christians are
insensible to sin, as dead persons to the charms and pleasures of life.
It has, however, been objected to this view, that it is inconsistent
with fact, since Christians, so far from being insensible to sin, are
represented in the next chapter as carrying on a perpetual struggle with
it. The corrupt nature, though weakened, is not eradicated, and too
frequently occasions such mournful falls, as leave little doubt
concerning its existence and power. Mr. Scott seems to have felt this
difficulty, for, having explained the phrase of "separation from
iniquity, as a dead man ceases from the actions of life," he immediately
adds, "not only ought this to be the believer's character, but in a
measure it actually is so." It is not probable. however, that the
apostle meant by the strong expression under discussion, that believers
were not altogether "dead to sin," but only in a measure.

Perhaps we shall arrive at a more satisfactory meaning of the words by
looking at the analogous expression in the context, used in reference to
Christ himself. He also, in the 10th verse, is said to have "died unto
sin," and the believer, in virtue of union with Christ, is regarded as"
dead with him," [Rom 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008.md); and, in
consequence of this death with Christ, is moreover freed, or rather
justified, δεδίκαιωται dedikaiōtai from sin, [Rom
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#007.md). Now it cannot be said of Christ
that he died unto sin, in the sense of becoming dead to its charms. for
it was never otherwise with him. The believer, therefore, cannot be dead
with Christ in this way; nor on this ground, can he be justified from
sin, since justification proceeds upon something very different from our
insensibility to sinful pleasures. What then is the meaning of the
language when applied to Christ? Sin is here supposed to be possessed of
certain power. That power or strength the apostle tells us elsewhere is
derived from the Law. "The strength of sin is the law," which demands
satisfaction to its injured honor, and insists on the infliction of its
penalty. Though then Jesus had no sin of his own, yet when he
voluntarily stood in the room of sinners, sin, or its strength, namely,
the Law, had power over him, until he died, and thus paid the penalty.
His death cancelled every obligation. Henceforth, sin had no more power
to exact anything at his hands.

Now Christians are one with Christ. When he died unto sin, they are
regarded as having died unto it also, and are therefore, equally with
their covenant head, justified from it. Sin, or its strength, the Law,
has from the moment of the saint's union with Christ, no more power to
condemn him, than human laws have to condemn one over again who had
already died to answer the demands of justice. "The law has dominion
over a man so long only as he liveth." On the whole, then, the
expression "dead to sin," is to be regarded as entirely parallel with
that other expression in the seventh chapter, "dead to the law," that
is, completely delivered from its authority as a covenant of works, and
more especially from its power to condemn.

This view exercises a decided influence an the believer's
sanctification. "How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer
therein?" The two things are incompatible. If in virtue of union with
Christ, we are dead with him, and freed from the penalty of sin, shall
not the same union secure our deliverance from its dominion? "If we be
dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him."

The whole argument, from the 1st to the 11th verse, proceeds upon the
fact of the saint's union with Christ.)

[Romans 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 6:3</span></span>

Know ye not - This is a further appeal to the Christian profession, and
the principles involved in it, in answer to the objection. The simple
argument in this verse and the two following is, that by our very
profession made in baptism, we have renounced sin, and have pledged
ourselves to live to God.

So many of us ... - All who were baptized; that is, all professed
Christians. As this renunciation of sin had been thus made by all who
professed religion, so the objection could not have reference to
Christianity in any manner.

Were baptized - The act of baptism denotes dedication to the service of
him in whose name we are baptized. One of its designs is to dedicate or
consecrate us to the service of Christ: Thus [Co1
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#002.md), the Israelites are said to have
been "baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea;" that is, they
became consecrated, or dedicated, or bound to him as their leader and
lawgiver. In the place before us, the argument of the apostle is
evidently drawn from the supposition that we have been solemnly
consecrated by baptism to the service of Christ; and that to sin is
therefore a violation of the very nature of our Christian profession.

Into - εἰς eis. This is the word which is used in [Mat
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019.md), "Teach all nations, baptizing
them into εἰς eis the name of the Father," etc. It means, being baptized
unto his service; receiving him as the Saviour and guide, devoting all
unto him and his cause.

Were baptized unto his death - We were baptized with special reference
to his death. Our baptism had a strong resemblance to his death. By that
he became insensible to the things of the world; by baptism we in like
manner become dead to sin. Further, we are baptized with particular
reference to the design of his death, the great leading feature and
purpose of his work. That was, to expiate sin; to free people from its
power; to make them pure. We have professed our devotion to the same
cause; and have solemnly consecrated ourselves to the same design - to
put a period to the dominion of iniquity.

[Romans 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 6:4</span></span>

Therefore we are buried ... - It is altogether probable that the apostle
in this place had allusion to the custom of baptizing by immersion. This
cannot, indeed, be proved, so as to be liable to no objection; but I
presume that this is the idea which would strike the great mass of
unprejudiced readers. But while this is admitted, it is also certain
that his main scope and intention was not to describe the mode of
baptism; nor to affirm that that mode was to be universal. The design
was very different. It was to show that by the solemn profession made at
our baptism, we had become dead to sin, as Christ was dead to the living
world around him when he was buried; and that as he was raised up to
life, so we should also rise to a new life. A similar expression occurs
in [Col 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012.md), "Buried with him in
baptism," etc. See the Editors' Notes at [Mat
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#006.md), [Mat
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016.md).

Into death - εἰς eis. Unto death; that is, with a solemn purpose to be
dead to sin and to the world. Grotius and Doddridge, however, understand
this as referring to the death of Christ - in order to represent the
death of Christ - or to bring us into a kind of fellowship with his
death.

That like as - In a similar manner. Christ rose from death in the
sepulchre; and so we are bound by our vows at baptism to rise to a holy
life.

By the glory of the Father - Perhaps this means, amidst the glory, the
majesty and wonders evinced by the Father when he raised him up; [Mat
28:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#002.md). Or possibly the word "glory"
is used here to denote simply his power, as the resurrection was a
signal and glorious display of his omnipotence.

Even so - As he rose to new life, so should we. As he rose from death,
so we, being made dead to sin and the world by that religion whose
profession is expressed by baptism, should rise to a new life, a life of
holiness.

Should walk - Should live, or conduct. The word "walk" is often used to
express the course of a man's life, or the tenor of his conduct; [Rom
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#012.md); [Rom
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001.md) notes; [Co1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007.md); [Co1
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#003.md) notes; [Eph
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010.md); [Eph
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001.md) notes, etc.

In newness of life - This is a Hebraism to denote new life. We should
rise with Christ to a new life; and having been made dead to sin, as he
was dead in the grave, so should we rise to a holy life, as he rose from
the grave. The argument in this verse is, therefore, drawn from the
nature of the Christian profession. By our very baptism, by our very
profession, we have become dead to sin, as Christ became dead; and being
devoted to him by that baptism, we are bound to rise, as he did, to a
new life.

While it is admitted that the allusion here was probably to the custom
of immersion in baptism, yet the passage cannot be adduced as an
argument that that is the only mode, or that it is binding on all
Christians in all places and ages, for the following reasons:

\(1\) The scope or design of the apostle is not to discuss the mode of
baptism, Or to state any doctrine on the subject. It is an incidental
allusion in the course of an argument, without stating or implying that
this was the universal mode even then, still less that it was the only
possible mode. His main design was to state the obligation of Christians
to be holy, from the nature of their profession at baptism - an
obligation just as impressive, and as forcible, from the application of
water in any other mode as by immersion. It arises from the fact of
baptism, not from the mode. It is just as true that they who are
baptized by affusion, or by sprinkling, are baptised into his death;
become professedly dead to sin and the world, and under obligations to
live to God, as those who are immersed. It results from the nature of
the ordinance, not from the mode.

\(2\) if this was the mode commonly, it does not follow that it was the
only mode, nor that it was to be universally observed; There is no
command that this should be the only mode. And the simple fact that it
was usually practiced in a warm climate, where ablutions were common,
does not prove that it is to be observed amidst polar snows and ice, and
in infancy, and age, and feebleness, and sickness; see the note at [Act
8:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#038.md).

\(3\) if this is to be pressed literally as a matter of obligation, why
should not also the following expression, "If we have been planted
together," etc., be pressed literally, and it be demanded that
Christians should somehow be "planted" as well as "buried?" Such an
interpretation only shows the absurdity of insisting on a literal
interpretation of the Scriptures in cases of simple allusion, or where
the main scope is illustration by figurative language.

[Romans 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 6:5</span></span>

For if we have been planted together - The word used here σύμφυτος
sumphutos, does not occur elsewhere in the New Testament. It properly
means sown or planted at the same time; what sprouts or springs up
together; and is applied to plants and trees that are planted at the
same time, and that sprout and grow together. Thus, the name would be
given to a field of grain that was sown at the same time, and where the
grain sprung up and grew simultaneously. Hence, it means intimately
connected, or joined together. And here it denotes that Christians and
the Saviour have been united intimately in regard to death; as he died
and was laid in the grave, so have they by profession died to sin. And
it is therefore natural to expect, that, like grain sown at the same
time, they should grow up in a similar manner, and resemble each other.

We shall be also - We shall be also fellow-plants; that is, we shall
resemble him in regard to the resurrection. As he rose from the grave,
so shall we rise from sin. As he lived a new life, being raised up, so
shall we live a new life. The propriety of this figure is drawn from the
doctrine often referred to in the New Testament, of a union between
Christ and his people. See this explained in the notes at [Joh
15:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001.md). The sentiment here inferred
is but an illustration of what was said by the Saviour [Joh
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#019.md), "Because I live, ye shall live
also." There is perhaps not to be found a more beautiful illustration
than that employed here by the apostle of seed sown together in the
earth, sprouting together, growing together, and ripening together for
the harvest. Thus, the Saviour and his people are united together in his
death, start up to life together in his resurrection, and are preparing
together for the same harvest of glory in the heavens.

In the likeness of his resurrection - This does not mean that we shall
resemble him when we are raised up at the last day - which may be,
however, true - but that our rising from sin will resemble his
resurrection from the grave. As he rose from the tomb and lived, so
shall we rise from sin and live a new life.

[Romans 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 6:6</span></span>

Knowing this - We all knowing this. All Christians are supposed to know
this. This is a new illustration drawn from the fact that by his
crucifixion our corrupt nature has been crucified also, or put to death;
and that thus we should be free from the servitude of sin.

Our old man - This expression occurs also in [Eph
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022.md), "That ye put off ...the old man
which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts." [Col
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009.md), "lie not to one another, seeing
that ye have put off the old man with his deeds." From these passages it
is evident that Paul uses the expression to denote our sinful and
corrupt nature; the passions and evil propensities that exist before the
heart is renewed. It refers to the love of sin, the indulgence of sinful
propensities, in opposition to the new disposition which exists after
the soul is converted, and which is called "the new man."

Is crucified - Is put to death, as if on a cross. In this expression
there is a personification of the corrupt propensities of our nature
represented as "our old man," our native disposition, etc. The figure is
here carried out, and this old man, this corrupt nature, is represented
as having been put to death in an agonizing and torturing manner. The
pains of crucifixion were perhaps the most torturing of any that the
human frame could bear. Death in this manner was most lingering and
distressing. And the apostle here by the expression "is crucified"
doubtless refers to the painful and protracted struggle which everyone
goes through when his evil propensities are subdued; when his corrupt
nature is slain; and when, a converted sinner, he gives himself up to
God. Sin dies within him, and he becomes dead to the world, and to sin;
"for as by the cross death is most lingering and severe, so that corrupt
nature is not subdued but by anguish." (Grotius.) All who have been born
again can enter into this description. They remember "the wormwood and
the gall." They remember the anguish of conviction; the struggle of
corrupt passion for the ascendency; the dying convulsions of sin in the
heart; the long and lingering conflict before it was subdued, and the
soul became submissive to God. Nothing will better express this than the
lingering agony of crucifixion: and the argument of the apostle is, that
as sin has produced such an effect, and as the Christian is now free
from its embrace and its power, he will live to God.

With him - The word "with" σύν sun here is joined to the verb "is
crucified" and means "is crucified as he was."

That the body of sin - This expression doubtless means the same as that
which he had just used, "our old man," But why the term "body" is used,
has been a subject in which interpreters have not been agreed. Some say
that it is a Hebraism, denoting mere intensity or emphasis. Some that it
means the same as flesh, that is, denoting our sinful propensities and
lusts. Grotius thinks that the term "body" is elegantly attributed to
sin, because the body of man is made up of many members joined together
compactly, and sin also consists of numerous vices and evil propensities
joined compactly, as it were, in one body. But the expression is
evidently merely another form of conveying the idea contained in the
phrase "our old man" - a personification of sin as if it had a living
form, and as if it had been put to death on a cross. It refers to the
moral destruction of the power of sin in the heart by the gospel, and
not to any physical change in the nature or faculties of the soul;
compare [Col 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011.md).

Might be destroyed - Might be put to death; might become inoperative and
powerless. Sin becomes enervated, weakened, and finally annihilated, by
the work of the Cross.

We should not serve - Should not be the slave of sin δουλεύειν
douleuein. That we should not be subject to its control. The sense is,
that before this we were slaves of sin (compare [Rom
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017),.md) but that now we are made free
from this bondage, because the moral death of sin has freed us from it.

Sin - Sin is here personified as a master that had dominion over us, but
is now dead.

[Romans 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 6:7</span></span>

For he that is dead - This is evidently an expression having a
proverbial aspect, designed to illustrate the sentiment just expressed.
The Rabbis had an expression similar to this, "When one is dead he is
free from commands." (Grotius.) So says Paul, when a man dies he is
exempt from the power and dominion of his master, of him who reigned
over him. The Christian had been subject to sin before his conversion.
But he has now become dead to it. And as when a servant dies, he ceases
to be subject to the control of his master, so the Christian being now
dead to sin, on the same principle, is released from the control of his
former master, sin. The idea is connected with [Rom
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006.md), where it is said that we should
not be the slaves of sin any more. The reason of this is assigned here,
where it is said that we are freed from it as a slave is freed when he
dies. Of course, the apostle here is saying nothing of the future world.
His whole argument has respect to the state of the Christian here; to
his being freed from the bondage of sin. It is evident that he who is
not freed from this bondage here, will not be in the future world. But
the argument of the apostle has no bearing on that point.

Is freed - Greek, Is justified. The word here is used clearly in the
sense of setting at liberty, or destroying the power or dominion. The
word is often used in this sense; compare [Act
13:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#038.md); compare a similar expression
in [Pe1 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#001.md), "He that hath suffered in
the flesh hath ceased from sin." The design of the apostle is not to say
that the Christian is perfect, but that sin has ceased to have dominion
over him, as a master ceases to have power over a slave when he is dead.
That dominion may be broken, so that the Christian may not be a slave to
sin, and yet he may be conscious of many failings and of much
imperfection; see Rom. 7.

[Romans 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 6:8</span></span>

This passage is a confirmation and illustration of what the apostle had
said before, [Rom 6:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005.md). The argument
is, that as Christ was once dead but now lives to God, and will no more
die, so we, being dead to sin, but living unto God, should not obey sin,
but should live only to God.

[Rom 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008.md)

Now if we be dead with Christ - If we be dead in a manner similar to
what he was; if we are made dead to sin by his work, as he was dead in
the grave; see the note at [Rom 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004.md).

We believe - All Christians. It is an article of our faith. This does
not refer to the future world so much as to the present. It becomes an
article of our belief that we are to live with Christ.

That we shall also live with him - This does not refer primarily to the
resurrection, and to the future state, but to the present. "We hold it
as an article of our faith, that we shall be alive with Christ." As he
was raised up from death, so we shall be raised from the death of sin.
As he lives, so we shall live in holiness. We are in fact raised up
here, and, as it were, made alive to him. This is not confined, however,
to the present life, but as Christ lives forever, so the apostle goes on
to show that we shall.

[Rom 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009.md)

Knowing - As we all know. This is assumed as an undoubted article of
belief.

Dieth no more - Will never die again. He will have occasion to make no
other atonement for sin; for what he has made is sufficient for all. He
is beyond the dominion of death, and will live forever, [Rev
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#018.md), "I am he that liveth and was
dead, and behold I am alive forevermore." This is not only a consolation
to the Christian, but it is an argument why he should be holy.

No more dominion - No rule; no lordship; no power. He is free from its
influence; and the king of terrors cannot reach his throne; compare [Heb
9:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#025.md); [Heb
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#012.md).

[Rom 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#010.md)

For in that he died - For in respect to the design of his death.

He died unto sin - His death had respect to sin. The design of his death
was to destroy sin; to make an atonement for it, and thus to put it
away. As his death was designed to effect this, so it follows that
Christians being baptized into his death, and having it as their object
to destroy sin, should not indulge in it. The whole force of the motive;
therefore, drawn from the death of Christ, is to induce Christians to
forsake sin; compare [Co2 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#015.md), "And
that he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth, live
unto themselves, but unto him which died for them and rose again."

Once - ἐφάπαξ ephapax. Once only; once for all. This is an adverb
denying a repetition (Schleusner), and implies that it will not be done
again; compare [Heb 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#027.md); [Heb
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012.md); [Heb
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#010.md). The argument of the apostle
rests much on this, that his death was once for all; that it would not
be repeated.

In that he liveth - The object, the design of his living. He aims with
his living power to promote the glory of God.

Unto God - He seeks to promote his glory. The argument of Paul is this:
Christians by their profession are united to him. They are bound to
imitate him. As he now lives only to advance the glory of God; as all
his mighty power, now that he is raised from the dead, and elevated to
his throne in heaven, is exerted to promote his glory; so should their
powers, being raised from the death of sin, be exerted to promote the
glory of God.

[Rom 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011.md)

Likewise - In like manner. This is an exhortation drawn from the
argument in the previous verses. It shows the design and tendency of the
Christian scheme.

Reckon ye yourselves - Judge, or esteem yourselves.

To be dead indeed unto sin - So that sin shall have no influence or
control ever you, any more than the objects of this world have ever the
dead in their graves; see the note at [Rom
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002.md).

But alive unto God - Bound to live to promote his glory; to make this
the great and sole object of your living.

Through Jesus Christ - By means of the death, and resurrection, and
example of Jesus Christ. The apostle regards all our disposition to live
to God as resulting from the work of the Lord Jesus Christ.

[Romans 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 6:12</span></span>

Let not sin therefore - This is a conclusion drawn from the previous
train of reasoning. The result of all these considerations is, that sin
should not be suffered to reign in us.

Reign - Have dominion; obtain the ascendency, or rule.

In your mortal body - In you. The apostle uses the word "mortal" here,
perhaps, for these reasons,

\(1\) To remind them of the tendency of the flesh to sin and corruption,
as equivalent to "fleshly," since the flesh is often used to denote evil
passions and desires (compare [Rom
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#005.md), [Rom
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023.md); [Rom
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003.md), [Rom
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#006).md); and,

\(2\) To remind them of their weakness, as the body was mortal, was soon
to decay, and was therefore liable to be overcome by temptation.
Perhaps, also, he had his eye on the folly of suffering the "mortal
body" to overcome the immortal mind, and to bring it into subjection to
sin and corruption.

That ye should obey it - That sin should get such an ascendency as to
rule entirely over you, and make you the slave.

In the lusts thereof - In its desires, or propensities.

[Romans 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 6:13</span></span>

Neither yield ye your members - Do not give up, or devote, or employ
your members, etc. The word "members" here refers to the members of the
body - the hands, feet, tongue, etc. It is a specification of what in
[Rom 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012.md) is included under the
general term "body;" see [Rom 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#005.md),
[Rom 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023.md); [Co1
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#015.md); [Co1
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012.md), [Co1
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#018.md), [Co1
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#020.md).

As instruments - This word ὁπλα hopla properly signifies "arms;" or
implements of war; but it also denotes an instrument of any kind which
we use for defense or aid. Here it means that we should not devote our
members - our hands, tongue, etc., as if under the direction of sinful
passions and corrupt desires, to accomplish purposes of iniquity. We
should not make the members of our bodies the slaves of sin reigning
within us.

Unto sin - In the service of sin; to work iniquity.

But yield yourselves ... - Give or devote yourselves to God.

That are alive - [Rom 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011.md).

And your members ... - Christians should devote every member of the body
to God and to his service. Their tongue should be consecrated to his
praise, and to the office of truth, and kindness, and benevolence; their
hands should be employed in useful labor for him and his cause; their
feet should be swift in his service, and should not go in the paths of
iniquity; their eyes should contemplate his works to excite thanksgiving
and praise; their ears should not be employed to listen to words of
deceit, or songs of dangerous and licentious tendency, or to persuasion
that would lead astray, but should be open to catch the voice of God as
he utters his will in the Book of truth, or as he speaks in the gale,
the zephyr, the rolling thunder, the ocean, or in the great events of
his providence. He speaks to us every day, and we should hear him; he
spreads his glories before us, and we should survey them to praise him;
he commands, and our hands, and heart, and feet should obey.

[Romans 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 6:14</span></span>

For sin ... - The propensity or inclination to sin.

Shall not have dominion - Shall not reign, [Rom
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012.md); [Rom
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006.md). This implies that sin ought not
to have this dominion; and it also expresses the conviction of the
apostle that it would not have this rule over Christians.

For we are not under law - We who are Christians are not subject to that
law where sin is excited, and where it rages unsubdued. But it may be
asked here, What is meant by this declaration? Does it mean that
Christians are absolved from all the obligations of the law? I answer,

\(1\) The apostle does not affirm that Christians are not bound to obey
the moral law. The whole scope of his reasoning shows that he maintains
that they are. The whole structure of Christianity supposes the same
thing; compare [Mat 5:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017.md).

\(2\) the apostle means to say that Christians are not under the law as
legalists, or as attempting to be justified by it. They seek a different
plan of justification altogether: and they do not attempt to be
justified by their own obedience. The Jews did; they do not.

\(3\) it is implied here that the effect of an attempt to be justified
by the Law was not to subdue sins, but to excite them and to lead to
indulgence in them.

Justification by works would destroy no sin, would check no evil
propensity, but would leave a man to all the ravages and riotings of
unsubdued passion. If, therefore, the apostle had maintained that people
were justified by works, he could not have consistently exhorted them to
abandon their sins. He would have had no powerful motives by which to
urge it; for the scheme would not lead to it. But he here says that the
Christian was seeking justification on a plan which contemplated and
which accomplished the destruction of sin; and he therefore infers that
sin should not have dominion over them.

But under grace - Under a scheme of mercy, the design and tendency of
which is to subdue sin, and destroy it. In what way the system of grace
removes and destroys sin, the apostle states in the following verses.

[Romans 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 6:15</span></span>

What then? shall we sin ... - The apostle proceeds to notice an
objection which might be suggested. "If Christians are not under the
law, which forbids all sin, but are under grace, which pardons sin, will
it not follow that they will feel themselves released from obligation to
be holy? Will they not commit sin freely, since the system of grace is
one which contemplates pardon, and which will lead them to believe that
they may be forgiven to any extent?" This Consequence has been drawn by
many professing Christians; and it was well therefore, for the apostle
to guard against it.

God forbid - Note, [Rom 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004.md).

[Romans 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 6:16</span></span>

Know ye not ... - The objection noticed in [Rom
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#015.md), the apostle answers by a
reference to the known laws of servitude or slavery, [Rom
6:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#016.md), and by showing that
Christians, who had been the slaves of sin, have now become the servants
of righteousness, and were therefore bound by the proper laws of
servitude to obey their new master: as if he had said, "I assume that
you know: you are acquainted with the laws of servitude; you know what
is required in such cases." This would be known to all who had been
either masters or slaves, or who had observed the usual laws and
obligations of servitude.

To whom ye yield yourselves - To whom ye give up yourselves for
servitude or obedience. The apostle here refers to voluntary servitude;
but where this existed, the power of the master over the time and
services of the servant was absolute. The argument of the apostle is,
that Christians had become the voluntary servants of God, and were
therefore bound to obey him entirely. Servitude among the ancients,
whether voluntary or involuntary, was rigid, and gave the master an
absolute right over his slave, [Luk
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#009.md); [Joh
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#034.md); [Joh
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015.md). To obey. To be obedient; or for
the purpose of obeying his commands.

To whom ye obey - To whom ye come under subjection. That is, you are
bound to obey his requirements.

Whether of sin - The general law of servitude the apostle now applies to
the case before him. If people became the servants of sin, if they gave
themselves to its indulgence, they would obey it, let the consequences
be what they might. Even with death, and ruin, and condemnation before
them; they would obey sin. They give indulgence to their evil passions
and desires, and follow them as obedient servants even if they lead them
down to hell. Whatever be the consequences of sin. yet he who yields to
it must abide by them, even if it leads him down to death and eternal
woe.

Or of obedience ... - The same law exists in regard to holiness or
obedience. The man who becomes the servant of holiness will feel himself
bound by the law of servitude to obey, and to pursue it to its regular
consequences.

Unto righteousness - Unto justification; that is, unto eternal life. The
expression stands contrasted with "death," and doubtless means that he
who thus becomes the voluntary servant of holiness, will feel himself
bound to obey it, unto complete and eternal justification and life;
compare [Rom 6:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021.md). The argument is
drawn from what the Christian would feel of the nature of obligation. He
would obey him to Whom he had devoted himself.

(This would seem to imply that justification is the effect of obedience.
Δικαιοσυνη Dikaiosunē, however, does not signify justification, but
righteousness, that is, in this case, personal holiness. The sense is,
that while the service of sin leads to death, that of obedience issues
in holiness or righteousness. It is no objection to this view that it
does not preserve the antithesis, since "justification" is not the
opposite of "death," any more than holiness. "There is no need," says
Mr. Haldane, "that there should be such an exact correspondence in the
parts of the antithesis, as is supposed. And there is a most obvious
reason why it could not be so. Death is the wages of sin, but life is
not the wages of obedience.")

[Romans 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 6:17</span></span>

But God be thanked - The argument in this verse is drawn from a direct
appeal to the feelings of the Roman Christians themselves. From their
experience, Paul was able to draw a demonstration to his purpose, and
this was with him a ground of gratitude to God.

That ye were ... - The sense of this passage is plain. The ground Of the
thanksgiving was not that they had been the slaves of sin; but it is,
that notwithstanding this, or although they had been thus, yet that they
were now obedient. To give thanks to God that people were sinners, would
contradict the whole spirit of this argument, and of the Bible. But to
give thanks that although people had been sinners, yet that now they had
become obedient; that is, that great sinners had become converted, is in
entire accordance with the spirit of the Bible, and with propriety. The
word "although" or "whereas," understood here, expresses the sense, "But
thanks unto God, that whereas ye were the servants of sin," etc.
Christians should thank God that they themselves, though once great
sinners, have become converted; and when others who are great sinners
are converted, they should praise him.

The servants of sin - This is a strong expression implying that they had
been in bondage to sin; that they had been completely its slaves.

From the heart - Not in external form only; but as a cordial, sincere,
and entire service. No other obedience is genuine.

That form of doctrine - Greek, type; see the note at [Rom
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014.md). The form or type of doctrine
means that shape or model of instruction which was communicated. It does
not differ materially from the doctrine itself, "you have obeyed that
doctrine," etc. You have yielded obedience to the instructions, the
rules, the tenor of the Christian revelation. The word "doctrine" does
not refer to an abstract dogma, but means instruction, that which is
taught. And the meaning of the whole expression is simply, that they had
yielded a cheerful and hearty obedience to what had been communicated to
them by the teachers of the Christian religion; compare [Rom
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008.md).

Which was delivered you - Margin, "Whereto ye were delivered." This is a
literal translation of the Greek; and the sense is simply in which you
have been instructed.

[Romans 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 6:18</span></span>

"Being then made free from sin." That is, as a master. You are not under
its dominion; you are no longer its slaves. They were made free, as a
servant is who is set at liberty, and who is, therefore, no longer under
obligation to obey.

Ye became the servants ... - You became voluntarily under the dominion
of righteousness; you yielded yourselves to it; and are therefore bound
to be holy; compare the note at [Joh
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#032.md).

[Romans 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 6:19</span></span>

I speak after the manner of men - I speak as people usually speak; or I
draw an illustration from common life, in order to make myself better
understood.

Because of the infirmity of your flesh - The word "infirmity" means
weakness, feebleness; and is opposed to vigor and strength. The word
"flesh" is used often to denote the corrupt passions of people; but it
may refer here to their intellect, or understanding; "Because of your
imperfection of spiritual knowledge; or incapacity to discern arguments
and illustrations that would be more strictly spiritual in their
character." This dimness or feebleness had been caused by long
indulgence in sinful passions, and by the blinding influence which such
passions have on the mind. The sense here is, "I use an illustration
drawn from common affairs, from the well-known relations of master and
slave, because you will better see the force of such an illustration
with which you have been familiar, than you would one that would be more
abstract, and more strictly spiritual." It is a kind of apology for
drawing an illustration from the relation of master and slave.

For as ye have yielded - Note, [Rom
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013.md). Servants to uncleanness. Have
been in bondage to impurity. The word "uncleanness" here refers to
impurity of life in any form; to the degraded passions that were common
among the heathen; see Rom. 1.

And to iniquity - Transgression of law.

Unto iniquity - For the purpose of committing iniquity. It implies that
they had done it in an excessive degree. It is well for Christians to be
reminded of their former lives, to awaken repentance, to excite
gratitude, to produce humility and a firmer purpose to live to the honor
of God. This is the use which the apostle here makes of it.

Unto holiness - In order to practice holiness. Let the surrender of your
members to holiness be as sincere and as unqualified as the surrender
was to sin. This is all that is required of Christians. Before
conversion they were wholly given to sin; after conversion they should
be wholly given to God. If all Christians would employ the same energies
in advancing the kingdom of God that they have in promoting the kingdom,
of Satan, the church would rise with dignity and grandeur, and every
continent and island would soon feel the movement. No requirement is
more reasonable than this; and it should be a source of lamentation and
mourning with Christians that it is not so; that they have employed so
mighty energies in the cause of Satan, and do so little in the service
of God. This argument for energy in the divine life, the apostle
proceeds further to illustrate by comparing the rewards obtained in the
two kinds of servitude, that of the world, and of God.

[Romans 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 6:20</span></span>

Ye were free from righteousness - That is, in your former state, you
were not at all under the influence of righteousness. You were entirely
devoted to sin; a strong expression of total depravity. It settles the
question; and proves that they had no native goodness. The argument
which is implied here rather than expressed is, that now they ought to
be equally free from sin, since they had become released from their
former bondage, and had become the servants of another master.

[Romans 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 6:21</span></span>

What fruit, then ... - What reward, or what advantage. This is an
argument drawn from the experience of Christians respecting the
indulgence of sinful passions. The question discussed throughout this
chapter is, whether the gospel plan of justification by faith leads to
indulgence in sin? The argument here is drawn from the past experience
which Christians have had in the ways of transgression. They have tried
it; they know its effects; they have tasted its bitterness; they have
reaped its fruits. It is implied here that having once experienced these
effects, and knowing the tendency of sin, they will not indulge in it
now; compare [Rom 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#005.md).

Whereof ye are now ashamed - Having seen their nature and tendency, you
are now ashamed of them; compare Rom. 1; [Eph
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#012.md), "For it is a shame to speak of
those things which are done of them in secret," [Co2
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#002.md); [Jde
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#013.md); [Phi
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019.md).

For the end - The tendency; the result. Those things lead to death.

Is death - Note, [Rom 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#022.md).

[Romans 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 6:22</span></span>

But now - Under the Christian plan of justification.

Being made free from sin - Being delivered from its dominion, and from
bondage; in the same manner as before conversion they were free from
righteousness, [Rom 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#020.md).

Ye have your fruit unto holiness - The fruit or result is holiness. This
service produces holiness, as the other did sin. It is implied here,
though not expressly affirmed, that in this service which leads to
holiness, they received important benefits, as in the service of sin
they had experienced many evils.

And the end - The final result - the ultimate consequence will be. At
present this service produces holiness; hereafter it will terminate in
everlasting life. By this consideration the apostle states the tendency
of the plan of justification, and urges on them the duty of striving
after holiness.

Everlasting life - Note, [Joh 3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036.md).
This stands in contrast with the word "death" in [Rom
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021.md), and shows its meaning. "One is
just as long in duration as the other;" and if the one is limited, the
other is. If those who obey shall be blessed with life forever, those
who disobey will be cursed with death forever. Never was there an
antithesis more manifest and more clear. And there could not be a
stronger proof that the word "death" in [Rom
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021.md), refers not to temporal death,
but to eternal punishment. For what force would there be in the argument
on the supposition that temporal death only is meant? The argument would
stand thus: "The end of those sins is to produce temporal death; the end
of holiness is to produce eternal life!" Will not temporal death be
inflicted, it would be immediately asked, at any rate? Are Christians
exempt from it? And do not people suffer this, whether they become
Christians or not? How then could this be an argument bearing on the
tenor of the apostle's reasoning? But admit the fair and obvious
construction of the passage to be the true one, and it becomes plain.
They were pursuing a course tending to everlasting ruin; they are now in
a path that shall terminate in eternal life. By this weighty
consideration, therefore, they are urged to be holy.

[Romans 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 6:23</span></span>

For the wages of sin - The word translated here "wages" ὀψώνια opsōnia
properly denotes what is purchased to be eaten with bread, as fish,
flesh, vegetables, etc. (Schleusner); and thence, it means the pay of
the Roman soldier, because formerly it was the custom to pay the soldier
in these things. It means hence, what a man earns or deserves; what is
his proper pay, or what he merits. As applied to sin, it means that
death is what sin deserves; what will be its proper reward. Death is
thus called the wages of sin, not because it is an arbitrary, undeserved
appointment, but

\(1\) Because it is its proper desert. Not a pain will be inflicted on
the sinner which he does not deserve. Not a sinner will die who ought
not to die. Sinners even in hell will be treated just as they deserve to
be treated; and there is not to man a more fearful and terrible
consideration than this. No man can conceive a more dreadful doom than
for himself to be treated forever just as he deserves to be. But,

\(2\) This is the wages of sin, because, like the pay of the soldier, it
is just what was threatened, [Eze
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#004.md), "The soul that sinneth, it shall
die." God will not inflict anything more than was threatened, and
therefore it is just.

Is death - This stands opposed here to eternal life, and proves that one
is just as enduring as the other.

But the gift of God - Not the wages of man; not what is due to him; but
the mere gift and mercy of God. The apostle is careful to distinguish,
and to specify thai this is not what man deserves, but what is
gratuitously conferred on him; Note, [Rom
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#015.md).

Eternal life - The same words which in [Rom
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#022.md) are rendered "everlasting life."
The phrase is opposed to death; and proves incontestably that that means
eternal death. We may remark, therefore,

\(1\) That the one will be as long as the other.

\(2\) as there is no doubt about the duration of life, so there can be
none about the duration of death. The one will be rich, blessed,
everlasting; the other sad, gloomy, lingering, awful, eternal.

\(3\) if the sinner is lost, he will deserve to die. He will have his
reward. He will suffer only what shall be the just due of sin. He will
not be a martyr in the cause of injured innocence. He will not have the
compassion of the universe in his favor. He will have no one to take his
part against God. He will suffer just as much, and just as long, as he
ought to suffer. He will suffer as the culprit pines in the dungeon, or
as the murderer dies on the gibbet, because this is the proper reward of
sin.

\(4\) they who are saved will be raised to heaven, not because they
merit it, but by the rich and sovereign grace of God. All their
salvation will be ascribed to him; and they will celebrate his mercy and
grace forever.

\(5\) it becomes us, therefore, to flee from the wrath to come. No man
is so foolish and so wicked as he who is willing to reap the proper
wages of sin. None so blessed as he who has part in the mercy of God,
and who lays hold on eternal life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 7](rom007.md)

</div>
