<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom008)  [Next](rom010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 9:0</span></span>

This chapter opens in some degree a new train of thought and
argumentation. Its main design probably was to meet objections which
would be alleged against the positions advanced and defended in the
previous parts of the Epistle. In the previous chapters, Paul had
defended the position that the barrier between the Jews and Gentiles had
been removed; that the Jews could not be saved by any external
advantages which they possessed; that all were alike guilty before God;
and that there was but one way for Jews and Gentiles of salvation - by
faith in Jesus Christ; Rom. 1; 2; 3. He had stated the benefits of this
plan Rom. 5, and showed its bearing in accomplishing what the Law of
Moses could not effect in overcoming sin; Rom. 6; 7. In Rom. 8 he had
stated also on what principles this was done; that it was according to
the purpose of God - the principle of electing mercy applied
indiscriminately to the mass of guilty Jews and Gentiles. To this
statement two objections might arise: first, that it was unjust; and
second, that the whole argument involved a departure from the promises
made to the Jewish nation. It might further be supposed that the apostle
had ceased to feel an interest in his countrymen, and had become the
exclusive advocate of the Gentiles. To meet these objections and
feelings, seems to have been the design of this chapter. He shows them,

\(1\) His unabated love for his countrymen, and regard for their
welfare; [Rom 9:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001).

\(2\) he shows them from their own writings that the principle of
election had existed in former times - in the case of Isaac [Rom
9:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007); in the writings of Moses [Rom
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#015); in the case of Pharaoh [Rom
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017); and in the prophecies of Hosea
and Isaiah [Rom 9:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025).

\(3\) he takes occasion throughout the chapter to vindicate this
principle of the divine administration; to answer objections; and to
show that, on the acknowledged principles of the Old Testament, a part
of the Jewish nation might be rejected; and that it was the purpose of
God to call others to the privileges of the people of God; [Rom
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016), [Rom
9:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#019), [Rom
9:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025), [Rom
9:29-33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029).

The chapter, therefore, has not reference to national election, or to
choice to external privileges, but has direct reference to the doctrine
of the election to salvation which had been stated in Rom. 8. To suppose
that it refers merely to external privileges and national distinctions,
makes the whole discussion unconnected, unmeaningful, and unnecessary.

[Romans 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 9:1</span></span>

I say the truth - In what I am about to affirm respecting my attachment
to the nation and people.

In Christ - Most interpreters regard this as a form of an oath, as
equivalent to calling Christ to witness. It is certainly to be regarded,
in its obvious sense, as an appeal to Christ as the searcher of the
heart, and as the judge of falsehood. Thus, the word translated "in" ἐν
en is used in the form of an oath in [Mat
5:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034); [Rev
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#006), Greek. We are to remember that
the apostle was addressing those who had been Jews; and the expression
has all the force of an oath "by the Messiah." This shows that it is
right on great and solemn occasions, and in a solemn manner, and thus
only, to appeal to Christ for the sincerity of our motives, and for the
truth of what we say. And it shows further, that it is right to regard
the Lord Jesus Christ as present with us, as searching the heart, as
capable of detecting insincerity, hypocrisy, and perjury, and as
therefore divine.

My conscience - Conscience is that act or judgment of the mind by which
we decide on the lawfulness or unlawfulness of our actions, and by which
we instantly approve or condemn them. It exists in every man, and is a
strong witness to our integrity or to our guilt.

Bearing me witness - Testifying to the truth of what I say.

In the Holy Ghost - He does not say that he speaks the truth by or in
the Holy Spirit, as he had said of Christ; but that the conscience
pronounced its concurring testimony by the Holy Spirit; that is,
conscience as enlightened and influenced by the Holy Spirit. It was not
simply natural conscience, but it was conscience under the full
influence of the Enlightener of the mind and Sanctifier of the heart.
The reasons of this solemn asseveration are probably the following:

\(1\) His conduct and his doctrines had led some to believe that he was
an apostate, and had lost his love for his countrymen. He had forsaken
their institutions, and devoted himself to the salvation of the
Gentiles. He here shows them that it was from no lack of love to them.

\(2\) the doctrines which he was about to state and defend were of a
similar character; he was about to maintain that no small part of his
own countrymen, notwithstanding their privileges, would be rejected and
lost. In this solemn manner, therefore, he assures them that this
doctrine had not been embraced because he did not love them, but because
it was solemn, though most painful truth. He proceeds to enumerate their
privileges as a people, and to show to them the strength and tenderness
of his love.

[Romans 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 9:2</span></span>

Great heaviness - Great grief.

Continual sorrow - The word rendered "continual" here must be taken in a
popular sense. Not that he was literally all the time pressed down with
this sorrow, but that whenever he thought on this subject, he had great
grief; as we say of a painful subject, it is a source of constant pain.
The cause of this grief, Paul does not expressly mention, though it is
implied in what he immediately says. It was the fact that so large a
part of the nation would be rejected, and cast off.

[Romans 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 9:3</span></span>

For I could wish ... - This passage has been greatly controverted. Some
have proposed to translate it, "I did wish," as referring to a former
state, when he renounced Christ, and sought to advance the interests of
the nation by opposing and defying him. But to this interpretation there
are insuperable objections.

\(1\) the object of the apostle is not to state his former feelings, but
his present attachment to his countrymen, and willingness to suffer for
them.

\(2\) the proper grammatical construction of the word used here is not I
did wish, but I could desire; that is, if the thing were possible. It is
not I do wish, or did wish, but I could desire ἠυχόμην ēuchomēn,
implying that he was willing now to endure it; that his present love for
them was so strong, that he would, if practicable, save them from the
threatened ruin and apostasy.

\(3\) it is not true that Paul ever did wish before his conversion to be
accursed by Christ, that is, by the Messiah. He opposed Jesus of
Nazareth; but he did not believe that he was the Messiah. At no time
would he have wished to be devoted to destruction "by the Messiah," or
"by Christ." Nothing would have been more terrible to a Jew; and Saul of
Tarsus never doubted that he was the friend of the promised Messiah, and
was advancing the true interests of his cause, and defending the hopes
of his nation against an impostor. The word, therefore, expresses a
feeling which the apostle had, when writing this Epistle, in regard to
the condition and prospects of the nation.

Were accursed from Chest - Might be anathema by Christ ἀνάθεμα εἶναι ἀπὸ
τοῦ Χριστοῦ anathema einai apo tou Christou. This passage has been much
controverted. The word rendered "accursed" (anathema) properly means,

\(1\) Anything that was set up, or "set apart," or consecrated to the
gods in the temples, as spoils of war, images, statues, etc. This is its
Classical Greek meaning. It has a similar meaning among the Hebrews, It
denoted what was set apart or consecrated to the service of God, as
sacrifices or offerings of any kind. In this respect it is used to
express the sense of the Hebrew word חרם cherem "anything devoted to
Yahweh, without the possibility of redemption." [Lev
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#021); [Lev
27:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#029); [Num
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#014); [Deu
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#026); [Jos
6:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#017); [Jos
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001); [Sa1
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#021); [Eze
44:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#029).

\(2\) as what was thus dedicated to Yahweh was alienated from the use of
him who devoted it, and was either burnt or slain and devoted to
destruction as an offering, the word came to signify a devotion of any
thing to destruction, or to complete ruin. And as whatever is devoted to
destruction may be said to be subject to a curse, or to be accursed, the
word comes to have this signification; [Kg1
20:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#042); [Isa
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#005). But in none of these cases does
it denote eternal death. The idea, therefore, in these places is simply,
"I could be willing to be destroyed, or devoted, to death, for the sake
of my countrymen." And the apostle evidently means to say that he would
be willing to suffer the bitterest evils, to forego all pleasure, to
endure any privation and toil, nay, to offer his life, so that he might
be wholly devoted to sufferings, as an offering, if he might be the
means of benefiting and saving the nation. For a similar case, see [Exo
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032). This does not mean that Paul
would be willing to be damned forever. For,

\(1\) The words do not imply that, and will not bear it.

\(2\) such a destruction could in no conceivable way benefit the Jews.

\(3\) such a willingness is not and cannot be required. And,

\(4\) It would be impious and absurd. No man has a right to be willing
to be the "eternal enemy" of God; and no man ever yet was, or could be
willing to endure everlasting torments.

From Christ - By Christ. Grotius thinks it means from the church of
Christ. Others think it means "after the example of Christ;" and others,
from Christ forever. But it evidently means that he was willing to be
devoted by Christ; that is, to be regarded by him, and appointed by him,
to suffering and death, if by that means he could save his countrymen.
It was thus the highest expression of true patriotism and benevolence.
It was an example for all Christians and Christian ministers. They
should be willing to be devoted to pain, privation, toil, and death, if
by that they could save others from ruin.

My kinsmen ... - My countrymen; all of whom he regarded as his kinsmen,
or relations, as descended from the same ancestors.

According to the flesh - By birth. They were of the same blood and
parentage, though not now of the same religious belief.

[Romans 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 9:4</span></span>

Who are Israelites - Descended from Israel, or Jacob; honored by having
such an ancestor, and by bearing a name so distinguished as that of his
descendants. It was formerly the honorable appellation of the people of
God.

To whom pertaineth - To whom it belongs. It was their elevated external
privilege.

The adoption - Of the nation into the family of God, or to be regarded
as His special people; [Deu 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#006).

And the glory - The symbol of the divine presence that attended them
from Egypt, and that finally rested over the ark in the first temple -
"the Shechinah;" [Exo 13:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021); [Exo
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022).

And the covenants - The various compacts or promises which had been made
from time to time with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and with the nation;
the pledges of the divine protection.

The giving of the law - On Mount Sinai; Exo. 20; compare [Psa
147:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#019).

And the service of God - The temple service; regarded by them as the
pride and ornament of their nation.

And the promises - Of the Messiah; and of the spread of the true
religion from them as a nation.

[Romans 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 9:5</span></span>

Whose are the fathers - Who have been honored with so illustrious an
ancestry. Who are descended from Abraham, Isaac, etc. On this they
highly valued themselves, and in a certain sense not unjustly; compare
[Mat 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009).

Of whom - Of whose nation. This is placed as the crowning and most
exalted privilege, that their nation had given birth to the
long-expected Messiah, the hope of the world.

As concerning the flesh - So far as his human nature was concerned. The
use of this language supposes that there was a higher nature in respect
to which he was not of their nation; see the note at [Rom
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003).

Christ came - He had already come; and it was their high honor that he
was one of their nation.

Who is over all - This is an appellation that belongs only to the true
God. It implies supreme divinity; and is full proof that the Messiah is
divine: Much effort has been made to show that this is not the true
rendering, but without success. There are no various readings in the
Greek manuscripts of any consequence; and the connection here evidently
requires us to understand this of a nature that is not "according to the
flesh," i. e., as the apostle here shows, of the divine nature.

God blessed forever - This is evidently applied to the Lord Jesus; and
it proves that he is divine. If the translation is fairly made, and it
has never been proved to be erroneous, it demonstrates that he is God as
well as man. The doxology "blessed forever" was usually added by the
Jewish writers after the mention of the name God, as an expression of
reverence. (See the various interpretations that have been proposed on
this passage examined in Prof. Stuart's Notes on this verse.)

[Romans 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 9:6</span></span>

Not as though ... - Not as though the promise of God had entirely
failed. Though I grieve thus [Rom
9:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#002), though I am deeply apprehensive
for the nation, yet I do not affirm that all the nation is to be
destroyed. The promise of God will not entirely fail.

Not all Israel - Not all the descendants of Jacob have the true spirit
of Israelites, or are Jews in the scriptural sense of the term; see the
note at [Rom 2:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#028).

[Romans 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 9:7</span></span>

Are they all children - Adopted into the true family of God. Many of the
descendants of Abraham were rejected.

But in Isaac - This was the promise; [Gen
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#012).

Shall thy seed ... - Thy true people. This implied a selection, or
choice; and therefore the doctrine of election was illustrated in the
very commencement of the history of the nation; and as God had then made
such a distinction, he might still do it. As he had then rejected a part
of the natural descendants of Abraham, so he might still do it. This is
the argument which the apostle is pursuing.

[Romans 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 9:8</span></span>

They which are the children of the flesh - The natural descendants.

These are not the children of God - Are not of necessity the adopted
children of God; or are not so in virtue of their descent merely. This
was in opposition to one of the most settled and deeply cherished
opinions of the Jews. They supposed that the mere fact of being a Jew,
entitled a man to the blessings of the covenant, and to be regarded as a
child of God. But the apostle shows them that it was not by their
natural descent that these spiritual privileges were granted; that they
were not conferred on people simply from the fact that they were Jews;
and that consequently those who were not Jews might become interested in
those spiritual blessings.

But the children of the promise - The descendants of Abraham on whom the
promised blessings would be bestowed. The sense is, that God at first
contemplated a distinction among the descendants of Abraham, and
intended to confine his blessings to such as he chose; that is, to those
to whom the promise particularly appertained, to the descendants of
Isaac. The argument of the apostle is, that "the principle" was thus
established that a distinction might be made among those who were Jews;
and as that distinction had been made in former times, so it might be
under the Messiah.

Are counted - Are regarded, or reckoned. God reckons things as they are;
and therefore designed that they should be his true children.

As the seed - The spiritual children of God; the partakers of his mercy
and salvation. This refers, doubtless, to spiritual privileges and to
salvation; and therefore has relation not to nations as such, but to
individuals.

[Romans 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 9:9</span></span>

For this is the word of promise - This is the promise made to Abraham.
The design of the apostle, in introducing this, is doubtless to show to
whom the promise appertained; and by specifying this, he shows that it
had not reference to Ishmael, but to Isaac.

At this time - Greek, According to this time; see [Gen
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#010), [Gen
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#014). Probably it means at the exact
time promised; I will fulfil the prediction at the very time; compare
[Kg2 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#016).

[Romans 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 9:10</span></span>

And not only this - Not only is the principle of making a distinction
among the natural descendants of Abraham thus settled by the promise,
but it is still further seen and illustrated in the birth of the two
sons of Isaac. He had shown that the principle of thus making a
distinction among the posterity of Abraham was recognised in the
original promise, thus proving that all the descendants of Abraham were
not of course to be saved; and he now proceeds to show that the
principle was recognised in the case of his posterity in the family of
Isaac. And he shows that it is not according to any natural principles
that the selection was made; that he not only made a distinction between
Jacob and Esau, but that he did it according to his good pleasure,
choosing the younger to be the object of his favor, and rejecting the
older, who, according to the custom of the times, was supposed to be
entitled to special honor and rights. And in order to prove that this
was done according to his own pleasure, he shows that the distinction
was made before they were born; before they had formed any character;
and, consequently, in such a way that it could not be pretended that it
was in consequence of any works which they had performed.

But when Rebecca - The wife of Isaac; see [Gen
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#021), [Gen
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023).

[Romans 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 9:11</span></span>

For the children being not yet born - It was not, therefore, by any
works of theirs. It was not because they had formed a character and
manifested qualities which made this distinction proper. It was laid
back of any such character, and therefore had its foundation in the
purpose or plan of God.

Neither having done any good or evil - That is, when the declaration
[Rom 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#012) was made to Rebecca. This is
a very important passage in regard to the question about the purposes of
God.

\(1\) they had done nothing good or bad; and when that is the case,
there can be, properly speaking, no moral character, for "a character is
not formed when the person has not acquired stable and distinctive
qualities." Webster.

\(2\) that the period of moral agency had not yet commenced; compare
[Gen 25:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#022). When that agency
commences, we do not know; but here is a case of which it is alarmed
that it had not commenced.

\(3\) the purpose of God is antecedent to the formation of character, or
the performance of any actions, good or bad.

\(4\) it is not a purpose formed because he sees anything in the
individuals as a ground for his choice, but for some reason which he has
not explained, and which in the Scripture is simply called purpose and
good pleasure; [Eph 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005).

\(5\) if it existed in this case, it does in others. If it was right
then, it is now. And if God then dispensed his favors on this principle,
he will now. But,

\(6\) This affirmation respecting Jacob and Esau does not prove that
they had not a nature inclined to evil; or a corrupt and sensual
propensity; or that they would not sin as soon as they became moral
agents. It proves merely that they had not yet committed actual sin.
That they, as well as all others, would certainly sin as soon as they
committed moral acts at all, is proved everywhere in the Sacred
Scriptures.

The purpose of God - Note, [Rom 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028).

According to election - To dispense his favors according to his
sovereign will and pleasure. Those favors were not conferred in
consequence of the merits of the individuals; but according to a wise
plan "lying back" of the formation of their characters, and before they
had done good or evil. The favors were thus conferred according to his
choice, or election.

Might stand - Might be confirmed; or might be proved to be true. The
case shows that God dispenses his favors as a sovereign. The purpose of
God was thus proved to have been formed without respect to the merits of
either.

Not of works - Not by anything which they had done either to merit his
favor or to forfeit it. It was formed on other principles than a
reference to their works. So it is in relation to all who shall be
saved. God has good reasons for saving those who shall be saved. What
the reasons are for choosing some to life, he has not revealed; but he
has revealed to us that it is not on account of their works, either
performed or foreseen.

But of him that calleth - According to the will and purpose of him that
chooses to dispense those favors in this manner. It is not by the merit
of man, but it is by a purpose having its origin with God, and formed
and executed according to his good pleasure. It is also implied here
that it is formed in such a way as to secure his glory as the primary
consideration.

[Romans 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 9:12</span></span>

It was said unto her - By Yahweh; see [Gen
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023).

The elder - The oldest son, which was Esau. By the law of primogeniture
among the Hebrews, he would have been entitled to special honors and
privileges. But it was said that in his case this custom should be
reversed, and that he should take the rank of the younger.

Should serve - Shall be subject to; shall not have the authority and
priority, but should be inferior to. The passage in Genesis [Gen
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023) shows that this had reference
particularly to the posterity of Esau, and not to him as an individual.
The sense is, that the descendants of Esau, who were Edomites, should be
inferior to, and subject to the descendants of Jacob. Jacob was to have
the priority; the promised land; the promises; and the honor of being
regarded as the chosen of God. There was reference here, therefore, to
the whole train of temporal and spiritual blessings which were to be
connected with the two races of people. If it be asked how this bears on
the argument of the apostle, we may reply,

\(1\) That it settles "the principle" that God might make a distinction
among people, in the same nation, and the same family, without reference
to their works or character.

\(2\) that he might confer his blessings on such as he pleased.

\(3\) if this is done in regard to nations, it may be in regard to
individuals. The principle is the same, and the justice the same. If it
be supposed to be unjust in God to make such a distinction in regard to
individuals, it is surely not less so to make a distinction in nations.
The fact that numbers are thus favored, does not make it the more
proper, or remove any difficulty.

\(4\) if this distinction may be made in regard to temporal things, why
not in regard to spiritual things? The principle must still be the same.
If unjust in one case, it would be in the other. The fact that it is
done in one case proves also that it will be in the other; for the same
great principle will run through all the dealings of the divine
government. And as people do not and cannot complain that God makes a
distinction among them in regard to talents, health, beauty, prosperity,
and rank, neither can they complain if he acts also as a sovereign in
the distribution of his spiritual favors. They, therefore, who regard
this as referring only to temporal and national privileges, gain no
relief in respect to the real difficulty in the case, for the
unanswerable question would still be asked, why has not God made all
people equal in everything? Why has he made any distinction among
people? The only reply to all such inquiries is, "Even so, Father, for
so it seemeth good in thy sight;" [Mat
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#026).

[Romans 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 9:13</span></span>

As it is written - [Mal 1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002). That
is, the distribution of favors is on the principle advanced by the
prophet, and is in accordance with the declaration that God had in fact
loved the one and hated the other.

Jacob - This refers, doubtless, to the posterity of Jacob.

Have I loved - I have shown affection for that people; I have bestowed
on them great privileges and blessings, as proofs of attachment. I have
preferred Jacob to Esau.

Esau - The descendants of Esau, the Edomites; see [Mal
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#004).

Have I hated - This does not mean any positive hatred; but that he had
preferred Jacob, and had withheld from Esau those privileges and
blessings which he had conferred on the posterity of Jacob. This is
explained in [Mal 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003)," And I hated
Esau, and laid his mountains and heritage waste for the dragons of the
wilderness;" compare [Jer 49:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#017);
[Eze 35:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#006). It was common among the
Hebrews to use the terms "love" and "hatred" in this comparative sense,
where the former implied strong positive attachment, and the latter, not
positive hatred, but merely a less love, or the withholding of the
expressions of affection; compare [Gen
29:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#030); [Pro
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#024), "He that spareth his rod hateth
his son; but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes;" [Mat
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024), "No man can serve two masters,
for either he will hate the one and love the other," etc.; [Luk
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#026), "if any man come to me, and
hate not his father and mother, etc."

[Romans 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 9:14</span></span>

What shall we say then? - What conclusion shall we draw from these
acknowledged facts, and from these positive declarations of Scripture.

Is there unrighteousness with God? - Does God do injustice or wrong?
This charge has often been brought against the doctrine here advanced.
But this charge the apostle strongly repels. He meets it by further
showing that it is the doctrine explicitly taught in the Old Testament
[Rom 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#015), [Rom
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017), and that it is founded on the
principles of equity, and on just views of the sovereignty of God; [Rom
9:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#019).

God forbid - Note, [Rom 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004).

[Romans 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 9:15</span></span>

For he saith to Moses - [Exo 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#019).

I will have mercy - This is said by God when he declared expressly that
he would make all his goodness pass before Moses [Exo
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#019), and when, therefore, it was
regarded, not as a proof of stern and inexorable justice, but as "the
very proof of his benevolence," and the highest which he thought proper
to exhibit. When people, therefore, under the influence of an unrenewed
and hosthe heart, charge this as an unjust and arbitrary proceeding,
they are resisting and perverting what God regards as the very
demonstration of his benevolence. The sense of the passage clearly is,
that he would choose the objects of his favor, and bestow his mercies as
he chose. None of the human race deserved his favor; and he had a right
to pardon whom he pleased, and to save people on his own terms, and
according to his sovereign will and pleasure.

On whom I will have mercy - On whom I choose to bestow mercy. The mode
he does not explain. But there could not be a more positive declaration
of these truths,

\(1\) That he does it as a sovereign, without giving an account of the
reason of his choice to any.

\(2\) that he does it without regard to any claim on the part of man; or
that man is regarded as destitute of merit, and as having no right to
his mercy.

\(3\) that he will do it to any extent which he pleases, and in whatever
time and manner may best accord with his own good pleasure.

\(4\) that he has regard to a definite number and that on that number he
intends to bestow eternal life; and,

\(5\) That no one has a right to complain.

It is proof of his benevolence that any are saved; and where none have a
claim, where all are justly condemned, he has a right to pardon whom he
pleases. The executive of a country may select any number of criminals
whom he may see fit to pardon, or who may be forgiven in consistency
with the supremacy of the laws and the welfare of the community and none
has a right to complain, but every good citizen should rejoice that any
may be pardoned with safety. So in the moral world, and under the
administration of its holy Sovereign, it should be a matter of joy that
any can be pardoned and saved; and not a subject of murmuring and
complaint that those who shall finally deserve to die shall be consigned
to woe.

[Romans 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 9:16</span></span>

So then - It follows as a consequence from this statement of God to
Moses. Or it is a doctrine established by that statement.

Not of him that willeth - This does not mean that he that becomes a
Christian, and is saved, does not choose eternal life; or is not made
willing; or that he is compelled to enter heaven against his own choice.
It is true that people by nature have no desire of holiness, and do not
choose eternal life. But the effect of the influences of God's Spirit on
the heart is to make it "willing in the day of his power;" [Psa
110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003). The meaning here is evidently,
that eternal life is not bestowed because man had any original
willingness or disposition to be saved; it is not because he commences
the work, and is himself disposed to it; but it is because God inclines
him to it, and disposes him to seek for mercy, and then confers it in
his own way. The word "willeth" here denotes wish or desire.

Nor of him that runneth - This denotes "strenuous, intense effort," as
when a man is anxious to obtain an object, or hastens from danger. The
meaning is not that the sinner does not make an effort to be saved; nor
that all who become Christians do not "in fact" strive to enter into the
kingdom, or earnestly desire salvation, for the Scriptures teach the
contrary; [Luk 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016); [Luk
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#024). There is no effort more intense
and persevering, no struggle more arduous or agonizing, than when a
sinner seeks eternal life. Nor does it mean that they who strive in a
proper way, and with proper effort, shall not obtain eternal life; [Mat
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007). But the sense is,

\(1\) That the sinner would not put forth any effort himself. If left to
his own course, he would never seek to be saved.

\(2\) that he is pardoned, not "on account" of his effort; not because
he makes an exertion; but because God chooses to pardon him.

There is no merit in his anxiety, and prayers, and agony, on account of
which God would forgive him; but he is still dependent on the mere mercy
of God to save or destroy him at his will. The sinner, however anxious
he may be, and however much or long he may strive, does not bring God
under an obligation to pardon him any more than the condemned criminal,
trembling with the fear of execution, and the consciousness of crime,
lays the judge or the jury under an obligation to acquit him. This fact,
it is of great importance for an awakened sinner to know. Deeply anxious
he should be, but there is no merit in his distress. Pray he should, but
there is no merit in his prayers. Weep and strive he may, but in this
there is no ground of claim on God for pardon; and, after all, he is
dependent on his mere sovereign mercy, as a lost, ruined, and helpless
sinner, to be saved or lost at his will.

But of God that showeth mercy - Salvation in its beginning, its
progress, and its close, is of him. He has a right, therefore, to bestow
it when and where he pleases. All our mercies flow from his mere love
and compassion, and not from our deserts. The essential idea here is,
that God is the original fountain of all the blessings of salvation.

[Romans 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 9:17</span></span>

For the Scripture saith - [Exo 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016).
That is, God saith to Pharaoh in the Scriptures; [Gal
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#008), [Gal
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#022). This passage is designed to
illustrate the doctrine that God shows mercy according to his sovereign
pleasure by a reference to one of the most extraordinary cases of
hardness of heart which has ever occurred. The design is to show that
God has a right to pass by those to whom he does not choose to show
mercy; and to place them in circumstances where they shall develope
their true character, and where in fait they shall become more hardened
and be destroyed; [Rom 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#018).

Unto Pharaoh - The haughty and oppressive king of Egypt; thus showing
that the most mighty and wicked monarchs are at his control; compare
[Isa 10:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005).

For this same purpose - For the design, or with the intent that is
immediately specified. This was the leading purpose or design of his
sustaining him.

Have I raised thee up - Margin in [Exo
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016), "made thee stand," that is,
sustained thee. The Greek word used by the apostle (ἐξήγειρα exēgeira),
means properly, I "have excited, roused, or stirred" thee up. But it may
also have the meaning, "I have sustained or supported thee." That is, I
have kept thee from death; I have preserved thee from ruin; I have
ministered strength to thee, so that thy full character has been
developed. It does not mean that God had infused into his mind any
positive evil, or that by any direct influence he had excited any evil
feelings, but that he had kept him in circumstances which were suited to
develope his true character. The meaning of the word and the truth of
the case may be expressed in the following particulars:

\(1\) God meant to accomplish some great purposes by his existence and
conduct.

\(2\) he kept him, or sustained him, with reference to that.

\(3\) he had control over the haughty and wicked monarch. He could take
his life, or he could continue him on earth. As he had control over all
things that could affect the pride, the feelings, and the happiness of
the monarch, so he had control over the monarch himself.

\(4\) "he placed him in circumstances just suited to develope his
character." He kept him amidst those circumstances until his character
was fully developed.

\(5\) he did not exert a positive evil influence on the mind of Pharaoh;
for,

\(6\) In all this the monarch acted freely. He did what he chose to do.
He pursued his own course. He was voluntary in his schemes of oppressing
the Israelites. He was voluntary in his opposition to God. He was
voluntary when he pursued the Israelites to the Red sea. In all his
doings he acted as he chose to do, and with a determined "choice of
evil," from which neither warning nor judgment would turn him away.
Thus, he is said to have hardened his own heart; [Exo
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#015).

\(7\) neither Pharaoh nor any sinner can justly blame God for placing
them in circumstances where they shall develope their own character, and
show what they are. It is not the fault of God, but their own fault. The
sinner is not compelled to sin; nor is God under obligation to save him
contrary to the prevalent desires and wishes of the sinner himself.

My power in thee - Or by means of thee. By the judgments exerted in
delivering an entire oppressed people from thy grasp. God's most signal
acts of power were thus shown in consequence of his disobedience and
rebellion.

My name - The name of Yahweh, as the only true God, and the deliverer of
his people.

Throughout all the earth - Or throughout all the land of Egypt; Note,
[Luk 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001). We may learn here,

\(1\) That a leading design of God in the government of the world is to
make his power, and name, and character known.

\(2\) that this is often accomplished in a most signal manner by the
destruction of the wicked.

\(3\) that wicked people should be alarmed, since their arm cannot
contend with God, and since his enemies shall be destroyed.

\(4\) it is right that the incorrigibly wicked should be cut off. When a
man's character is fully developed; when he is fairly tried; when in all
circumstances, he has shown that he will not obey God, neither justice
nor mercy hinders the Almighty from cutting him down and consigning him
to death.

[Romans 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 9:18</span></span>

Therefore hath he mercy ... - This is a conclusion stated by the apostle
as the result of all the argument.

Whom he will he hardeneth - This is not stated in what the Scripture
said to Pharaoh, but is a conclusion to which the apostle had arrived,
in view of the case of Pharaoh. The word "hardeneth" means only to
harden in the manner specified in the case of Pharaoh. It does not mean
to exert a positive influence, but to leave a sinner to his own course,
and to place him in circumstances where the character will be more and
more developed; see the note at [Joh
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#040). It implies, however, an act of
sovereignty on the part of God in thus leaving him to his chosen course,
and in not putting forth that influence by which he could be saved from
death. Why this is, the apostle does not state. We should, however, not
dispute a fact everywhere prevalent; and should have sufficient
confidence in God to believe that it is in accordance with infinite
wisdom and rectitude.

[Romans 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 9:19</span></span>

Thou wilt say then unto me - The apostle here refers to an objection
that might be made to his argument. If the position which he had been
endeavoring to establish were true; if God had a purpose in all his
dealings with people; if all the revolutions among people happened
according to his decree, so that he was not disappointed, or his plan
frustrated; and if his own glory was secured in all this, why could he
blame people?

Why doth he yet find fault? - Why does he blame people, since their
conduct is in accordance with his purpose, and since he bestows mercy
according to his sovereign will? This objection has been made by sinners
in all ages. It is the standing objection against the doctrines of
grace. The objection is founded,

\(1\) On the difficulty of reconciling the purposes of God with the free
agency of man.

\(2\) it assumes, what cannot be proved, that a plan or purpose of God
must destroy the freedom of man.

\(3\) it is said that if the plan of God is accomplished, then what is
best to be done is done, and, of course, man cannot be blamed. These
objections are met by the apostle in the following argument.

Who hath resisted his will? - That is, who has "successfully opposed"
his will, or frustrated his plan? The word translated "resist" is
commonly used to denote the resistance offered by soldiers or armed men.
Thus, [Eph 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013), "Take unto you the
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand (resist or
successfully oppose) in the evil day:" see [Luk
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#015), "I will give you a mouth and
wisdom which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay or
resist;" see also [Act 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#010); [Act
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#008), "But Elymas ...withstood them,
etc." The same Greek word, [Rom 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#002);
[Gal 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011). This does not mean that no
one has offered resistance or opposition to God, but that no one has
done it successfully. God had accomplished his purposes "in spite of"
their opposition. This was an established point in the sacred writings,
and one of the admitted doctrines of the Jews. To establish it had even
been a part of the apostle's design; and the difficulty now was to see
how, this being admitted, people could be held chargeable with crime.
That it was the doctrine of the Scriptures, see [Ch2
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#006), "In thine hand "is there not"
power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee?" [Dan
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#035), "he doeth according to his will
in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth, and none
can stay his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou?" See also the case
of Joseph and his brethren, [Gen
50:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#020), "As for you, ye thought evil
against me, but God meant it unto good."

[Romans 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 9:20</span></span>

Nay but, O man ... - To this objection the apostle replies in two ways;
first, by asserting the sovereignty of God, and affirming that he had a
right to do it [Rom 9:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020); and
secondly, by showing that he did it according to the principles of
justice and mercy, or that it was involved of necessity in his
dispensing justice and mercy to mankind; [Rom
9:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022).

Who art thou ... - Paul here strongly reproves the impiety and
wickedness of arraigning God. This impiety appears,

\(1\) Because man is a creature of arraigning God. This impiety appears,
Because man is a creature of God, and it is improper that he should
arraign his Maker.

\(2\) he is unqualified to understand the subject. "Who art thou?" What
qualifications has a creature of a day, a being just in the infancy of
his existence; of so limited faculties; so perverse, blinded, and
interested as man, to sit in judgment on the doings of the Infinite
Mind? Who gave him the authority, or invested him with the prerogatives
of a judge over his Maker's doings?

\(3\) even if man were qualified to investigate those subjects, what
right has he to reply against God, to arraign him, or to follow out a
train of argument tending to involve his Creator in shame and disgrace?
No where is there to be found a more cutting or humbling reply to the
pride of man than this. And on no subject was it more needed. The
experience of every age has shown that this has been a prominent topic
of objection against the government of God; and that there has been no
point in the Christian theology to which the human heart has been so
ready to make objections as to the doctrine of the sovereignty of God.

Repliest against God - Margin, "Answerest again; or, disputest with
God." The passage conveys the idea of answering again; or of arguing to
the dishonor of God. It implies that when God declares his will, man
should be still. God has his own plans of infinite wisdom, and it is not
ours to reply against him, or to arraign him of injustice, when we
cannot see the reason of his doings.

Shall the thing formed ... - This sentiment is found in [Isa
29:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#016); see also [Isa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#009). It was especially proper to
adduce this to a Jew. The objection is one which is supposed to be made
by a Jew, and it was proper to reply to him by a quotation from his own
Scriptures. Any being has a right to fashion his work according to his
own views of what is best; and as this right is not denied to people, we
ought not to blame the infinitely wise God for acting in a similar way.
They who have received every blessing they enjoy from him, ought not to
blame him for not making them different.

[Romans 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 9:21</span></span>

Hath not the potter ... - This same sovereign right of God the apostle
proceeds to urge from another illustration, and another passage from the
Old Testament; [Isa 64:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#008), "But now, O
Lord, thou art our Father; we are the clay, and thou our potter; and we
all are the work of thy hand." This passage is preceded in Isaiah by one
declaring "the depravity of man;" [Isa
64:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#006), "We are all as an unclean thing,
and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; and we all do fade as a
leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away." As they
were polluted with sin, as they had transgressed the Law of God, and had
no claim and no merit, God might bestow his favors as he pleased, and
mould them as the potter did the clay. He would do no injury to those
who were left, and "who had no claim to his mercy," if he bestowed
favors on others, any more than the potter would do injustice to one
part of the mass, if he put it to an ignoble use, and moulded another
part into a vessel of honor.

This is still the condition of sinful people. God does no injustice to a
man if he leaves him to take his own course to ruin, and makes another,
equally undeserving, the recipient of his mercy. He violated none of my
rights by not conferring on me the talents of Newton or of Bacon; or by
not placing me in circumstances like those of Peter and Paul. Where all
are undeserving, the utmost that can be demanded is that he should not
treat them with injustice. And this is secured even in the case of the
lost. No man will suffer more than he deserves; nor will any man go to
perdition feeling that he has "a claim" to better treatment than he
receives. The same sentiment is found in [Jer
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#006), "O house of Israel, cannot I do
with you as this potter? saith the Lord. Behold, as the clay is in the
potter's hand, so are ye in my hand, O house of Israel. At what instant
I shall speak concerning a nation, etc."

The passage in Isaiah proves that God has the right of a sovereign over
guilty individuals; that in Jeremiah, that he has the same right over
nations; thus meeting the whole case as it was in the mind of the
apostle. These passages, however, assert only the right of God to do it,
without affirming anything about the manner in which it is done. In
fact, God bestows his favors in a mode very different from that in which
a potter moulds his clay. God does not create holiness by a mere act of
power, but he produces it in a manner consistent with the moral agency
of people; and bestows his favors not to compel people, but to incline
them to be willing to receive them; [Psa
110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003), "Thy people shall be willing in
the day of thy power." It should be further remarked, that the argument
of the apostle here does not refer to "the original creation" of people,
as if God had then made them one for honor and another for dishonor. He
refers to man as fallen and lost. His argument is this: "Man is in
ruins: he is fallen; he has no claim on God; all deserve to die; on this
mass, where none have any claim, he may bestow life on whom he pleases,
without injury to others; he may exercise the right of a sovereign to
pardon whom he pleases; or of a potter to mould any part of the useless
mass to purposes of utility and beauty."

Potter - One whose occupation it is to make earthen vessels.

Power - This word denotes here not merely "physical power," but
authority, right; see [Mat 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#029),
translated "authority;" [Mat 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#023);
[Th2 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#009); [Mar
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#010); [Luk
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#024), "The Son of man hath power on
earth to forgive sins, etc."

Lump - Mass. It denotes anything that is reduced to a fine consistency,
and mixed, and made soft by water; either clay, as in this place, or the
mass produced of grain pounded and mixed with water; [Rom
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016), "If the first-fruit be holy,
the lump is also holy;" [Co1 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#006),
"Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump?"

One vessel - A cup, or other utensil, made of clay.

Unto honour - Fitted to an honorable use, or designed for a more useful
and refined purpose.

Unto dishonour - To a meaner service, or more common use. This is a
common mode of expression among the Hebrews. The lump here denotes the
mass of people, sinners, having no claim on God. The potter illustrates
God's right over that mass, to dispose of it as seems good in his sight.
The doctrine of the passage is, that people have no right to complain if
God bestows his blessings where and when he chooses.

[Romans 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 9:22</span></span>

What if God ... - If God does what the apostle supposes, what then? Is
it not right? This is the second point in the answer to the objection in
[Rom 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#019). The answer has respect to
the "two classes" of people which actually exist on the earth - the
righteous and the wicked. And the question is, whether "in regard to
these two classes God does in fact do wrong?" If he does not, then the
doctrine of the apostle is established, and the objection is not valid.
It is assumed here, as it must be, that the world is "in fact" divided
into two classes - saints and sinners. The apostle considers the case of
sinners in [Rom 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022).

Willing - Being disposed; having an inclination to. It denotes an
inclination of mind toward the thing proposed. If the thing itself was
right; if it was proper to "show his wrath," then it was proper to be
willing to do it. If it is right to do a thing, it is right to purpose
or intend to do it.

His wrath - τὴν ὀργὴν tēn orgēn. This word occurs thirty-five times in
the New Testament. Its meaning is derived from the idea of earnestly
desiring or reaching for an object, and properly denotes, in its general
sense, a vehement desire of attaining anything. Hence, it comes to
denote an earnest desire of revenge, or of inflicting suffering on those
who have injured us; [Eph 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#031), "Let
all bitterness and wrath, etc." [Col
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#008); [Ti1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008). Hence, it denotes indignation in
general, which is not joined with a desire of revenge; [Mar
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#005), "He looked round about on them
with anger." It also denotes punishment for sin; the anger or
displeasure of God against transgression; Note, [Rom
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018); [Luk
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#007); [Luk
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#023), etc. In this place it is
evidently used to denote "severe displeasure against sin."sin is an evil
of so great magnitude, "it is right" for God to be willing to evince his
displeasure against it; and just in proportion to the extent of the
evil. This displeasure, or wrath, it is proper that God should always be
willing to show; nay, it would not be right for him not to show it, for
that would be the same thing as to be indifferent to it, or to approve
it. In this place, however, it is not affirmed,

\(1\) That God has any pleasure in sin, or its punishment; nor,

\(2\) That he exerted any agency to compel man to sin. It affirms only
that God is willing to show his hatred of incorrigible and
long-continued wickedness when it actually exists.

To make his power known - This language is the same as what was used in
relation to Pharaoh; [Rom 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017); [Exo
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016). But it is not probable that the
apostle intended to confine it to the Egyptians only. In the following
verse he speaks of "the vessels of mercy prepared "unto glory;" which
cannot be supposed to be language adapted to the temporal deliverance of
the Jews. The case of Pharaoh was "one instance, or illustration" of the
general principle on which God would deal with people. His government is
conducted on great and uniform principles; and the case of Pharaoh was a
development of the great laws on which he governs the universe.

Endured - Bore with; was patient, or forbearing; [Rev
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#003). "And hast borne, and hast
patience, etc." [Co1 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#007), "charity,
(love) beareth all things." [Luk 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#007),
"will not God avenge his elect. though he bear long with theme?"

With much long-suffering - With much patience. He suffered them to live
while they deserved to die. God bears with all sinners with much
patience; he spares them amid all their provocations, to give them
opportunity of repentance; and though they are suited for destruction,
yet he prolongs their lives, and offers them pardon, and loads them with
benefits. This fact is a complete vindication of the government of God
from the aspersions of all his enemies.

Vessels of wrath - The word "vessel" means a cup, etc. made of earth. As
the human body is frail, easily broken and destroyed, it comes to
signify also the body. [Co2 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007); "we
have this treasure in earthen vessels." [Th1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#004), "that everyone of you should know
how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honor" - that everyone
should keep his body from the indulgence of unlawful passions; compare
[Rom 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003). Hence, also it means "the
man himself." [Act 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015), "he is a
chosen vessel unto me, etc." compare [Isa
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#005). In this place there is
doubtless, allusion to what he had just said of clay in the hands of the
potter. The phrase "vessels of wrath" denotes wicked people against whom
it is fit or proper that wrath should be shown; as Judas is called "the
son of perdition," see the note at [Joh
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012). This does not mean that people
by their very creation, or their physical nature, are thus denominated;
but people who, from long continuance in iniquity, deserve to experience
wrath; as Judas was not called "son of perdition" by any arbitrary
appointment, or as an original designation, but because in consequence
of his avarice and treason this was the name which "in fact" actually
described him, or suited his case.

Fitted - κατηρτισμένα katērtismena. This word properly means to
"restore; to place in order; to render complete; to supply a defect; to
fit to, or adapt to, or prepare for;" see [Mat
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#021), "Were mending their nets." [Gal
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001), "restore such an one, etc." In
this place it is a participle, and means those who are suited for or
"adapted to" destruction; those whose characters are such as to deserve
destruction, or as to make destruction proper. See the same use of the
word in [Heb 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#003), "Through faith we
understand that the worlds were framed" - beautifully suited up in
proper proportions, one part adapted to another - "by the Word of God."
[Heb 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005), "a body hast thou prepared
for me;" suited, or adapted to me; compare [Psa
68:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#010); [Psa
74:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#016). In this place there is not the
semblance of a declaration that "God had prepared them, or fitted them
for destruction." It is a simple declaration that they were in fact
suited for it, without making an affirmation about the manner in which
they became so.

A reader of the English Bible may, perhaps, sometimes draw the
impression that God had suited them for this. But this is not affirmed;
and there is an evident design in not affirming it, and a distinction
made between them and the vessels of mercy which ought to be regarded.
In relation to the latter it is expressly affirmed that God suited or
prepared them for glory; see [Rom
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#023), "Which he had afore prepared
unto glory." The same distinction is remarkably striking in the account
of the last judgment in [Mat 25:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034),
[Mat 25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041). To the righteous, Christ
will say, "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared
for you, etc." To the wicked, "Depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels;" not said to
have been originally prepared "for them." It is clear, therefore, that
God intends to keep the great truth in view, that he prepares his people
"by direct agency" for heaven; but that he exerts "no such agency" in
preparing the wicked for destruction.

For destruction - εἰς ἀπώλειαν eis apōleian. This word occurs in the New
Testament no less than 20 times; [Mat
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013), "Which leadeth to destruction."
[Joh 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012), "son of perdition." [Act
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#020), "thy money perish with thee;"
Greek, be for destruction with thee, [Act
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#016); [Phi
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#028), "Token of perdition." [Phi
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019), "whose end is destruction." [Th2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003), "the son of perdition." [Ti1
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#009), "which drown men in destruction
and perdition." [Heb 10:39](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#039), "which
draw back into perdition; see also [Pe2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001), [Pe2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#003); [Pe2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#007), [Pe2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#016), etc. In these places it is clear
that the reference is to the future punishment of wicked people, and in
"no instance" to national calamities. No such use of the word is to be
found in the New Testament; and this is further clear from the contrast
with the word "glory" in the next verse. We may remark here, that if
people are suited or prepared for destruction; if future torment is
adapted to them, and they to it; if it is fit that they should be
subjected to it; then God will do what is fit or right to be done, and,
unless they repent, they must perish. Nor would it be right for God to
take them to heaven as they are; to a place for which they are not
suited, and which is not adapted to their feelings, their character, or
their conduct.

[Rom 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#023)

And that he might make known - That he might manifest or display. The
apostle had shown (in [Rom 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022)) that
the dealings of God toward the wicked were not liable to the objection
made in [Rom 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#019). In this verse he
proceeds to show that the objection could not lie against his dealings
with the other class of people - the righteous. If his dealings toward
neither were liable to the objection, then he has "met the whole case,"
and the divine government is vindicated. This he proves by showing that
for God to show the riches of his glory toward those whom he has
prepared for it, cannot be regarded as unjust.

The riches of his glory - This is a form of expression common among the
Hebrews, meaning the same as his rich or "his abundant glory." The same
expression occurs in [Eph 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018).

On the vessels of mercy - People toward whom his mercy was to be
displayed (see [Rom 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022)); that is, on
those toward whom he has purposed to display his mercy.

Mercy - Favor, or pity shown to the miserable. Grace is favor to the
undeserving; mercy, favor to those in distress. This distinction is not,
however, always strictly observed by the sacred writers.

Which he had afore prepared - We are here brought to a remarkable
difference between God's mode of dealing with them and with the wicked.
Here it is expressly affirmed that God himself had prepared them for
glory. In regard to the wicked, it is simply affirmed that they "were
fitted" for destruction, without affirming anything of the agency by
which it was done. That God prepares his people for glory - commences
and continues the work of their redemption - is abundantly taught in the
Scriptures; [Th1 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#009), "God hath
appointed us, to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ." [Ti2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009), "who hath saved us and called us
with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his
own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the
world began." See also [Eph 1:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004),
[Eph 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#011); [Rom
8:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028); [Act
13:48](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#048); [Joh
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013). As the renewing of the heart and
the sanctifying of the soul is an act of goodness, it is worthy of God,
and of course no objection could lie against it. No man could complain
of a course of dealings designed to make people better; and as this is
the sole design of the electing love of God, his deal, ings with this
class of people are easily vindicated. No Christian can complain that
God has chosen him, renewed him, and made him pure and happy. And as
this was an important part of the plan of God, it is easily defended
from the objection in [Rom 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#019).

Unto glory - To happiness; and especially to the happiness of heaven
[Heb 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010), "It became him, in bringing
many sons unto glory, etc." [Rom 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#002),
"we rejoice in hope of the glory of God." [Co2
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017), "our light affliction worketh
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory," [Th2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#014); [Ti2
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#010); [Pe1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#004). This eternal state is called
"glory," because it blends together everything that constitutes honor,
dignity, purity, love, and happiness. All these significations are in
various places attached to this word, and all mingle in the eternal
state of the righteous. We may remark here,

\(1\) That this word "glory" is not used in the Scriptures to denote any
"external national privileges;" or to describe any external call of the
gospel. No such instance is to be found. Of course the apostle here by
vessels of mercy meant individuals destined to eternal life, and not
nations externally called to the gospel. No instance can be found where
God speaks of nations called to external privileges, and speaks of them
as "prepared unto glory."

\(2\) as this word refers to the future state of individuals, it shows
what is meant by the word "destruction" in [Rom
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022). That term stands contrasted with
glory; and describes, therefore, the future condition of individual
wicked people. This is also its uniform meaning in the New Testament.

On this vindication of the apostle we may observe:

\(1\) That all people will be treated as they ought to be treated.
People will be dealt with according to their characters at the end of
life.

\(2\) if people will suffer no injustice, then this is the same as
saying that they will be treated justly. But what is this? That the
wicked shall be treated as they deserve. What they deserve God has told
us in the Scriptures. "These shall go away into everlasting punishment."

\(3\) God has a right to bestow his blessings as he chooses. Where all
are undeserving, where none have any claim, he may confer his favors on
whom he pleases.

\(4\) he actually does deal with people in this way. The apostle takes
this for granted. He does not deny it. He most evidently believes it,
and labors to show that it is right to do so. If he did not believe it,
and meant to teach it, he would have said so. It would have met the
objection at once, and saved all argument. He reasons as if he did
believe it; and this settles the question that the doctrine is true.

[Romans 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rom 9:24</span></span>

Even us ... - See [Rom 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016); [Rom
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#010); [Rom
3:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#029). To prove that the Gentiles
might be called as well as the Jews, was a leading design of the
Epistle.

Us - Christians, selected from both Jews and Gentiles. This proves that
he did not refer to nations primarily, but to individuals chosen out of
nations. Two things are established here.

\(1\) that the grace of God was not confined to the Jewish people, as
they supposed, so that it could be conferred on no others.

\(2\) that God was not bound to confer grace on all the descendants of
Abraham, as he bestowed it on those selected from the mass, according to
his own will, and not of necessity "on the mass" itself.

[Romans 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 9:25</span></span>

As he saith also - The doctrine which he had established, he proceeds
now to confirm by quotations from the writings of Jews, that he might
remove every objection. The doctrine was,

\(1\) That God intended to call his people from the Gentiles as well as
the Jews.

\(2\) that he was bound by no promise and no principle of obligation to
bestow salvation on all the Jews.

\(3\) that, therefore, it was right for him to reject any or all of the
Jews, if he chose, and cut them off from their privileges as a people
and from salvation.

In Osee - This is the Greek form of writing the Hebrew word Hosea. It
means in the book of Hosea, as "in David" means in the book of David, or
by David, [Heb 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#007). The passage is
found in [Hos 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023). This quotation is
not made according to the letter, but the sense of the prophet is
preserved. The meaning is the same in Hosea and in this place, that God
would bring those into a covenant relation to himself, who were before
deemed outcasts and strangers. Thus, he supports his main position that
God would choose his people from among the Gentiles as well as the Jews,
or would exercise toward both his right as a sovereign, bestowing or
withholding his blessings as he pleases.

[Romans 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rom 9:26</span></span>

And it shall come to pass - It shall happen, or take place. This is a
continuation of the quotation from the prophet Hosea [Hos
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010), designed to confirm the doctrine
which he was establishing. Both these quotations have the same design,
and are introduced for the same end. In Hosea they did not refer to the
calling of the Gentiles, but to the recalling the rejected Jews. God
says, after the Jews had been rejected and scattered for their idolatry;
after they had forfeited his favor, and been cast off as if they were
not his people; he would recall them, and bestow on them again the
appellation of sons. The apostle does not quote this as having original
reference to the Gentiles, but for the following purposes:

\(1\) If God formerly purposed to recall to himself a people whom he had
rejected; if he bestowed favors on his own people after they had
forfeited his favor, and ceased to be entitled to the name of "his
people:" then the same thing was not to be regarded as absurd if he
dealt in a similar manner with the Gentiles - also a part of his
original great family, the family of man, but long since rejected and
deemed strangers.

\(2\) the dealings of God toward the Jews in the time of Hosea settled
"a general principle of government." His treatment of them in this
manner was a part of his great plan of governing the world. On the same
plan he now admitted the Gentiles to favor. And as this "general
principle" was established; as the history of the Jews themselves was a
precedent in the case, it ought not to be objected in the time of Paul
that the "same principle" should be carried out to meet the case also of
the Gentiles.

In the place - The place where they may be scattered, or where they may
dwell. Or rather, perhaps, in those nations which were not regarded as
the people of God, there shall be a people to whom this shall apply.

Where it was said unto them - Where the proper appellation of the people
was, that they were not the people of God; where they were idolatrous,
sinful, aliens, strangers; so that they had none of the marks of the
children of God.

Ye are not my people - People in covenant with God; under his
protection, as their Sovereign, and keeping his laws.

There shall they be called - That is, there they "shall be." The verb to
call in the Hebrew writings means often the same as "to be." It denotes
that this shall be the appellation which properly expresses their
character. It is a figure perhaps almost unique to the Hebrews; and it
gives additional interest to the case. Instead of saying coldly and
abstractedly, "they are such," it introduces also the idea that such is
the "favorable judgment" of God in the case; see [Mat
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009), "Peace-makers ...shall be called
the children of God;" see the note on that place; also [Rom
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#019); [Mat
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#013), "My house shall "be called" the
house of prayer;" [Mar 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#017); [Luk
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032), [Luk
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035), [Luk
1:76](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#076); [Isa
56:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007).

The children of ... - Greek, Sons; see the note at [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001).

Living God - Called living God in opposition to dead idols; see the [Mat
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016) note; also [Mat
26:63](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#063) note; [Joh
6:69](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#069) note; [Act
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#015) note; [Th1
1:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001) is a most honorable and
distinguished appellation. No higher favor can be conferred on mortals
than "to be" the sons of the living God; members of his family; entitled
to his protection; and secure of his watch and care. This was an object
of the highest desire with the saints of old; see [Psa
42:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#002); [Psa
84:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#002)," My soul thirsteth for God, the
living God;" "My heart and my flesh cry out for the living God."

[Romans 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rom 9:27</span></span>

Esaias - The Greek way of writing the word "Isaiah."

Crieth - [Isa 10:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022). Exclaims, or
speaks aloud or openly: compare [Joh
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015). Isaiah brings forth the doctrine
fully, and without any concealment or disguise. This doctrine related to
the rejection of the Jews; a far more difficult point to establish than
was that of the calling of the Gentiles. It was needful, therefore, to
fortify it by some explicit passage of the Scriptures.

Concerning Israel - Concerning "the Jews." It is probable that Isaiah
had reference primarily to the Jews of his own time; to that wicked
generation that God was about to punish, by sending them captive into
other lands. The case was one, however, which settled a "general
principle of the Jewish government;" and, therefore, it was applicable
to the case before the apostle. If the thing for which he was contending
- that the Jews might be rejected existed in the time of Isaiah, and was
settled then as a precedent, it might exist also in his time, and under
the gospel.

As the sand of the sea - This expression is used to denote an indefinite
or an innumerable multitude. It often occurs in the sacred writings. In
the infancy of society, before the art of numbering was carried to a
great extent, people were obliged to express themselves very much in
this manner, [Gen 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017), "I will
multiply thy seed ...as the sand which is upon the seashore;" [Isa
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#012), Isaiah doubtless had reference
to this promise; "Though all that was promised to Abraham shall be
fulfilled, and his seed shall be as numerous as God declared, yet a
remnant only, etc." The apostle thus shows that his doctrine does not
conflict at all with the utmost expectation of the Jews drawn from the
promises of God; see a similar use of the term "sand" in [Jdg
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#012); [Sa1
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#005); [Sa2
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#011), etc. In the same manner great
numbers were denoted by the stars of heaven, [Gen
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017); [Gen
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005).

A remnant shall be saved - Meaning a remnant only. This implies that
great multitudes of them would be "cast off," and "be not saved." If
only a remnant was to be saved, many must be lost; and this was just the
point which the apostle was endeavoring to establish. The word "remnant"
means what is left, particularly what may remain after a battle or a
great calamity, [Kg2 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#031); [Kg2
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#011); [Jdg
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#011); [Isa
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#022). In this place, however, it
means a small part or portion. Out of the great multitude there shall be
so few left as to make it proper to say that it was a mere remnant. This
implies, of course, that the great mass should be cast away or rejected.
And this was the use which the apostle intended to make of it; compare
the Wisdom of Sirach, xliv. 17, "Noah ...was left unto the earth as a
remnant when the flood came."

Shall be saved - Shall be preserved or kept from destruction. As Isaiah
had reference to the captivity of Babylon. this means that only a
remnant should return to their native land. The great mass should be
rejected and cast off. This was the case with the ten tribes, and also
with many others who chose to remain in the land of their captivity The
use which the apostle makes of it is this: In the history of the Jews,
by the testimony of Isaiah, a large part of the Jews of that time were
rejected, and cast off from being the special people of God. It is
clear, therefore, that God has brought himself under no obligation to
save all the descendants of Abraham. This case settles the principle. If
God did it then, it was equally consistent for him to do it in the time
of Paul, under the gospel. The conclusion, therefore, to which the
apostle came, that it was the intention of God to reject and cast off
the Jews as a people, was in strict accordance with their own history
and the prophecies. It was still true that a remnant was to be saved,
while the great mass of the people was rejected. The apostle is not to
be understood here as affirming that the passage in Isaiah had reference
to the gospel, but only that "it settled one great principle of the
divine administration in regard to the Jews, and that their rejection
under the gospel was strictly in accordance with that principle."

[Rom 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#028)

He will finish the work - This is taken from the Septuagint translation
of [Isa 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#023). The Hebrew is, "The
Lord God of hosts shall make a consumption, even determined, in the
midst of all the land." Or, as it may be rendered, "Destruction is
decreed which shall make justice overflow; yea, destruction is verily
determined on; the Lord Yahweh will execute it in the midst of all the
land." (Stuart.) The Septuagint and the apostle adhere to "the sense" of
the passage, but do not follow the words. The phrase, "will finish the
work," means "he will bring the thing to an end," or will accomplish it.
It is an expression applicable to a firm purpose to accomplish an
object. It refers here to his threat of cutting off the people; and
means that he will fulfil it.

Cut it short - This word here means to "execute it speedily." The
destruction shall not be delayed.

In righteousness - So as to manifest his own justice. The work, though
apparently severe, yet shall be a just expression of God's abhorrence of
the sins of the people.

Because a short work - The word here rendered "short" means properly
that which is "determined on or decreed." This is the sense of the
Hebrew; and the phrase here denotes "the purpose which was determined
on" in relation to the Jews.

Upon the earth - Upon the land of Israel; see the notes at [Mat
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#004); [Mat
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#008). The design for which the apostle
introduces this passage is to show that God of old destroyed many of the
Jews for their sin; and that, therefore, the doctrine of the apostle was
no new thing, that "the Jews" might be excluded from the special
privileges of the children of God.

[Romans 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">rom 9:29</span></span>

And as Esaias said - [Isa 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009).

Before - The apostle had just cited one prediction from the tenth
chapter of Isaiah. He now says that Isaiah had affirmed the same thing
in a previous part of his prophecy.

Except the Lord of Sabaoth - In Isaiah, the Lord of Hosts. The word
"Sabaoth" is the Hebrew word rendered "hosts" (armies). It properly
denotes armies or military hosts organized for war. Hence, it denotes
the "hosts of heaven," and means:

\(1\) "The angels" who are represented as marshalled or arranged into
military orders; [Eph 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021); [Eph
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010); [Eph
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012); [Col
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016); [Col
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015); [Jde
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#006); [Kg1
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#019), "I saw the Lord sitting on his
throne, and all the host of heaven standing by him;" [Psa
103:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#021); [Psa
148:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#002).

\(2\) the stars; [Jer 33:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#022), "As the
host of heaven cannot be numbered, etc." [Isa
40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026); [Deu
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#019), etc. God is called the Lord of
hosts, as being at the head of all these armies; their King and their
Commander. It is a phrase properly expressive of his majesty and power,
and is appropriately introduced here, as the "act of saving" "the seed"
was a signal "act of power" in the midst of great surrounding
wickedness.

Had left - Had preserved, or kept from destruction. Here their
preservation is ascribed to God, and it is affirmed that if God had not
interposed, "the whole nation" would have been cut off. This fully
establishes the doctrine of the apostle, that God might cast off the
Jews, and extend the blessings to the Gentiles.

A seed - The Hebrew in Isaiah means "one surviving or escaping,"
corresponding with the word "remnant." The word "seed" commonly means in
the Scriptures "descendants, posterity." In this place it means "a part,
a small portion; a remnant," like the small portion of the harvest which
is reserved for sowing.

We had been as Sodoma - The nation was so wicked, that unless God had
preserved a small number who were pious from the general corruption of
the people, they would have been swept off by judgment, like Sodom and
Gomorrah. We are told that ten righteous men would have saved Sodom;
[Gen 18:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#032). Among the Israelites, in a
time of great general depravity, a small number of holy men were found
who preserved the nation. The design of the apostle here was the same as
in the previous verses - to show that it was settled in the Jewish
history that God might cast off the people, and reject them from
enjoying the special privileges of his friends. It is true that in
Isaiah he has reference to the temporal punishments of the Jews. But it
settles "a great principle," for which Paul was contending, that God
might cast off the nation consistently with his promises and his plans.
We may learn here,

\(1\) That the existence of religion among a people is owing to the love
of God. "Except the Lord "had left us, etc."

\(2\) it is owing to his mercy that "any men" are kept from sin, and any
nation from destruction.

\(3\) we see the value of religion and of pious people in a nation. Ten
such would have saved Sodom; and a few such saved Judea; compare [Mat
5:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013).

\(4\) God has aright to withdraw his mercies from any other people,
however exalted their privileges, and leave them to ruin; and we should
not be high-minded, but fear; Rom, [Mat
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#020).

[Romans 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">rom 9:30</span></span>

What shall we say then? - What conclusion shall we draw from the
previous train of remarks? To what results have we come by the passages
adduced from the Old Testament? This question is asked preparatory to
his summing up the argument; and he had so stated the argument that the
conclusion which he was about to draw was inevitable.

The Gentiles - That many of the Gentiles; or that the way was open for
them, and many of them "had actually" embraced the righteousness of
faith. This Epistle was written as late as the year 57 (see
Introduction), and at that time multitudes of pagans had embraced the
Christian religion.

Which followed not after righteousness - The apostle does not mean that
none of the pagans had any solicitude about right and wrong, or that
there were no anxious inquiries among them; but he intends particularly
to place them in contrast with the Jew. They had not made it their main
object to justify themselves; they were not filled with prejudice and
pride as the Jews were, who supposed that they had complied with the
Law, and who felt no need of any other justification; they were sinners,
and they felt it, and had no such mighty obstacle in a system of
self-righteousness to overcome as the Jew had. Still it was true that
they were excessively wicked, and that the prevailing characteristic
among them was that they did not follow after righteousness; see Rom. 1.
The word "followed" here often denotes to pursue with intense energy, as
a hunter pursues his game, or a man pursues a flying enemy. The Jews had
sought righteousness in that way; the Gentiles had not. The word
"righteousness" here means the same as justification. The Gentiles,
which sought not justification, have obtained justification.

Have attained to righteousness - Have become justified. This was a
matter of fact; and this was what the prophet had predicted. The apostle
does not say that the sins of the Gentiles, or their indifference to the
subject, was any reason why God justified them, or that people would be
as safe in sin as in attempting to seek for salvation. He establishes
the doctrine, indeed, that God is a sovereign; but still it is implied
that the gospel did not have the special obstacle to contend with among
the Gentiles that it had among the Jews. There was less pride,
obstinacy, self-confidence; and people were more easily brought "to see"
that they were sinners, and to feel their need of a Saviour. Though God
dispenses his favors as a sovereign, and though all are opposed by
nature to the gospel, yet it is always true that the gospel finds more
obstacles among some people than among others. This was a most cutting
and humbling doctrine to the pride of a Jew; and it is no wonder,
therefore, that the apostle guarded it as he did.

Which is of faith - Justification by faith in Christ; see the note at
[Rom 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017).

[Romans 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">rom 9:31</span></span>

But Israel - The Jews. The apostle does not mean to affirm that none of
the Jews had obtained mercy, but that "as a people," or acting according
to the prevalent principles of the nation to work out their own
righteousness, they had not obtained it.

Which followed after the law of righteousness - The phrase, "the law of
righteousness," means the law of justice, or "the just law." That Law
demands perfect purity; and even its external observance demanded
holiness. The Jews supposed that they rendered such obedience to that
Law as to constitute "a meritorious" ground of justification. This they
had "followed after," that is, pursued zealously and unremittingly. The
reason why they did not obtain justification in that way is fully stated
in Rom. 1-3 where it is shown that the Law demands perfect compliance
with its precepts; and that Jews, as well as Gentiles, had altogether
failed in rendering such compliance.

Hath not attained to the law of righteousness - They have not come to
yield true obedience to the Law, even though imperfect; not such
obedience as to give evidence that they have been justified. We may
remark here,

\(1\) That no conclusion could have been more humbling to a Jew than
this. It constituted the whole of the prevalent religion, and was the
object of their incessant toils.

\(2\) as they made the experiment fully, and failed: as they had the
best advantages for it, and did not succeed, but reared only a miserable
and delusive system of self-righteousness [Phi
3:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#004); it follows, that all similar
experiments must fail, and that none now can be justified by the Law.

\(3\) thousands fail in the same attempt.

They seek to justify themselves before God. They attempt to weave a
righteousness of their own. The moral man does this. The immoral man
attempts it as much as the moral man, and is as confident in his own
righteousness. The troubled sinner does this; and this it is which keeps
him so long from the cross of Christ. All this must be renounced; and
man must come as a poor, lost, ruined sinner, and throw himself upon the
mere mercy of God in Christ for justification and life.

[Romans 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">rom 9:32</span></span>

Wherefore? - Why? The apostle proceeds to state the reason why so
uniform and remarkable a result happened. "They sought it not by faith,
etc." They depended on their own righteousness, and not on the mercy of
God to be obtained by faith.

By the works of the law - By complying with all the demands of the Law
so that they might merit salvation. Their attempted obedience included
their prayers, fastings, sacrifices, etc., as well as compliance with
the demands of the moral law. It may be asked here, perhaps, how the
Jews could know any better than this? how should they know anything
about justification by faith? To this I answer:

\(1\) That the doctrine was stated in the Old Testament; see [Hab
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004); compare [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017); [Psa
32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001); [Psa
130:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#001); [Psa
14:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001); compare Rom. 3; [Job
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#002).

\(2\) the sacrifices had reference to a future state of things, and were
doubt less so understood; see the Epistle to the Hebrews.

\(3\) the "principle" of justification, and of living by faith, had been
fully brought out in the lives and experience of the saints of old; see
Rom. 4 and Heb. 11.

They stumbled - They fell; or failed; or "this was the cause why they"
did not obtain it.

At that stumbling-stone - To wit, at what he specifies in the following
verse. "A stumbling-stone" is a stone or impediment in the path over
which people may fall. Here it means "that obstacle which prevented
their attaining the righteousness of faith; and which was the occasion
of their fall, rejection, and ruin." That was the rejection and the
crucifixion of their own Messiah; their unwillingness to be saved by
him; their contempt of him and his message. For this God withheld from
them the blessings of justification, and was about to cast them off as a
people. This also the apostle proceeds to prove was foretold by the
prophets.

[Romans 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">rom 9:33</span></span>

As it is written - see [Isa 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014); [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016). The quotation here is made up
of both these passages, and contains the substance of both; compare also
[Psa 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022); [Pe1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#006).

Behold I lay in Sion - Mount Sion was the hill or eminence in Jerusalem,
over-against Mount Moriah, on which the temple was built. On this was
the palace of David, and this was the residence of the court; [Ch1
11:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#005). Hence, the whole city was
often called by that name; [Psa 48:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#012);
[Psa 69:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#035); [Psa
87:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#002). Hence, also it came to signify
the capital, the glory of the people of God, the place of solemnities;
and hence, also the church itself; [Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006); [Psa
51:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#018); [Psa
102:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#013); [Psa
137:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#003); [Isa
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#027); [Isa
52:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001); [Isa
59:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#020), etc. In this place it means the
church. God will place or establish in the midst of that church.

A stumblingstone and rock of offence - Something over which people shall
fall; see the note at [Mat 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029). This
is by Paul referred to the Messiah. He is called rock of stumbling, not
because it was the design of sending him that people should fall, but
because such would be the result. The application of the term "rock" to
the Messiah is derived from the custom of building, as he is the
"cornerstone" or the "immovable foundation" on which the church is to be
built. It is not on human merits, but by the righteousness of the
Saviour, that the church is to be reared; see [Pe1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#004)," I lay in Sion "a chief
cornerstone;" [Psa 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022), "The stone
which the builders rejected, is become the head stone of the corner;"
[Eph 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020), "Jesus Christ himself being
the chief cornerstone." This rock, designed as a corner stone to the
church, became, by the wickedness of the Jews, the block over which they
fall into ruin; [Pe1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#008).

Shall not be ashamed - This is taken substantially from the Septuagint
translation of [Isa 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016), though with
some variation. The Hebrew is, "shall not make haste," as it is in our
English version. This is the literal meaning of the Hebrew word; but it
means also "to be afraid;" as one who makes haste often is; to be
agitated with fear or fright; and hence, it has a signification nearly
similar to that of shame. It expresses the substance of the same thing,
namely, "failure of obtaining expected success and happiness." The
meaning here is, that the man who believes shall not be agitated, or
thrown into commotion, by fear of want or success: shall not be
disappointed in his hopes; and, of course, he shall never be ashamed
that he became a Christian. They who do not believe in Christ shall be
agitated, fall, and sink into eternal shame and contempt. [Dan
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002). They who do believe shall be
confident; shall not be deceived, but shall obtain the object of their
desires. It is clear that Paul regarded the passage in Isaiah as
referring to the Messiah. The same also is the case with the other
sacred writers who have quoted it; [Pe1
2:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005); see also [Mat
21:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042); [Luk
20:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#017); [Luk
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034). The ancient Targum of Jonathan
translates the passage, [Isa 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016),
"Lo, I will place in Zion a king, a king strong, mighty and terrible;"
referring doubtless to the Messiah. Other Jewish writings also show that
this interpretation was formerly given by the Jews to the passage in
Isaiah.

In view of this argument of the apostle, we may remark,

\(1\) That God is a sovereign, and has a right to dispose of people as
he pleases.

\(2\) the doctrine of election was manifest in the case of the Jews as
an established principle of the divine government, and is therefore
true.

\(3\) it argues great lack of proper feeling to be opposed to this
doctrine. It is saving, in other words, that we have not confidence in
God; or that we do not believe that he is qualified to direct the
affairs of his own universe as well as we.

\(4\) the doctrine of election is a doctrine which is not arbitrary; but
which will yet be seen to be wise, just, and good. It is the source of
all the blessings that any mortals enjoy; and in the case before us, it
can be seen to be benevolent as well as just. It is better that God
should cast off a part of the small nation of the Jews, and extend these
blessings to the Gentiles, than that they should always have been
confined to Jews. The world is better for it, and more good has come out
of it.

\(5\) the fact that the gospel has been extended to all nations, is
proof that it is from heaven. To a Jew there was no motive to attempt to
break down all the existing institutions of his nation, and make the
blessings of religion common to all nations, unless he knew that the
gospel system was true. Yet the apostles were Jews; educated with all
the prejudices of the Jewish people.

\(6\) the interests of Christians are safe. They shall not be ashamed or
disappointed. God will keep them, and bring them to his kingdom.

\(7\) people still are offended at the cross of Christ. They contemn and
despise him. He is to them as a root out of dry ground, and they reject
him, and fall into ruin. This is the cause why sinners perish; and this
only. Thus, as the ancient Jews brought ruin on themselves and their
country, so do sinners bring condemnation and woe on their souls. And as
the ancient despisers and crucifiers of the Lord Jesus perished, so will
all those who work iniquity and despise him now.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 10](rom010)

</div>
