<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom009)  [Next](rom011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#001)

[Romans 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 10:1</span></span>

Brethren - This expression seems intended particularly for the Jews, his
ancient friends, fellow-worshippers, and kinsmen, but who had embraced
the Christian faith. It is an expression of tenderness and affection,
denoting his deep interest in their welfare.

My heart's desire - The word "desire" εὐδοκία eudokia means benevolence,
and the expression, "my heart's desire," means my earnest and sincere
wish.

Prayer to God - He not only cherished this feeling but he expressed in a
desire to God. He had no desire that his kinsmen should be destroyed; no
pleasure in the appalling doctrine which he had been defending. He still
wished their welfare; and could still pray for them that they might
return to God. Ministers have no pleasure in proclaiming the truth that
people must be lost. Even when they declare the truths of the Bible that
some will be lost; when they are constrained by the unbelief and
wickedness of people to proclaim it of them, they still can sincerely
say that they seek their salvation.

For Israel - For the Jewish nation.

That they might be saved - This clearly refers to salvation from the sin
of unbelief; and the consequences of sin in hell. It does not refer to
the temporal calamities which were coming upon them, but to preservation
from the eternal anger of God; compare [Rom
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026); [Ti1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#004). The reasons why the apostle
commences this chapter in this tender manner are the following.

\(1\) because he had stated and defended one of the most offensive
doctrines that could be preached to a Jew; and he was desirous to show
them that it was not from any lack of affection for them, but that he
was urged to it by the pressure of truth.

\(2\) he was regarded by them as an apostate. He had abandoned them when
bearing their commission, and while on his way to execute their favorite
purposes, and had preached the doctrine which they had sent him to
destroy; compare Acts 9. He had opposed them everywhere; had proclaimed
their pride, self-righteousness, and crime in crucifying their Messiah;
had forsaken all that they valued; their pomp of worship, their city,
and their temple; and had gone to other lands to bear the message of
mercy to the nations that they despised. He was willing to show them
that this proceeded from no lack of affection for them, but that he
still retained toward them the feelings of a Jew, and could give them
credit for much that they valued themselves on, [Rom
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002).

\(3\) he was aware of the deep and dreadful condemnation that was coming
on them. In view of that he expressed his tender regard for their
welfare, and his earnest prayer to God for their salvation. And we see
here the proper feelings of a minister of the gospel when declaring the
most terrible of the truths of the Bible. Paul was tender, affectionate,
kind; convincing by cool argument, and not harshly denouncing; stating
the appalling truth, and then pouring out his earnest desires to God
that he would avert the impending doom. So should the awful doctrines of
religion be preached by all the ambassadors of God.

[Romans 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 10:2</span></span>

For I bear them record - To bear record means to be a witness; to give
evidence. This, Paul was well qualified to do. He had been a Jew of the
strictest order [Act 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#005); [Phi
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#005), and he well knew the
extraordinary exertions which they put forth to obey the commands of the
Law.

A zeal of God - A zeal for God. Thus, [Joh
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#017)," The zeal of thine house hath
eaten me up;" an earnest desire for the honor of the sanctuary has
wholly absorbed my attention; compare [Psa
69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009); [Act
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#020), "Thou seest, brother, how many
thousands of Jews there are which believe, and they are all zealous of
the law;" [Act 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#003), "And was zealous
toward God as ye all are this day." Zeal for God here means passionate
ardor in the things pertaining to God, or in the things of religion. In
this they were, doubtless, many of them sincere; but sincerity does not
of itself constitute true piety; [Joh
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#002), "The time cometh that whosoever
killeth you will think that he doeth God service." This would be an
instance of extraordinary zeal, and in this they would be sincere; but
persecution to death of apostles cannot be true religion; see also [Mat
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#015); [Act
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#009), "I thought that I ought to do,"
etc. So many persons suppose that, provided they are sincere and
zealous, they must of course be accepted of God. But the zeal which is
acceptable is what aims at the glory of God, and which is founded on
true benevolence to the universe; and which does not aim primarily to
establish a system of self-righteousness, as did the Jew, or to build up
our own sect, as many others do. We may remark here, that Paul was not
insensible to what the Jews did, and was not unwilling to give them
credit for it. A minister of the gospel should not be blind to the
amiable qualities of people or to their zeal; and should be willing to
speak of it tenderly, even when he is proclaiming the doctrine of
depravity, or denouncing the just judgments of God.

Not according to knowledge - Not an enlightened, discerning, and
intelligent zeal. Not what was founded on correct views of God and of
religious truth. Such zeal is enthusiasm, and often becomes persecuting.
Knowledge without zeal becomes cold, abstract, calculating, formal; and
may be possessed by devils as well as human beings. It is the union of
the two - the action of the man called forth to intense effort by just
views of truth and by right feeling - that constitutes true religion.
This was the zeal of the Saviour and of the apostles.

[Romans 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 10:3</span></span>

For they being ignorant - The ignorance of the Jews was voluntarily, and
therefore criminal. The apostle does not affirm that they could not have
known what the plan of God was; for he says [Rom
10:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018) that they had full
opportunity of knowing. An attentive study of their own Scriptures would
have led them to the true knowledge of the Messiah and his
righteousness; see [Joh 5:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039); compare
[Isa 53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001), etc. Yet the fact that
they were ignorant, though not an excuse, is introduced here, doubtless,
as a mild and mitigating circumstance, that should take off the severity
of what he might appear to them to be saying; [Ti1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013), "But I obtained mercy because I
did it ignorantly, in unbelief;" [Luk
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034), "Then said Jesus, Father,
forgive them, for they know not what they do;" [Act
7:60](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#060). Involuntary ignorance excuses
from guilt; but ignorance produced by our sin or our indolence is no
excuse for crime.

Of God's righteousness - Not of the personal holiness of God, "but of
God's plan of justifying people, or of declaring them righteous by faith
in his Son;" see the note at [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017). Here God's plan stands opposed
to their efforts to make themselves righteous by their own works.

And seeking to establish ... - Endeavoring to confirm or make valid
their own righteousness; to render it such as to constitute a ground of
justification before God; or to make good their own claims to eternal
life by their merits. This stands opposed to the justification by grace,
or to God's plan. And they must ever be opposed. This was the constant
effort of the Jews; and in this they supposed they had succeeded. see
Paul's experience in [Phi 3:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#004); [Act
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#005). Instances of their belief on
this subject occur in all the gospels, where our Saviour combats their
notions of their own righteousness. See particularly their views and
evasions exposed in Matt. 23; compare [Mat
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020), etc.; [Mat
6:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#002). It was this which mainly
opposed the Lord Jesus and his apostles; and it is this confidence in
their own righteousness, which still stands in the way of the progress
of the gospel among people.

Have not submitted themselves - Confident in their own righteousness.
they have nor yielded their hearts to a plan which requires them to come
confessing that they have no merit, and to be saved by the merit of
another. No obstacle to salvation by grace is so great as the
self-righteousness of the sinner.

Righteousness of God - His plan or scheme of justifying people.

[Romans 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 10:4</span></span>

For Christ - This expression implies faith in Christ. This is the design
of the discussion, to show that justification cannot be obtained by our
own righteousness, but by faith in Christ. As no direct benefit results
to people from Christ unless they believe on him, faith in him is
implied where the word occurs in this connection.

Is the end of the law - The word translated "end" means what completes a
thing, or renders it perfect; also the boundary, issue, or termination
of anything, as the end of life, the result of a prophecy, etc.; [Joh
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001); [Luk
22:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#037). It also means the design or
object which is had in view; the principal purpose for which it was
undertaken; [Ti1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)," The end of the
commandment is charity;" the main design or purpose of the command is to
produce love; [Pe1 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#009), "The end of
your faith, the salvation of your souls;" the main design or purpose of
faith is to secure salvation; [Rom
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009), "To this end Christ both died,"
etc. For this design or purpose. This is doubtless its meaning here.
"The main design or object which the perfect obedience of the Law would
accomplish, is accomplished by faith in Christ." That is, perfect
obedience to the Law would accomplish justification before God, secure
his favor and eternal life. The same end is now accomplished by faith in
Christ. The great design of both is the same; and the same great end is
finally gained. This was the subject of discussion between the apostle
and the Jews; and this is all that is necessary to understand in the
case. Some have supposed that the word "end" refers to the ceremonial
law; that Christ fulfilled it, and brought it to an end. Others, that he
perfectly fulfilled the moral law. And others, that the Law in the end
leads us to Christ, or that its design is to point us to him. All this
is true, but not the truth taught in this passage. That is simple and
plain, that by faith in Christ the same end is accomplished in regard to
our justification, that would be by perfect obedience to the moral law.

For righteousness - Unto justification with God.

To every ... - See the note at [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017).

[Romans 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 10:5</span></span>

For Moses describeth ... - This is found in [Lev
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005), "Ye shall therefore keep my
statutes and my judgments, which if a man do he shall live in them."
This appeal is made to Moses, both in regard to the righteousness of the
Law and that of faith, in accordance with the usual manner of Paul to
sustain all his positions by the Old Testament, and to show that he was
introducing no new doctrine. He was only affirming that which had been
long before taught in the writings of the Jews themselves. The word
"describeth" is literally writes γράφει graphei, a word often used in
this sense.

The righteousness ... - The righteousness which a perfect obedience to
the Law of God would produce. That consisted in perfectly doing all that
the Law required.

The man which doeth these things - The man who shall perform or obey
what was declared in the previous statutes. Moses here had reference to
all the commandments which God had given, moral and ceremonial. And the
doctrine of Moses is what pertains to all laws, that he who shall render
perfect and continued compliance with all the statutes made known, shall
receive the reward which the Law promises. This is a first principle of
all law; for all law holds a man to be innocent, and, of course,
entitled to whatever immunities and rewards it has to confer, until he
is proved to be guilty. In this case, however, Moses did not affirm that
in fact any one either had yielded or would yield perfect obedience to
the Law of God. The Scriptures abundantly teach elsewhere that it never
has been done.

Doeth - Obeys, or yields obedience. So also [Mat
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#019), "Shall do and teach them." [Mat
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024), [Mat
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#026), "whosoever heareth these sayings
...and doeth them." [Mat 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003); [Mar
3:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#035); [Mar
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#020); [Luk
6:46-47](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#046), [Luk
6:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#049).

Shall live - Shall obtain felicity. Obedience shall render him happy,
and entitled to the rewards of the obedient. Moses doubtless referred
here to all the results which would follow obedience. The effect would
be to produce happiness in this life and in the life to come. The
principle on which happiness would be conferred, would be the same
whether in this world or the next. The tendency and result of obedience
would be to promote order, health, purity, benevolence; to advance the
welfare of man, and the honor of God, and thus must confer happiness.
The idea of happiness is often in the Scriptures represented by the word
"life"; see the note at [Joh 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024). It
is evident moreover that the Jews understood Moses here as referring to
more than temporal blessings. The ancient Targum of Onkelos renders the
passage in Leviticus thus: "The man who does these things shall live in
them to eternal life." So the Arabic version is, "The retribution of him
who works these things is that he shall live an eternal life."

By them - ἐν αὐτοῖς en autois. In them. In their observance he shall
find happiness. Not simply as a result, or reward, but the very act of
obeying shall carry its own reward. This is the case with all true
religion. This declaration of Moses is still true. If perfect obedience
were rendered, it would, from the nature of the case, confer happiness
and life as long as the obedience was rendered. God would not punish the
innocent. But in this world it never has been rendered, except in the
case of the Lord Jesus; and the consequence is, that the course of man
has been attended with pain, sorrow, and death.

[Romans 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 10:6</span></span>

But the righteousness which is of faith - It is observable here that
Paul does not affirm that Moses describes any where the righteousness by
faith, or the effect of the scheme of justification by faith. His object
was different, to give the Law, and state its demands and rewards. Yet
though he had not formally described the plan of justification by faith,
yet he had used language which would fitly express that plan. The scheme
of justification by faith is here personified, as if it were living and
describing its own effects and nature. One describing it would say, Or
the plan itself speaks in this manner. The words here quoted are taken
from [Deu 30:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011). The original
meaning of the passage is this: Moses, near the end of his life, having
given his commandments to the Israelites exhorts them to obedience. To
do this, he assures them that his commands are reasonable, plain,
intelligible, and accessible.

They did not require deep research, long journeys, or painful toil.
There was no need of crossing seas, and going to other lands, of looking
into the profound mysteries of the high heavens, or the deep abyss; but
they were near them, had been plainly set before them, and were easily
understood. To see the excellency of this characteristic of the divine
Law, it may be observed, that among the ancients, it was not uncommon
for legislators and philosophers to travel to distant countries in
pursuit of knowledge. They left their country, encountered dangers on
the sea and land, to go to distant regions that had the reputation of
wisdom. Egypt was especially a land of such celebrity; and in subsequent
times Pythagoras, and the principal philosophers of Greece, traveled
into that country to converse with their priests, and to bear the fruits
of their wisdom to benefit their native land. And it is not improbable
that this had been done to some extent even in or before the time of
Moses. Moses says that his precepts were to be obtained by no such
painful and dangerous journeys. They were near them, plain, and
intelligible. This is the general meaning of this passage Moses dwells
on the thought, and places it in a variety of forms by the questions,
"who shall go up to heaven for us, etc.;" and Paul regards this as
appropriately describing the language of Christian faith; but without
affirming that Moses himself had any reference in the passage to the
faith of the gospel.

On this wise - In this manner.

Say not in thine heart - The expression to say in the heart is the same
as to think. Do not think, or suppose, that the doctrine is so difficult
to be understood, that one must ascend to heaven in order to understand
it.

Who shall ascend into heaven? - This expression was used among the Jews
to denote any difficult undertaking. To say that it was high as heaven,
or that it was necessary to ascend to heaven to understand it, was to
express the highest difficulty. Thus, [Job
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#007), "Canst thou by searching find
out God? It is high as heaven, what canst thou do? etc." Moses says it
was not so with his doctrine. It was not impossible to be understood,
but was plain and intelligible.

That is, to bring Christ ... - Paul does not here affirm that it was the
original design of Moses to affirm this of Christ. His words related to
his own doctrine. Paul makes this use of the words because,

\(1\) They appropriately expressed the language of faith.

\(2\) if this might be affirmed of the doctrines of Moses, much more
might it of the Christian religion. Religion had no such difficult work
to do as to ascend to heaven to bring down a Messiah. That work was
already accomplished when God gave his Son to become a man, and to die.

To save man it was indeed indispensable that Christ should have come
down from heaven. But the language of faith was that this had already
been done. Probably the word "Christ" here includes all the benefits
mentioned in [Rom 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004) as resulting
from the work of Christ.

[Romans 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 10:7</span></span>

Or who shall descend into the deep? - These words are also a part of the
address of Moses, [Deu 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#013). But it
is not literally quoted. The Hebrew is, "Neither is it beyond the sea,
that thou shouldst say, Who shall go over the sea for us, etc." The
words of the quotation are changed, but not the sense; and it is to be
remembered that Paul is not professing to quote the words of Moses, but
to "express the language of faith;" and this he does mainly by words
which Moses had used, which also expressed his meaning. The words as
used by Moses refer to what is remote, and therefore difficult to be
obtained. To cross the sea in the early times of navigation involved the
highest difficulty, danger, and toil. The sea which was in view was
doubtless the Mediterranean, but the crossing of that was an enterprise
of the greatest difficulty, and the regions beyond that were regarded as
being at a vast distance.

Hence, it is spoken of as being the widest object with which they were
acquainted, and the fairest illustration of infinity, [Job
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#009). In the same sense Paul uses the
word "deep," ἄβυσσον abusson - "the abyss." This word is applied to
anything the depth or bottom of which is not known. It is applied to the
ocean (in the Septuagint), [Job 41:31](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#031),
"He maketh the deep to boil as a pot." [Isa
44:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#027), "that saith to the deep, Be
dry, etc." [Gen 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011); [Gen
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#002); to a broad place [Job
36:16](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#016); and to the abyss before the
world was formed, [Gen 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002). In the New
Testament it is not applied to the ocean, unless in the passage [Luk
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#031) (see the note on that place), but
to the abode of departed spirits; and particularly to the dark, deep,
and bottomless pit, where the wicked are to dwell forever. [Rev
9:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#001), "and to him was given the key
of the bottomless pit. And he opened the bottomless pit;" Greek, "The
pit of the abyss."

[Rev 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#007); [Rev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008); [Rev
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001), [Rev
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#003). In these places the word means
the deep, awful regions of the nether world. The word stands opposed to
heaven; as deep as that is high; as dark as that is light; while the one
is as vast as the other. In the place before us it is opposed to heaven;
and to descend there to bring up one, is supposed to be as impossible as
to ascend to heaven to bring one down. Paul does not affirm that Christ
descended to those regions; but he says that there is no such difficulty
in religion as if one were required to descend into those profound
regions to call back a departed spirit. That work was in fact done, when
Jesus was recalled from the dead, and now the work of salvation is easy.
The word "abyss" here, therefore, corresponds to Hades, or the dark
regions of departed spirits.

That is, to bring up Christ ... - Justification by faith had no such
difficult and impossible work to perform as would be an attempt for man
to raise the dead. That would be impossible; but the work of religion is
easy. "Christ, the ground of hope, is not by our efforts to be brought
down from heaven to save us, for that is done; nor by our efforts to be
raised from the dead, for that is done; and what remains for us, that is
to believe, is easy, and is near us." This is the meaning of the whole
passage.

[Romans 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 10:8</span></span>

But what saith it? - That is, what is the language of the doctrine of
justification by faith? Or what is to be done according to that
doctrine?

The word is nigh thee - This is still a use of the language of Moses.
[Deu 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#014). The meaning is, the
doctrine is not difficult to be understood and embraced. What is nigh us
may be easily obtained. What is remote, with difficulty. The doctrine of
Moses and of the gospel was nigh; that is, it was easily obtained,
embraced, and understood.

In thy mouth - This is taken from the Septuagint. [Deu
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#014). The meaning is, that the
doctrine was already so familiar, and so well understood, that it was
actually in their mouth, that is, their language, their common
conversation. Moses had so often inculcated it, that it was understood
and talked about by the people, so that there was no need to search in
distant climes to obtain it. The same was true of the gospel. The facts
were so well known by the preaching of the apostles, that they might be
said to be "in every man's mouth."

In thy heart - The word "heart" is very variously used in the sacred
Scriptures. As used by Moses in this place, it evidently means that his
doctrines were in their mind, or were a subject of meditation and
reflection. They already possessed them, and talked and thought about
them: so that there was no need of going to distant places to learn
them. The same was true of the doctrine requiring faith in Christ. It
was already among them by the preaching of the apostles, and was a
subject of conversation and of thought.

That is - This is the use which the apostle makes of it; not that Moses
referred to the gospel. His language conveys the main idea which Paul
wished to do, that the doctrine was plain and intelligible.

The word of faith - The doctrine which requires faith, that is, the
gospel; compare [Ti1 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#006). The gospel
is called the Word of faith, the Word of God, as being what was spoken,
or communicated by God to man. [Rom
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017); [Heb
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#005); [Heb
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#003).

Which we preach - Which is proclaimed by the apostles, and made known to
Jews and Gentiles. As this was now made known to all, as the apostles
preached it everywhere, it could be said to be nigh them; there was no
need of searching other lands for it, or regarding it as a hidden
mystery, for it was plain and manifest to all. Its simplicity and
plainness he proceeds immediately to state.

[Romans 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 10:9</span></span>

That if thou shalt confess - The word here rendered "confess" ὁμολογέω
homologeō is often rendered "profess"; [Mat
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023), "Then will I profess to them, I
never knew you;" [Tit 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#016); [Tit
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#014); [Rom
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#022); [Ti1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#010); [Ti1
6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#012), [Ti1
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#021); [Heb
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001), etc. It properly means to "speak
what agrees with something which others speak or maintain." Thus,
confession or profession expresses our "agreement or concord with what
God holds to be true, and what he declares to be true." It denotes a
public declaration or assent to that, here expressed by the words "with
thy mouth." A profession of religion then denotes a public declaration
of our agreement with what God has declared, and extends to all his
declarations about our lost estate, our sin, and need of a Saviour; to
his doctrines about his own nature, holiness, and law; about the Saviour
and the Holy Spirit; about the necessity of a change of heart and
holiness of life; and about the grave and the judgment; about heaven and
hell. As the doctrine respecting a Redeemer is the main and leading
doctrine, it is put here by way of eminence, as in fact involving all
others; and publicly to express our assent to this, is to declare our
agreement with God on all kindred truths.

With thy mouth - To profess a thing with the mouth is to speak of it; to
declare it; to do it openly and publicly.

The Lord Jesus - Shalt openly acknowledge attachment to Jesus Christ.
The meaning of it may be expressed by regarding the phrase "the Lord" as
the predicate; or the thing to be confessed is, that he is Lord; compare
[Act 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036); [Phi
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#011), "And that every tongue should
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord." Here it means to acknowledge him as
Lord, that is, as having a right to rule over the soul.

Shalt believe in thy heart - Shalt sincerely and truly believe this, so
that the external profession shall correspond with the real, internal
feelings. Where this is not the case, it would be hypocrisy; where this
is the case, there would be the highest sincerity, and this religion
requires.

That God hath raised him - This fact, or article of Christian belief, is
mentioned here because of its great importance, and its bearing on the
Christian system. If this be true, then all is true. Then it is true
that he came forth from God; that he died for sin; and that God approved
and accepted his work. Then it is true that he ascended to heaven, and
is exalted to dominion over the universe, and that he will return to
judge the quick and the dead. For all this was professed and taught; and
all this was regarded as depending on the truth of his having been
raised from the dead; see [Phi 2:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008);
[Eph 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021); [Act
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024), [Act
2:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#032); [Act
17:31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031); [Co2
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#014); [Co1
15:13-20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#013). To profess this doctrine
was, therefore, virtually to profess all the truths of the Christian
religion. No man could believe this who did not also believe all the
truths dependent on it. Hence, the apostles regarded this doctrine as so
important, and made it so prominent in their preaching. See the note at
[Act 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#003).

Thou shalt be saved - From sin and hell. This is the doctrine of the
gospel throughout; and all this shows that salvation by the gospel was
easy.

[Romans 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 10:10</span></span>

For with the heart - Not with the understanding merely, but with such a
faith as shall be sincere, and shall influence the life. There can be no
other genuine faith than what influences the whole mind.

Believeth unto righteousness - Believes so that justification is
obtained. (Stuart.) In God's plan of justifying people, this is the way
by which we may be declared just or righteous in his sight. The moment a
sinner believes, therefore, he is justified; his sins are pardoned; and
he is introduced into the favor of God. No man can be justified without
this; for this is God's plan, and he will not depart from it.

With the mouth confession is made ... - That is, confession or
profession is so made as to obtain salvation. He who in all appropriate
ways professes his attachment to Christ shall be saved. This profession
is to be made in all the proper ways of religious duty; by an avowal of
our sentiments; by declaring on all proper occasions our belief of the
truth; and by an unwavering adherence to them in all persecutions,
oppositions, and trials. He who declares his belief makes a profession.
He who associates with Christian people does it. He who acts with them
in the prayer meeting, in the sanctuary, and in deeds of benevolence,
does it. He who is baptized, and commemorates the death of the Lord
Jesus, does it. And he who leads an humble, prayerful, spiritual life,
does it. He shows his regard to the precepts and example of Christ
Jesus; his regard for them more than for the pride, and pomp, and
allurements of the world. All these are included in a profession of
religion. In whatever way we can manifest attachment to it, it must be
done. The reason why this is made so important is, that there can be no
true attachment to Christ which will not manifest itself in the life. A
city that is set on a hill cannot be hid. It is impossible that there
should be true belief in the heart of man, unless it should show itself
in the life and conversation. This is the only test of its existence and
its power; and hence it is made so important in the business of
religion. And we may here learn,

\(1\) That a profession of religion is, by Paul, made as really
indispensable to salvation as believing. According to him it is
connected with salvation as really as faith is with justification; and
this accords with all the declarations of the Lord Jesus; [Mat
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#032); [Mat
25:34-46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034); [Luk
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#008).

\(2\) there can be no religion where there is not a willingness to
confess the Lord Jesus. There is no true repentance where we are not
willing to confess our faults. There is no true attachment to a father
or mother or friend, unless we are willing on all proper occasions to
avow it. And so there can be no true religion where there is too much
pride, or vanity, or love of the world, or fear of shame to confess it.

\(3\) those who never profess any religion have none: and they are not
safe. To deny God the Saviour before people is not safe. They who do not
profess religion, profess the opposite. The real feelings of the heart
will be expressed in the life. And they who profess by their lives that
they have no regard for God and Christ, for heaven and glory, must
expect to be met in the last day, as those who deny the Lord that bought
them, and who bring upon themselves quick destruction; [Pe2
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#002).

[Romans 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 10:11</span></span>

For the Scripture saith ... - [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016). This was the uniform doctrine
of the Scripture, that he who holds an opinion on the subject of
religion will not be ashamed to avow it. This is the nature of religion,
and without this there can be none; see this passage explained in [Rom
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033).

[Romans 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 10:12</span></span>

For there is no difference - In the previous verse Paul had quoted a
passage from [Isa 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016), which says
that "everyone" (Greek, πᾶς pas) that believeth shall not be ashamed;
that is, everyone of every nation and kindred. This implies that it was
not to be confined to the Jews. This thought he now further illustrates
and confirms by expressly declaring that there is no difference between
the Jew and the Greek. This doctrine it was one main design of the
Epistle to establish, and it is fully proved in the course of the
argument in Rom. 1-4. See particularly [Rom
3:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026). When the apostle says there
is no difference between them, he means in regard to the subject under
discussion. In many respects there might be a difference; but not in the
way of justification before God. There all had sinned; all had failed of
obeying the Law; and all must be justified in the same way, by faith in
the Lord Jesus Christ. The word "difference" διαστολὴ diastolē means
"distinction, diversity." It also means "eminence, excellence,
advantage." There is no eminence or advantage which the Jew has over the
Greek in regard to justification before God.

The Jew - That portion of mankind which professed to yield obedience to
the Law of Moses.

The Greek - Literally, those who dwelt in Greece, or those who spoke the
Greek language. As the Jews, however, were acquainted chiefly with the
Greeks, and knew little of other nations, the name Greek among them came
to denote all who were not Jews; that is, the same as the Gentiles. The
terms "Jew and Greek," therefore, include all mankind. There is no
difference among people about the terms of salvation; they are the same
to all. This truth is frequently taught. It was a most important
doctrine, especially in a scheme of religion that was to be preached to
all people. It was very offensive to the Jews, who had always regarded
themselves as a especially favored people. Against this, all their
prejudices were roused, as it completely overthrew all their own views
of national eminence and pride, and admitted despised Gentiles to the
same privileges with the long favored and chosen people of God. The
apostles, therefore, were at great pains fully to establish it; see [Act
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#009); [Gal
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028).

For the same Lord over all ... - For there is the same Lord of all; that
is, the Jews and Gentiles have one common Lord; compare [Rom
3:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#029). The same God had formed them,
and ruled them; and God now opened the same path to life. See this fully
presented in Paul's address to the people of Athens, in [Act
17:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026); see also [Ti1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005). As there was but one God; as all,
Jews and Gentiles, were his creatures; as one law was applicable to all;
as all had sinned; and as all were exposed to wrath; so it was
reasonable that there should be the same way of return - through the
mere mercy of God. Against this the Jew ought not to object; and in this
he and the Greek should rejoice.

Is rich unto all - πλουτῶν εἰς παντάς ploutōn eis pantas. The word
"rich" means to have abundance, to have in store much more than is
needful for present or personal use. It is commonly applied to wealth.
But applied to God, it means that he abounds in mercy or goodness toward
others. Thus, [Eph 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#004), "God, who is
rich in mercy," etc.; [Ti1 6:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017),
"charge them that are rich in this world ...that they be rich in good
works." [Jam 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#005), "God hath chosen the
poor ...rich in faith;" that is, abounding in faith and good works, etc.
Thus, God is said to be rich toward all, as he abounds in mercy and
goodness toward them in the plan of salvation.

That call upon him - This expression means properly to supplicate, to
invoke, as in prayer. As prayer constitutes no small part of religion;
and as it is a distinguishing characteristic of those who are true
Christians ([Act 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#011), "Behold he
prayeth;") to call on the name of the Lord is put for religion itself,
and is descriptive of acts of devotion toward God; [Pe1
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#017), "And if ye call on the Father,
etc.;" [Act 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#021); [Act
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#014)," he hath authority ...to bind
all that call on thy name;" [Act 7:59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#059);
[Act 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#016); [Gen
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#026), "Then began men to call on the
name of the Lord."

[Romans 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 10:13</span></span>

For whosoever shall call ... - This sentiment is found substantially in
[Joe 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032), "And it shall come to pass,
that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered."
This is expressly applied to the times of the gospel, by Peter, in [Act
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#021); see the note on that place. To
call on the name of the Lord is the same as to call on the Lord himself.
The word "name" is often used in this manner. "The name of the Lord is a
strong tower, etc.;" [Pro 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#010). "The
name of the God of Jacob defend thee;" [Psa
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#001). That is, God himself is a strong
tower, etc. It is clear from what follows, that the apostle applies this
to Jesus Christ; and this is one of the numerous instances in which the
writers of the New Testament apply to him expressions which in the Old
Testament are applicable to God; see [Co1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#002).

Shall be saved - This is the uniform promise; see [Act
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#021); [Act
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#016), "Arise, and be baptized, and
wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord." This is proper and
indispensable because,

\(1\) We have sinned against God, and it is right that we should confess
it.

\(2\) because he only can pardon us, and it is fit, that if we obtain
pardon, we should ask it of God.

\(3\) to call upon him is to acknowledge him as our Sovereign, our
Father, and our Friend; and it is right that we render him our homage.

It is implied in this, that we call upon him with right feelings; that
is, with a humble sense of our sinfulness and our need of pardon, and
with a willingness to receive eternal life as it is offered us in the
gospel. And if this be done, this passage teaches us that all may be
saved who will do it. He will cast none away who come in this manner.
The invitation and the assurance extend to all nations and to people of
all times.

[Romans 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 10:14</span></span>

How then shall they call. ... - The apostle here adverts to an objection
which might be urged to his argument. His doctrine was, that faith in
Christ was essential to justification and salvation; and that this was
needful for all; and that, without this, man must perish. The objection
was, that they could not call on him in whom they had not believed; that
they could not believe in him of whom they had not heard; and that this
was arranged by God himself, so that a large part of the world was
destitute of the gospel, and in fact did not believe; [Rom
10:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#016). The objection had particular
reference to the Jews; and the ground of injustice which a Jew would
complain of, would be, that the plan made salvation dependent on faith,
when a large part of the nation had not heard the gospel, and had had no
opportunity to know it. This objection the apostle meets, so far as it
was of importance to his argument, in [Rom
10:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018). The first part of the
objection is, that they could "not call on him in whom they had not
believed." That is, how could they call on one in whose existence,
ability, and willingness to help, they did not believe? The objection
is, that in order to our calling on one for help, we must be satisfied
that there is such a being, and that he is able to aid us. This remark
is just, and every man feels it. But the point of the objection is, that
"sufficient evidence of the divine mission and claims of Jesus Christ
had not been given to authorize the doctrine that eternal salvation
depended on belief in him, or that it would be right to suspend the
eternal happiness of few and Gentile on this."

How shall they believe in him ... - This position is equally undeniable,
that people could not believe in a being of whom they had not heard. And
the implied objection was, that people could not be expected to believe
in one of whose existence they knew nothing, and, of course, that they
could not be blamed for not doing it. It was not right, therefore, to
make eternal life depend, both among Jews and Gentiles, on faith in
Christ.

And how shall they hear ... - How can people hear, unless some one
proclaim to them, or preach to them what is to be heard and believed?
This is also true. The objection thence derived is, that it is not right
to condemn people for not believing what has never been proclaimed to
them; and, of course, that the doctrine that eternal life is suspended
on faith cannot be just and right.

[Romans 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 10:15</span></span>

And how shall they preach - In what way shall there be preachers, unless
they are commissioned by God? The word "how" does not refer to the
manner of preaching, but to the fact that there would be no preachers at
all unless they were sent forth. To preach means to proclaim in a public
manner, as a crier does. In the Scriptures it means to proclaim the
gospel to people.

Except they be sent - That is, except they are divinely commissioned,
and sent forth by God. This was an admitted doctrine among the Jews,
that a proclamation of a divine message must be made by one who was
commissioned by God for that purpose; [Jer
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#021); [Jer
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#007); [Jer
14:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#014); [Jer
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#025). He who sends a message to people
can alone designate the proper persons to bear it. The point of the
objection, therefore, was this: People could not believe unless the
message was sent to them; yet God had not actually sent it to all
people: it could not, therefore, be just to make eternal life depend on
so impracticable a thing as faith, since people had not the means of
believing.

As it is written - In [Isa 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007).

How beautiful ... - The reason why this passage is introduced here is,
that it confirms what had just been advanced in the objection - the
"importance and necessity" of there being messengers of salvation. That
importance is seen in the high encomium which is passed on them in the
Sacred Scriptures. They are regarded as objects especially attractive;
their necessity is fully recognised; and a distinguished rank is given
to them in the oracles of God - How beautiful. How attractive, how
lovely. This is taken from the Hebrew, with a slight variation. In the
Hebrew, the words "upon the mountains" occur, which makes the passage
more picturesque, though the sense is retained by Paul. The image in
Isaiah is that of a herald seen at first leaping or running on a distant
hill, when he first comes in sight, with tidings of joy from a field of
battle, or from a distant land. Thus, the appearance of such a man to
those who were in captivity, would be an image full of gladness and joy.

Are the feet - Many have supposed that the meaning of this expression is
this: The feet of a herald, naked and dusty from traveling, would be
naturally objects of disgust. But what would be naturally disagreeable
is thus made pleasant by the joy of the message. But this explanation is
far fetched, and wants parallel instances. Besides, it is a violation of
the image which the apostle had used. That was a distant object - a
herald running on the distant hills; and it supposes a picture too
remote to observe distinctly the feet, whether attractive or not. The
meaning of it is clearly this: "how beautiful is the coming or the
running of such a herald." The feet are emblematic of his coming. Their
rapid motion would be seen; and their rapidity would be beautiful from
the desire to hear the message which he brought. The whole meaning of
the passage, then, as applied to ministers of the gospel, is, that their
coming is an attractive object, regarded with deep interest, and
productive of joy - an honored and a delightful employment.

That preach ... - Literally, "that evangelize peace. That proclaim the
good news of peace; or bring the glad message of peace.

And bring glad tidings ... - Literally, "and evangelize good things;" or
that bring the glad message of good things. Peace here is put for good
of any kind; and as the apostle uses it, for the news of reconciliation
with God by the gospel. Peace, at the end of the conflicts, distresses,
and woes of war, is an image of all blessings. Thus, it is put to denote
the blessings when a sinner ceases to be the enemy of God, obtains
pardon, and is admitted to the joys of those who are his children and
friends. The coming of those messengers who proclaim it is joyful to the
world. It fills the bosom of the anxious sinner with peace; and they and
their message will be regarded with deep interest, as sent by God, and
producing joy in an agitated bosom, and peace to the world. This is an
illustration of the proper feeling with which we should regard the
ministers of religion. This passage in Isaiah is referred by the Jews
themselves to the times of the gospel (Rosenmuller).

[Romans 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 10:16</span></span>

But they have not all obeyed the gospel - It is not easy to see the
connection of this; and it has been made a question whether this is to
be regarded as a continuation of the objection of the Jew, or as a part
of the answer of the apostle. After all the attention which I have been
able to give it, I am inclined to regard it as an admission of the
apostle, as if he had said, "It must be admitted that all have not
obeyed the gospel. So far as the objection of the Jew arises from that
fact, and so far as that fact can bear on the case, it is to be conceded
that all have not yielded obedience to the gospel. For this was clearly
declared even by the prophet;" compare [Act
28:24](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#024); [Heb
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#002).

For Esaias saith - [Isa 53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001).

Who hath believed our report? - That is, Isaiah complains that his
declarations respecting the Messiah had been rejected by his countrymen.
The form of expression, "Who hath believed?" is a mode of saying
emphatically that few or none had done it. The great mass of his
countrymen had rejected it. This was an example to the purpose of the
apostle. In the time of Isaiah this fact existed; and it was not a new
thing that it existed in the time of the gospel. "Our report." Our
message; or what is delivered to be heard and believed. It originally
means the doctrine which Isaiah delivered about the Messiah; and implies
that the same thing would occur when the Messiah should actually come.
Hence, in the fifty-third chapter he proceeds to give the reasons why
the report would not be credited. and why the Messiah would be rejected.
It would be because he was a root out of a dry ground; because he was a
man of sorrows. etc. And this actually took place. Because he did not
come with splendor and pomp, as a temporal prince, he was rejected, and
put to death. On substantially the same grounds he is even yet rejected
by thousands. The force of this verse, perhaps, may be best seen by
including it in a parenthesis, "How beautiful are the feet, etc." how
important is the gospel ministry - (although it must be admitted, that
all have not obeyed, for this was predicted also by Isaiah, etc.)

[Romans 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 10:17</span></span>

So then faith cometh ... - This I take to be clearly the language of the
objector. As if he had said, by the very quotation which you have made
from Isaiah, it appears that a report was necessary. He did not condemn
people for not believing what they had not heard; but he complains of
those who did not believe a message actually delivered to them. Even by
this passage, therefore, it seems that a message was necessary, that
faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the divine message. It could not
be right, therefore, to condemn those who had not obeyed the gospel
because they had not heard it; and hence, not right to make salvation
dependent on a condition which was, by the arrangement of God, put
beyond their power. The very quotation from Isaiah, therefore, goes to
confirm the objection in [Rom
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014);15.

By hearing - Our translation has varied the expression here, which is
the same in two places in the Greek: "Isaiah said, Who hath believed our
report τῇ ἀκοῇ tē akoē? So then, you must admit that faith comes by that
report ἐξ ἀκοῆς ex akoēs, and therefore this report or message is
necessary." When it is said that faith cometh by hearing, it is not
meant that all who hear actually believe, for that is not true; but that
faith does not exist unless there is a message, or report, to be heard
or believed. It cannot come otherwise than by such a message; in other
words, unless there is something made known to be believed. And this
shows us at once the importance of the message, and the fact that people
are converted by the instrumentality of truth, and of truth only.

And hearing - And the report, or the message (η ̔ἀκοὴ hē akoē), is by
the Word of God; that is, the message is sent by the command of God. It
is his word, sent by his direction, and therefore if withheld by him,
those who did not believe could not be blamed. The argument of the
objector is, that God could not justly condemn people for not believing
the gospel.

[Romans 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 10:18</span></span>

But I say - But to this objection, I, the apostle, reply. The objection
had been carried through the previous verses. The apostle comes now to
reply to it. In doing this, he does not deny the principle contained in
it, that the gospel should be preached in order that people might be
justly condemned for not believing it; not that the messengers must be
sent by God, not that faith comes by hearing. All this he fully admits.
But he proceeds to show, by an ample quotation from the Old Testament,
that this had been actually furnished to the Jews and to the Gentiles,
and that they were actually in possession of the message, and could not
plead that they had never heard it. This is the substance of his answer.

Have they not heard? - A question is often, as it is here, an emphatic
way of affirming a thing. The apostle means to affirm strongly that they
had heard. The word "they," in this place, I take to refer to the
Gentiles. What was the fact in regard to Israel, or the Jew, he shows in
the next verses. One main design waste show that the same scheme of
salvation extended to both Jews and Gentiles. The objection was, that it
had not been made known to either, and that therefore it could not be
maintained to be just to condemn those who rejected it. To this the
apostle replies that then it was extensively known to both; and if so,
then the objection in [Rom 10:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014),
was not well founded, for in fact the thing existed which the objector
maintained to be necessary, to wit, that they had heard, and that
preachers had been sent to them.

Yes, verily - In the original, a single word, μενοῦνγε menounge,
compounded of μέν men and οὖν oun and γέ ge. An intense expression,
denoting strong affirmation.

Their sound went ... - These words are taken in substance from [Psa
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004). The psalmist employs them to
show that the works of God, the heavens and the earth, proclaim his
existence everywhere. By using them here, the apostle does not affirm
that David had reference to the gospel in them, but he uses them to
express his own meaning; he makes an affirmation about the gospel in
language used by David on another occasion, but without intimating or
implying that David had such a reference. In this way we often quote the
language of others as expressing in a happy way our own thoughts, but
without supposing that the author had any such reference. The meaning
here is, that that may be affirmed in fact of the gospel which David
affirmed of the works of God, that their sound had gone into all the
earth.

Their sound - Literally, the sound or tone which is made by a stringed
instrument (φθόγγος phthongos). Also a voice, a report. It means here
they have spoken, or declared truth. As applied to the heavens, it would
mean that they speak, or proclaim, the wisdom or power of God. As used
by Paul, it means that the message of the gospel had been spoken, or
proclaimed, far and wide. The Hebrew, is "their line, etc." The
Septuagint translation is the same as that of the apostle - their voice
ὁ φθόγγος αὐτῶν ho phthoggos autōn. The Hebrew word may denote the
string of an instrument, of a harp, etc. and then the tone or sound
produced by it; and thus was understood by the Septuagint. The apostle,
however, does not affirm that this was the meaning of the Hebrew; but he
conveyed his doctrine in language which aptly expressed it.

Into all the earth - In the psalm, this is to be taken in its utmost
signification. The works of God literally proclaim his wisdom to all
lands and to all people. As applied to the gospel, it means that it was
spread far and wide, that it had been extensively preached in all lands.

Their words - In the psalm, the heavens are represented as speaking, and
teaching people the knowledge of the true God. But the meaning of the
apostle is, that the message of the gospel had sounded forth; and he
referred doubtless to the labors of the apostles in proclaiming it to
the pagan nations. This Epistle was written about the year 57. During
the time which had elapsed after the ascension of Christ, the gospel had
been preached extensively in all the known nations; so that it might be
said that it was proclaimed in those regions designated in the Scripture
as the uttermost parts of the earth. Thus, it had been proclaimed in
Jerusalem, Syria, Asia Minor, Greece, Rome, Arabia, and in the islands
of the Mediterranean. Paul, reasoning before Agrippa, says, that he
could not be ignorant of those things, for they had not been done in a
corner; [Act 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#026). In [Col
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023), Paul says that the gospel had
been preached to every creature which is under heaven; see [Col
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#006). Thus, the great facts and
doctrines of the gospel had in fact been made known; and the objection
of the Jew was met. It would be sufficiently met by the declaration of
the psalmist that the true God was made known by his works, and that
therefore they were without excuse (compare [Rom
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)); but in fact the gospel had been
preached, and its great doctrine and duties had been proclaimed to all
nations far and near.

[Romans 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 10:19</span></span>

But I say ... - Still further to meet the objection, he shows that the
doctrine which he was maintaining was actually taught in the Old
Testament.

Did not Israel know? - Did not the Jews understand. Is it not recorded
in their books, etc. that they had full opportunity to be acquainted
with this truth? This question is an emphatic way of affirming that they
did know. But Paul does not here state what it was that they knew. That
is to be gathered from what he proceeds to say. From that it appears
that he referred to the fact that the gospel was to be preached to the
Gentiles, and that the Jews were to be cast off. This doctrine followed
from what he had already maintained in [Rom
10:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#012), that there was no difference
in regard to the terms of salvation, and that the Jew had no particular
privileges. If so, then the barrier was broken down; and if the Jews did
not believe in Jesus Christ, they must be rejected. Against this was the
objection in [Rom 10:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014), that they
could not believe; that they had not heard; and that a preacher had not
been sent to them. If, now, the apostle could show that it was an
ancient doctrine of the Jewish prophets that the Gentiles should
believe, and that the Jews would not believe, the whole force of the
objection would vanish. Accordingly he proceeds to show that this
doctrine was distinctly taught in the Old Testament.

First - First in order; as we say, in the first place.

I will provoke you - These words are taken from [Deu
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021). In that place the declaration
refers to the idolatrous and wicked conduct of the Jews. God says that
they had provoked him, or excited his indignation, by worshipping what
was not God, that is, by idols; and he, in turn, would excite their envy
and indignation by showing favors to those who were not regarded as a
people; that is, to the Gentiles. They had shown favor, or affection,
for what was not God, and by so doing had provoked him to anger; and he
also would show favor to those whom they regarded as no people, and
would thus excite their anger. Thus, he would illustrate the great
principle of his government in [Sa2
22:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#026), "With the merciful thou wilt
show thyself merciful; with the pure, thou wilt show thyself pure; and
with the froward thou wilt show thyself unsavory," that is, froward.
[Psa 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#026). In this passage the great
doctrine which Paul was defending is abundantly established - that the
Gentiles were to be brought into the favor of God; and the cause also is
suggested to be the obstinacy and rebellion of the Jews. It is not clear
that Moses had particularly in view the times of the gospel; but he
affirms a great principle which is applicable to those times - that if
the Jews should be rebellious, and prove themselves unworthy of his
favor, that favor would be withdrawn, and conferred on other nations.
The effect of this would be, of course, to excite their indignation.
This principle the apostle applies to his own times; and affirms that it
ought to have been understood by the Jews themselves.

That are no people - That is, those whom you regard as unworthy the name
of a people. Those who have no government, laws, or regular
organization; who wander in tribes and clans, and who are under no
settled form of society. This was the case with most barbarians; and the
Jews, evidently regarded all ancient nations in this light, as unworthy
the name of a people.

A foolish nation - The word "fool" means one void of understanding. But
it also means one who is wicked, or idolatrous; one who contemns God.
[Psa 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001), "the fool hath said in his
heart, there is no God." [Pro 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007),
"fools despise wisdom and instruction." Here it means a nation who had
no understanding of the true God ἀσυνέτῳ asunetō.

I will anger - My bestowing favors on them will excite your anger. We
may remark here,

\(1\) That God is a sovereign, and has a right to bestow his favors on
whom he pleases.

\(2\) that when people abuse his mercies, become proud, or cold, or dead
in his service, he often takes away their privileges, and bestows them
on others.

\(3\) that the effect of his sovereignty is to excite people to anger.

Proud and wicked people are always enraged that he bestows his favors on
others; and the effect of his sovereign dealings is, to provoke to anger
the very people who by their sins have rejected his mercy. Hence, there
is no doctrine that proud man hates so cordially as he does the doctrine
of divine sovereignty; and none that will so much test the character of
the wicked.

[Romans 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 10:20</span></span>

But Esaias - [Isa 65:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001).

Is very bold - Expresses the doctrine openly, boldly, without any
reserve. The word ἀποτολμάω apotolmaō means to dare, to be venturesome,
to be bold. It means here that however unpopular the doctrine might be,
or however dangerous it was to avow that the Jews were extremely wicked,
and that God for their wickedness would cast them off, yet that Isaiah
had long since done it. This was the point which Paul was establishing;
and against this, the objection was urged, and all the Jewish prejudices
excited. This is the reason why he so much insists on it, and is so
anxious to defend every part by the writings of acknowledged authority
among the Jews - the Old Testament. The quotation is made from the
Septuagint, with only a slight change in the order of the phrases. The
meaning is, that God was found, or the true knowledge of him was
obtained, by those who had not sought after him; that is, by the
Gentiles, who had worshipped idols, and who had not sought for the true
God. This does not mean that we are to expect to find God if we do not
seek for him; or that in fact any become Christians who do not seek for
it, and make an effort. The contrary is abundantly taught in the
Scriptures; [Heb 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006); [Ch1
28:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#008); [Mat
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033); [Mat
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007); [Luk
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#009). But it means that the Gentiles,
whose characteristic was not that they sought God, would have the gospel
sent to them, and would embrace it. The phrase, "I was found," in the
past tense here, is in the present in the Hebrew, intimating that the
time would come when God would say this of himself; that is, that the
time would come when the Gentiles would be brought to the knowledge of
the true God. This doctrine was one which Isaiah had constantly in his
eye, and which he did not fear to bring openly before the Jews.

[Romans 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 10:21</span></span>

But to Israel he saith - The preceding quotation established the
doctrine that the Gentiles were to be called. But there was still an
important part of his argument remaining - that the Jews were to be
rejected. This he proceeds to establish; and he here, in the language of
Isaiah [Isa 65:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#002), says that while the
Gentiles would be obedient, the character of the Jews was, that they
were a disobedient and rebellious people.

All day long - Continually, without intermission; implying that their
acts of rebellion were not momentary; but that this was the established
character of the people.

I have stretched forth my hands - This denotes an attitude of entreaty;
a willingness and earnest desire to receive them to favor; to invite and
entreat; [Pro 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#024).

A disobedient - In the Hebrew, rebellious, contumacious. The Greek
answers substantially to that; disbelieving, not confiding or obeying.

Gain-saying - Speaking against; resisting, opposing. This is not in the
Hebrew, but the substance of it was implied. The prophet Isaiah proceeds
to specify in what this rebellion consisted, and to show that this was
their character; [Isa 65:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#002). The
argument of the apostle is this; namely, the ancient character of the
people was that of wickedness; God is represented as stretching out his
hands in vain; they rejected him, and he was sought and found by others.
It was implied, therefore, that the rebellious Jews would be rejected;
and, of course, the apostle was advancing and defending no doctrine
which was not found in the writings of the Jews themselves. And thus, by
a different course of reasoning, he came to the same conclusion which he
had arrived at in the first four chapters of the Epistle, that the
Gentiles and Jews were on the same level in regard to justification
before God.

In the closing part of this chapter, the great doctrine is brought forth
and defended that the way of salvation is open for all the world. This,
in the time of Paul, was regarded as a novel doctrine. Hence, he is at
so much pains to illustrate and defend it. And hence, with so much zeal
and self-denial, the apostles of the Lord Jesus went and proclaimed it
to the nations. This doctrine is not the less important now. And from
this discussion we may learn the following truths:

\(1\) The pagan world is in danger without the gospel. They are sinful,
polluted, wretched. The testimony of all who visit pagan nations accords
most strikingly with that of the apostles in their times. Nor is there
any evidence that the great mass of pagan population has changed for the
better.

\(2\) the provisions of the gospel are ample for them - for all. Its
power has been tried on many nations; and its mild and happy influence
is seen in meliorated laws, customs, habits; in purer institutions; in
intelligence and order; and in the various blessings conferred by a pure
religion. The same gospel is suited to produce on the wildest and most
wretched population, the same comforts which are now experienced in the
happiest part of our own land,

\(3\) the command of Jesus Christ remains still the same, to preach the
gospel to every creature. That command has never been repealed or
changed. The apostles met the injunction, and performed what they could.
It remains for the church to act as they did, to feel as they did, and
put forth their efforts as they did, in obeying one of the most plain
and positive laws of Jesus Christ.

\(4\) if the gospel is to be proclaimed everywhere, people must be sent
forth into the vast field. Every nation must have an opportunity to say,
"How beautiful are the feet of him that preaches the gospel of peace."
Young men, strong and vigorous in the Christian course, must give
themselves to this work, and devote their lives in an enterprise which
the apostles regarded as honorable to them; and which infinite Wisdom
did not regard as unworthy the toils, and tears, and self-denials of the
Son of God.

\(5\) the church, in training young men for the ministry, in fitting her
sons for these toils, is performing a noble and glorious work; a work
which contemplates the triumph of the gospel among all nations. Happy
will it be when the church shall feel the full pressure of this great
truth, that the gospel may be preached to every son and daughter of
Adam; and when every man who enters the ministry shall count it, not
self-denial, but a glorious privilege to be permitted to tell dying
pagan people that a Saviour bled for all sinners. And happy that day
when it can be said with literal truth that their sound has gone out
into all the earth; and that as far as the sun in his daily course sheds
his beams, so far the Sun of righteousness sheds also his pure and
lovely rays into the abodes of human beings. And we may learn, also,
from this,

\(6\) That God will withdraw his favors from those nations that are
disobedient and rebellions. Thus, he rejected the ancient Jews; and thus
also he will forsake all who abuse his mercies; who become proud,
luxurious, effeminate and wicked. In this respect it becomes the people
of this favored land to remember the God of their fathers; and not to
forget, too, that national sin provokes God to withdraw, and that a
nation that forgets God must be punished.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 11](rom011)

</div>
