<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Romans Index](rom.md)  
  [Previous](rom002)  [Next](rom004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001.md)

[Romans 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 3:1</span></span>

What advantage ... - The design of the first part of this chapter is to
answer some of the objections which might be offered by a Jew to the
statements in the last chapter. The first objection is stated in this
verse. A Jew would naturally ask, if the view which the apostle had
given were correct, what special benefit could the Jew derive from his
religion? The objection would arise particularly from the position
advanced [Rom 2:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#025.md), that if a pagan
should do the things required by the Law, he would be treated as "if" he
had been circumcised. Hence, the question, "what profit is there of
circumcision?"

[Romans 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 3:2</span></span>

Much every way - Or, in every respect. This is the answer of the apostle
to the objection in [Rom 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001.md).

Chiefly - That is, this is the principal advantage, and one including
all others. The main benefit of being a Jew is, to possess the sacred
Scriptures and their instructions.

Unto them were committed - Or were intrusted, were confided. The word
translated "were committed," is what is commonly employed to express
"faith" or "confidence," and it implied "confidence" in them on the part
of God in intrusting his oracles to them; a confidence which was not
misplaced, for no people ever guarded a sacred trust or deposit with
more fidelity, than the Jews did the Sacred Scriptures.

The oracles - The word "oracle" among the pagan meant properly the
answer or response of a god, or of some priest supposed to be inspired,
to an inquiry of importance, usually expressed in a brief sententious
way, and often with great ambiguity. The place from which such a
response was usually obtained was also called an oracle, as the oracle
at Delphi, etc. These oracles were frequent among the pagan, and affairs
of great importance were usually submitted to them. The word rendered
"oracles" occurs in the New Testament but four times, [Act
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#038.md); [Heb
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012.md); [Pe1
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#011.md); [Rom
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#002.md). It is evidently used here to
denote the Scriptures, as being what was spoken by God, and particularly
perhaps the divine promises. To possess these was of course an eminent
privilege, and included all others, as they instructed them in their
duty, and were their guide in everything that pertained to them in this
life and the life to come. They contained, besides, many precious
promises respecting the future dignity of the nation in reference to the
Messiah. No higher favor can be conferred on a people than to be put in
possession of the sacred Scriptures. And this fact should excite us to
gratitude, and lead us to endeavor to extend them also to other nations;
compare [Deu 4:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007.md); [Psa
147:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#019.md).

[Romans 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 3:3</span></span>

For what if some did not believe? - This is to be regarded as another
objection of a Jew. "What then? or what follows? if it be admitted that
some of the nation did not believe, does it not follow that the
faithfulness of God in his promises will fail?" The points of the
objection are these:

\(1\) The apostle had maintained that the nation was sinful Rom. 2; that
is, that they had not obeyed or believed God.

\(2\) This, the objector for the time admits or supposes in relation to
some of them. But,

\(3\) he asks whether this does not involve a consequence which is not
admissible, that God is unfaithful.

Did not the fact that God chose them as his people, and entered into
covenant with them, imply that the Jews should be kept from perdition?
It was evidently their belief that all Jews would be saved, and this
belief they grounded on his covenant with their fathers. The doctrine of
the apostle Rom. 2 would seem to imply that in certain respects they
were on a level with the Gentile nations; that if they sinned, they
would be treated just like the pagan; and hence, they asked of what
value was the promise of God? Had it not become vain and nugatory?

Make the faith - The word "faith" here evidently means the
"faithfulness" or "fidelity of God to his promises." Compare [Mat
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#023.md); [Ti2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#010.md); [Hos
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#020.md).

Of none effect - Destroy it; or prevent him from fulfilling his
promises. The meaning of the objection is, that the fact supposed, that
the Jews would become unfaithful and be lost, would imply that God had
failed to keep his promises to the nation; or that he had made promises
which the result showed he was not able to perform.

[Romans 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 3:4</span></span>

God forbid - Greek. Let not this be. The sense is, "let not this by any
means be supposed." This is the answer of the apostle, showing that no
such consequence followed from his doctrines; and that "if" any such
consequence should follow, the doctrine should be at once abandoned, and
that every man, no matter who, should be rather esteemed false than God.
The veracity of God was a great first principle, which was to be held,
whatever might be the consequence. This implies that the apostle
believed that the fidelity of God could be maintained in strict
consistency with the fact that any number of the Jews might be found to
be unfaithful, and be cast off. The apostle has not entered into an
explanation of this, or shown how it could be, but it is not difficult
to understand how it was. The promise made to Abraham, and the fathers,
was not unconditional and absolute, that all the Jews should be saved.
It was implied that they were to be obedient; and that if they were not,
they would be cast off; [Gen 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#019.md).
Though the apostle has not stated it here, yet he has considered it at
length in another part of this Epistle, and showed that it was not only
consistent with the original promise that a part of the Jews should be
found unfaithful, and be east off, but that it had actually occurred
according to the prophets; [Rom
10:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#016.md); 11. Thus, the fidelity of
God was preserved; at the same time that it was a matter of fact that no
small part of the nation was rejected and lost.

Let God be true - Let God be esteemed true and faithful, whatever
consequence may follow. This was a first principle, and should be now,
that God should be believed to be a God of truth, whatever consequence
it might involve. How happy would it be, if all people would regard this
as a fixed principle, a matter not to be questioned in their hearts, or
debated about, that God is true to his word! How much doubt and anxiety
would it save professing Christians; and how much error would it save
among sinners! Amidst all the agitations of the world, all conflicts,
debates, and trials, it would be a fixed position where every man might
find rest, and which would do more than all other things to allay the
tempests and smooth the agitated waves of human life.

But every man a liar - Though every man and every other opinion should
be found to be false. Of course this included the apostle and his
reasoning; and the expression is one of those which show his magnanimity
and greatness of soul. It implies that every opinion which he and all
others held; every doctrine which had been defended; should be at once
abandoned, if it implied that God was false. It was to be assumed as a
first principle in all religion and all reasoning, that if a doctrine
implied that God was not faithful, it was of course a false doctrine.
This showed his firm conviction that the doctrine which he advanced was
strictly in accordance with the veracity of the divine promise. What a
noble principle is this! How strikingly illustrative of the humility of
true piety, and of the confidence which true piety places in God above
all the deductions of human reason! And if all people were willing to
sacrifice their opinions when they appeared to impinge on the veracity
of God; if they started back with instinctive shuddering at the very
supposition of such a lack of fidelity in him; how soon would it put an
end to the boastings of error, to the pride of philosophy, to lofty
dictation in religion! No man with this feeling could be for a moment a
universalist; and none could be an infidel.

As it is written - [Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004.md). To
confirm the sentiment which he had just advanced and to show that it
accorded with the spirit of religion as expressed in the Jewish
writings, the apostle appeals to the language of David, uttered in a
state of deep penitence for past transgressions. Of all quotations ever
made, this is one of the most beautiful and most happy. David was
overwhelmed with grief; he saw his crime to be awful; he feared the
displeasure of God, and trembled before him. Yet "he held it as a fixed,
indisputable principle that" God was right. This he never once thought
of calling in question. He had sinned against God, God only; and he did
not once think of calling in question the fact that God was just
altogether in reproving him for his sin, and in pronouncing against him
the sentence of condemnation.

That thou mightest be justified - That thou mightest be regarded as just
or right, or, that it may appear that God is not unjust. This does not
mean that David had sinned against God for the purpose of justifying
him, but that he now clearly saw that his sin had been so directly
against him, and so aggravated, that God was right in his sentence of
condemnation.

In thy sayings - In what thou hast spoken; that is, in thy sentence of
condemnation; in thy words in relation to this offence. It may help us
to understand this, to remember that the psalm was written immediately
after Nathan, at the command of God, had gone to reprove David for his
crime; (see the title of the psalm.) God, by the mouth of Nathan, had
expressly condemned David for his crime. To this expression of
condemnation David doubtless refers by the expression "in thy sayings;"
see [Sa2 12:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#007.md).

And mightest overcome - In the Hebrew, "mightest be pure," or mightest
be esteemed pure, or just. The word which the Septuagint and the apostle
have used, "mightest overcome," is sometimes used with reference to
litigations or trials in a court of justice. He that was accused and
acquitted, or who was adjudged to be innocent, might be said to
overcome, or to gain the cause. The expression is thus used here. As if
there were a trial between David and God, God would overcome; that is,
would be esteemed pure and righteous in his sentence condemning the
crime of David.

When thou art judged - The Hebrew is, "when thou judgest;" that is, in
thy judgment pronounced on this crime. The Greek may also be in the
middle voice as well as the passive, and may correspond, therefore, in
meaning precisely with the Hebrew. So the Arabic renders it. The Syriac
renders it, "when they (that is, people) shall judge thee." The meaning,
as expressed by David, is, that God is to be esteemed right and just in
condemning people for their sins, and that a true penitent, that is, a
man placed in the best circumstances to form a proper estimate of God,
will see this, though it should condemn himself. The meaning of the
expression in the connection in which Paul uses it, is, that it is to be
held as a fixed, unwavering principle, that God is right and true,
whatever consequences it may involve; whatever doctrine it may
overthrow; or whatever man it may prove to be a liar.

[Romans 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 3:5</span></span>

But if our unrighteousness - If our sin. The particular sin which had
been specified [Rom 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003.md) was
"unbelief." But the apostle here gives the objection a general form.
This is to be regarded as an objection which a Jew might make. The force
of it is this:

\(1\) It had been conceded that some had not believed; that is, had
sinned.

\(2\) but God was true to his promises. Notwithstanding their sin, God's
character was the same. Nay,

\(3\) In the very midst of sin, and as one of the results of it, the
character of God, as a just Being, shone out illustriously. The question
then was,

\(4\) If his glory resulted from it; if the effect of all was to show
that his character was pure; how could he punish that sin from which his
own glory resulted? And this is a question which is often asked by
sinners.

Commend - Recommend; show forth; render illustrious.

The righteousness of God - His just and holy character. This was the
effect on David's mind, that he saw more clearly the justice of God in
his threatenings against sin, in consequence of his own transgression.
And if this effect followed, if honor was thus done to God, the question
was, how he could consistently punish what tended to promote his own
glory?

What shall we say? - What follows? or, what is the inference? This is a
mode of speech as if the objector hesitated about expressing an
inference which would seem to follow, but which was horrible in its
character.

Is God unrighteous? - The meaning of this would be better expressed
thus: "Is "not" God unrighteous in punishing? Does it not follow that if
God is honored by sin, that it would be wrong for him to inflict
punishment?"

Who taketh vengeance - The meaning of this is simply, "who inflicts
punishment." The idea of vengeance is not necessarily in the original
ὀργήν orgēn. It is commonly rendered "wrath," but it often means simply
"punishment," without any reference to the state of the mind of him who
inflicts it, [Mat 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007.md); [Luk
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#007.md); [Luk
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#023.md); [Joh
3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036.md). Notes, [Rom
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018.md); [Rom
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#015.md).

I speak as a man - I speak after the manner of human beings. I speak as
appears to be the case to human view; or as would strike the human mind.
It does not mean that the language was such as wicked people were
accustomed to use; but that the objector expressed a sentiment which to
human view would seem to follow from what had been said. This I regard
as the language of an objector. It implies a degree of reverence for the
character of God, and a seeming unwillingness to state an objection
which seemed to be dishonorable to God, but which nevertheless pressed
itself so strong on the mind as to appear irresistible. No way of
stating the objection could have been more artful or impressive.

[Romans 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 3:6</span></span>

God forbid - Note, [Rom 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004.md).

For then - If it be admitted that it would be unjust for God to inflict
punishment.

How shall God ... - How will it be right or consistent for him to judge
the world.

Judge - To "judge" implies the possibility and the correctness of
"condemning" the guilty; for if it were not right to condemn them,
judgment would be a farce. This does not mean that God would condemn all
the world; but that the fact of judging people implied the possibility
and propriety of condemning those who were guilty. It is remarkable that
the apostle does not attempt to explain how it could be that God could
take occasion from the sins of people to promote his glory; nor does he
even admit the fact; but he meets directly the objection. To understand
the force of his answer, it must be remembered that it was an admitted
fact, a fact which no one among the Jews would call in question, that
God would judge the world. This fact was fully taught in their own
writings, [Gen 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#025.md); [Ecc
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#014.md); [Ecc
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#009.md). It was besides an admitted point
with them that God would condemn the pagan I world; and perhaps the term
"world" here refers particularly to them.

But how could this be if it were not right for God to inflict punishment
at all? The inference of the objector, therefore, could not be true;
though the apostle does not tell us how it was consistent to inflict
punishment for offences from which God took occasion to promote his
glory. It may be remarked, however, that God will judge offences, not
from what he may do in overruling them, but from the nature of the crime
itself. The question is not, what good God may bring out of it, but what
does the crime itself deserve? what is the character of the offender?
what was his intention? It is not what God may do to overrule the
offence when it is committed. The just punishment of the murderer is to
be determined by the Law, and by his own desert; and not from any
reputation for integrity and uprightness which the judge may manifest on
his trial; or from any honor which may accrue to the police for
detecting him; or any security which may result to the commonwealth from
his execution; or from any honor which the Law may gain as a just law by
his condemnation. Nor should any of these facts and advantages which may
result from his execution, be pleaded in bar of his condemnation. So it
is with the sinner under the divine administration. It is indeed a truth
[Psa 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010.md) that the wrath of man shall
praise God, and that he will take occasion from people's wickedness to
glorify himself as a just judge and moral governor; but this will be no
ground of acquittal for the sinner.

[Romans 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 3:7</span></span>

For if ... - This is an objection similar to the former. It is indeed
but another form of the same.

The truth of God - His truth or faithfulness in adhering to his
threatenings. God threatened to punish the guilty. By their guilt he
will take occasion to show his own truth; or their crime will furnish
occasion for such an exhibition.

Hath more abounded - Has been more striking, or more manifest. His
"truth" will be shown by the fulfillment of all his promises to his
people, and of all his predictions. But it will also be shown by
fulfilling his threatenings on the guilty. It will, therefore, more
abound by their condemnation; that is, their condemnation will furnish
new and striking instances or his truth. Every lost sinner will be,
therefore, an eternal monument of the truth of God.

Through my lie - By means of my lie, or as one of the results of my
falsehood. The word "lie" here means falsehood, deceitfulness,
"unfaithfulness." If by the unfaithfulness of the Jewish people to the
covenant, occasion should be given to God to glorify himself, how could
they be condemned for it?

Unto his glory - To his praise, or so as to show his character in such a
way as to excite the praise and admiration of his intelligent creation.

Why yet am I ... - How can that act be regarded as evil, which tends to
promote the glory of God? The fault in the reasoning of the objector is
this, that he takes for granted that the direct tendency of his conduct
is to promote God's glory, whereas it is just the reverse; and it is by
God's reversing that tendency, or overruling it, that he obtains his
glory. The tendency of murder is not to honor the Law, or to promote the
security of society, but just the reverse. Still, his execution shall
avert the direct tendency of his crime, and do honor to the law and the
judge, and promote the peace and security of the community by
restraining others.

[Romans 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 3:8</span></span>

And not rather - This is the answer of the apostle. He meets the
objection by showing its tendency if carried out, and if it were made a
principle of conduct. The meaning is, "If the glory of God is to be
promoted by sin, and if a man is not therefore to be condemned, or held
guilty for it; if this fact absolves man from crime, "why not carry the
doctrine out, and make it a principle of conduct, and do all the evil we
can, in order to promote his glory." This was the fair consequence of
the objection. And yet this was a result so shocking and monstrous, that
all that was necessary in order to answer the objection was merely to
state this consequence. Every man's moral feelings would revolt at the
doctrine; everyman would know that it could not be true; and every man,
therefore, could see that the objection was not valid.

As we - This refers, doubtless, to the apostles, and to Christians
generally. It is unquestionable, that this accusation was often brought
against them.

Slanderously reported - Greek, As we are "blasphemed." This is the
legitimate and proper use of the word "blaspheme," to speak of one in a
reproachful and calumnious manner.

As some affirm ... - Doubtless Jews. Why they should affirm this, is not
known. It was doubtless, however, some perversion of the doctrines that
the apostles preached. The doctrines which were thus misrepresented and
abused, were probably these: the apostles taught that the sins of people
were the occasion of promoting God's glory in the plan of salvation.
That "where sin abounded, grace did much more abound;" [Rom
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020.md). That God, in the salvation of
people, would be glorified just in proportion to the depth and pollution
of the guilt which was forgiven. This was true; but how easy was it to
misrepresent this as teaching that people ought to sin in order to
promote God's glory! and instead of stating it as an inference which
they drew from the doctrine, to state it as what the apostles actually
taught. This is the common mode in which charges are brought against
others. People draw an inference themselves, or suppose that the
doctrine leads to such an inference, and then charge it on others as
what they actually hold and teach. There is one maxim which should never
be departed from: "That a man is not to be held responsible for the
inferences which we may draw from his doctrine; and that he is never to
be represented as holding and teaching what we suppose follows from his
doctrine." He is answerable only for what he avows.

Let us do evil - That is, since sin is to promote the glory of God, let
us commit as much as possible.

That good may come - That God may take occasion by it to promote his
glory.

Whose damnation is just - Whose "condemnation;" see the note at [Rom
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023.md). This does not necessarily refer
to future punishment, but it means that the conduct of those who thus
slanderously perverted the doctrines of the Christian religion, and
accused the apostles of teaching this doctrine, was deserving of
condemnation or punishment. Thus, he expressly disavows, in strong
language, the doctrine charged on Christians. Thus, he silences the
objection. And thus he teaches, as a great fundamental law, "that evil
is not to be done that good may come." This is a universal rule. And
this is in no case to be departed from. Whatever is evil is not to be
done under any pretence. Any imaginable good which we may think will
result from it; any advantage to ourselves or to our cause; or any glory
which we may think may result to God, will not sanction or justify the
deed. Strict, uncompromising integrity and honesty is to be the maxim of
our lives; and in such a life only can we hope for success, or for the
blessing of God.

[Romans 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 3:9</span></span>

What then? - This is another remark supposed to be made by a Jewish
objector. "What follows? or are we to infer that we are better than
others?

Are we better than they? - Are we Jews better than the Gentiles? Or
rather, have we any preference, or advantage as to character and
prospects, over the Gentiles? These questions refer only to the great
point in debate, to wit, about justification before God. The apostle had
admitted [Rom 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#002.md) that the Jews had
important advantages in some respects, but he now affirms that those
advantages did not make a difference between them and the Gentiles about
justification.

No, in no wise - Not at all. That is, the Jews have no preference or
advantage over the Gentiles in regard to the subject of justification
before God. They have failed to keep the Law; they are sinners; and if
they are justified, it must be in the same way as the rest of the world.

We have before proved ... - [Rom
1:21-32](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021.md); 2.

Under sin - Sinners. Under the power and dominion of sin.

[Romans 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 3:10</span></span>

As it is written - The apostle is reasoning with Jews; and he proceeds
to show from their own Scriptures, that what he had affirmed was true.
The point to be proved was, that the Jews, in the matter of
justification, had no advantage or preference over the Gentiles; that
the Jew had failed to keep the Law which had been given him, as the
Gentile had failed to keep the Law which had been given him; and that
both, therefore, were equally dependent on the mercy of God, incapable
of being justified and saved by their works. To show this, the apostle
adduces texts to show what was the character of the Jewish people; or to
show that according to their own Scriptures, they were sinners no less
than the Gentiles. The point, then, is to prove the depravity of the
Jews, not that of universal depravity. The interpretation should be
confined to the bearing of the passages on the Jews, and the quotations
should not be adduced as directly proving the doctrine of universal
depravity. In a certain sense, which will be stated soon, they may be
adduced as bearing on that subject. But their direct reference is to the
Jewish nation. The passages which follow, are taken from various parts
of the Old Testament. The design of this is to show, that this
characteristic of sin was not confined to any particular period of the
Jewish history, but pertained to them as a people; that it had
characterised them throughout their existence as a nation. Most of the
passages are quoted in the language of the Septuagint. The quotation in
[Rom 3:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#010.md), is from [Psa
14:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001.md); and from [Psa
53:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#001.md). [Psa
53:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#001.md) is the same as [Psa
14:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001.md), with some slight variations.

(Yet if we consult [Psa 14:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001.md) and
[Psa 53:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#001.md), from which the quotations
in [Rom 3:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#010.md) are taken, we shall be
constrained to admit that their original application is nothing short of
universal. The Lord is represented as looking down from heaven, (not
upon the Jewish people only, but upon the "children of men" at large,
"to see if there were any that did understand and seek God);" and
declaring, as the result of his unerring scrutiny, "there is "none" that
doeth good, no, not one."

That the apostle applies the passages to the case of the Jews is
admitted, yet it is evident more is contained in them than the single
proof of Jewish depravity. They go all the length of proving the
depravity of mankind, and are cited expressly with this view. "We have
before proved both Jews and Gentiles," says Paul in [Rom
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#009.md), "that they are all under sin."
Immediately on this, the quotations in question are introduced with the
usual formula, "as it is written," etc. Now since the apostle adduces
his Scripture proofs, to establish the doctrine that both Jews and
Gentiles are all under sin," we cannot reasonably decide against him by
confining their application to the Jews only.

In [Rom 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019.md) Paul brings his argument
to bear directly on the Jews. That they might not elude his aim, by
interpreting the universal expressions he had introduced, of all the
pagan only, leaving themselves favorably excepted; he reminds them that"
whatsoever things the law saith, it saith to them that were under it."
Not contented with having placed them alongside of the Gentiles in [Rom
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#009.md); by this second application of the
general doctrine of human depravity, to their particular case, he
renders escape or evasion impossible. The scope of the whole passage
then, is, that all people are depraved, and that the Jews form no
exception. This view is further strengthened by the apostle's conclusion
in [Rom 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020.md). "Therefore, by the deeds
of the law there shall no flesh be justified in his (God's) sight."

"If the words," says President Edwards, "which the apostle uses, do not
most fully and determinately signify an universality, no words ever used
in the Bible are sufficient to do it. I might challenge any man to
produce any one paragraph in the scriptures, from the beginning to the
end, where there is such a repetition and accumulation of terms, so
strongly, and emphatically, and carefully, to express the most perfect
and absolute universality, or any place to be compared to it." -
"Edwards on Original Sin, - Haldane's Commentary."

There is none righteous - The Hebrew [Psa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001.md) is, there is none that doeth
good. The Septuagint has the same. The apostle quotes according to the
sense of the passage. The design of the apostle is to show that none
could be justified by the Law. He uses an expression, therefore, which
is exactly conformable to his argument, and which accords in meaning
with the Hebrew, "there is none just," δίκαιος dikaios.

No, not one - This is not in the Hebrew, but is in the Septuagint. It is
a strong universal expression, denoting the state of almost universal
corruption which existed in the time of the psalmist. The expression
should not be interpreted to mean that there was not literally "one
pious man" in the nation; but that the characteristic of the nation was,
at that time, that it was exceedingly corrupt. Instead of being
righteous, as the Jew claimed, because they were Jews, the testimony of
their own Scriptures was, that they were universally wicked.

(The design of the apostle, however, is not to prove that there were few
or none pious. He is treating of the impossibility of justification by
works, and alleges in proof that, according to the judgment of God in
the [Psa 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001.md) Psalm, there were none
righteous, etc., in regard to their natural estate, or the condition in
which man is, previous to his being justified. In this condition, all
are deficient in righteousness, and have nothing to commend them to the
divine favor. What people may afterward become by grace is another
question, on which the apostle does not, in this place, enter. Whatever
number of pious people, therefore, there might be in various places of
the world, the argument of the apostle is not in the least affected. It
will hold good even in the millennium!)

[Romans 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 3:11</span></span>

There is none that understandeth - In the Hebrew [Psa
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002.md), God is represented as looking
down from heaven to see, that is, to make investigation, whether there
were any that understood or sought after him. This circumstance gives
not only high poetic beauty to the passage, but deep solemnity and
awfulness. God, the searcher of hearts, is represented as making
investigation on this very point. He looks down from heaven for this
very purpose, to ascertain whether there were any righteous. In the
Hebrew it is not asserted, though it is clearly and strongly implied,
that none such were found. That fact the apostle "states." If, as the
result of such an investigation, none were found; if God did not specify
that there were any such; then it follows that there were none. For none
could escape the notice of his eye; and if there had been any, the
benevolence of his heart would have led him to record it. To understand
is used in the sense of being wise; or of having such a state of moral
feeling as to dispose them to serve and obey God. The word is often used
in the Bible, not to denote a mere intellectual operation of the mind,
but the state of the heart inclining the mind to obey and worship God;
[Psa 107:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#043.md); [Psa
119:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#027.md), [Psa
119:100](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#100.md); [Pro
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#005.md); [Isa
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010.md); "Lest they should understand
with their heart," etc.

That seeketh after God - That endeavors to know and do his will, and to
be acquainted with his character. A disposition not to seek after God,
that is, to neglect and forget him, is one of the most decided proofs of
depravity. A righteous man counts it his highest privilege and honor to
know God, and to understand his will. A man can indulge in wickedness
only by forgetting God. Hence, a disposition "not" to seek God is full
proof of depravity.

[Romans 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 3:12</span></span>

They have all gone out of the way - They have "declined" from the true
path of piety and virtue.

They are together - They have at the same time; or they have equally
become unprofitable. They are as one; they are joined, or united in this
declension. The expression denotes union, or similarity.

Become unprofitable - This word in Hebrew means to become "putrid" and
"offensive," like fruit that is spoiled. In Arabic, it is applied to
"milk" that becomes sour. Applied to moral subjects, it means to become
corrupt and useless. They are of no value in regard to works of
righteousness.

There is none ... - This is taken literally from the Hebrew.

[Romans 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 3:13</span></span>

Their throat ... - This expression is taken from [Psa
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#009.md), literally from the Septuagint.
The design of the psalm is to reprove those who were false, traitorous,
slanderous, etc. [Psa 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#006.md). The
psalmist has the sin of deceit, and falsehood, and slander particularly
in his eye. The expressions here are to be interpreted in accordance
with that. The sentiment here may be, as the grave is ever open to
receive all into it, that is, into destruction, so the mouth or the
throat of the slanderer is ever open to swallow up the peace and
happiness of all. Or it may mean, as from an open sepulchre there
proceeds an offensive and pestilential vapor, so from the mouths of
slanderous persons there proceed noisome and ruinous words. "(Stuart.)"
I think the connection demands the former interpretation.

With their tongues ... - In their conversation, their promises, etc.,
they have been false, treacherous, and unfaithful.

The poison of asps - This is taken literally from the Septuagint of [Psa
140:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#003.md). The asp, or adder, is a species
of serpent whose poison is of such active operation that it kills almost
the instant that it penetrates, and that without remedy. It is small,
and commonly lies concealed, often in the "sand" in a road, and strikes
the traveler before he sees it. It is found chiefly in Egypt and Lybia.
It is said by ancient writers that the celebrated Cleopatra, rather than
be carried a captive to Rome by Augustus, suffered an asp to bite her in
the arm, by which she soon died. The precise species of serpent which is
here meant by the psalmist, however, cannot be ascertained. All that is
necessary to understand the passage is, that it refers to a serpent
whose bite was deadly, and rapid in its execution.

Is under their lips - The poison of the serpent is contained in a small
bag which is concealed at the root of the tooth. When the tooth is
struck into the flesh, the poison is pressed out, through a small hole
in the tooth, into the wound. Whether the psalmist was acquainted with
that fact, or referred to it, cannot be known: his words do not of
necessity imply it. The sentiment is, that as the poison of the asp is
rapid, certain, spreading quickly through the system, and producing
death; so the words of the slanderer are deadly, pestiferous, quickly
destroying the reputation and happiness of man. They are as subtle, as
insinuating, and as deadly to the reputation, as the poison of the adder
is to the body. Wicked people in the Bible are often compared to
serpents; [Mat 23:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#033.md); [Gen
49:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#017.md).

[Romans 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 3:14</span></span>

Whose mouth - [Psa 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#007.md). The apostle
has not quoted this literally, but has given the sense. David in the
psalm is describing his bitter enemies.

Cursing - Reproachful and opprobrious language, such as Shimei used in
relation to David; [Sa2 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005.md), [Sa2
16:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#007.md).

Bitterness - In the psalm, deceits. The word "bitterness" is used to
denote severity, harshness, cruelty; reproachful and malicious words.

[Romans 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 3:15</span></span>

Their feet ... - The quotation in this and the two following verses, is
abridged or condensed from [Isa
59:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#007.md). The expressions occur in the
midst of a description of the character of the nation in the time of the
prophet. The apostle has selected a few expressions out of many, rather
making a reference to the entire passage, than a formal quotation. The
expression, "their feet are swift," etc., denotes the eagerness of the
nation to commit crime, particularly deeds of injustice and cruelty.
They thirsted for the blood of innocence, and hasted to shed it, to
gratify their malice, or to satisfy their vengeance.

[Romans 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 3:16</span></span>

Destruction - That is, they "cause" the destruction or the ruin of the
reputation, happiness, and peace of others.

Misery - Calamity, ruin.

In their ways - Wherever they go. This is a striking description not
only of the wicked then, but of all times. The tendency of their conduct
is to destroy the virtue, happiness, and peace of all with whom they
come in contact.

[Romans 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 3:17</span></span>

And the way of peace ... - What tends to promote their own happiness, or
that of others, they do not regard. Intent on their plans of evil, they
do not know or regard what is suited to promote the welfare of
themselves or others. This is the case with all who are selfish, and who
seek to gain their own purposes of crime and ambition.

[Romans 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 3:18</span></span>

There is no fear of God - [Psa 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#001.md).
The word "fear" here denotes "reverence, awe, veneration." There is no
such regard or reverence for the character, authority, and honor of God
as to restrain them from crime. Their conduct shows that they are not
withheld from the commission of iniquity by any regard to the fear or
favor of God. The only thing that will be effectual in restraining
people from sin, will be a regard to the honor and Law of God.

In regard to these quotations from the Old Testament, we may make the
following remarks.

\(1\) they fully establish the position of the apostle, that the nation,
as such, was far from being righteous, or that they could be justified
by their own works. By quotations from no less than six distinct places
in their own writings, referring to different periods of their history,
he shows what the character of the nation was. And as this was the
characteristic of those times. it followed that a Jew could not hope to
be saved simply because he was a Jew. He needed, as much as the Gentile,
the benefit of some other plan of salvation.

\(2\) these passages show us how to use the Old Testament, and the facts
of ancient history. They are to be adduced not as showing directly what
the character of man is, now, but to show what human nature is. They
demonstrate what man is when under the most favorable circumstances; in
different situations; and at different periods of the world. The
concurrence of past facts shows what the race is. And as past facts are
uniform; as man thus far, in the most favorable circumstances, has been
sinful; it follows that this is the characteristic of man everywhere. It
is settled by the facts of the world, just as any other characteristic
of man is settled by the uniform occurrence of facts in all
circumstances and times. Ancient facts, and quotations of Scripture,
therefore, are to be adduced as proofs of the tendency of human nature.
So Paul used them, and so it is lawful for us to use them.

\(3\) it may be observed further, that the apostle has given a view of
human depravity which is very striking. He does not confine it to one
faculty of the mind, or to one set of actions; he specifies each member
and each faculty as being perverse, and inclined to evil. The depravity
extends to all the departments of action. The tongue, the mouth, the
feet, the "lips," are all involved in it; all are perverted, and all
become the occasion of the commission of sin. The entire man is corrupt;
and the painful description extends to every department of action.

\(4\) if such was the character of the Jewish nation under all its
advantages, what must have been the character of the pagan? We are
prepared thus to credit all that is said in Rom. i., and elsewhere, of
the sad state of the pagan world.

\(5\) what a melancholy view we have thus of human nature. From whatever
quarter we contemplate it, we come to the same conclusion. Whatever
record we examine; whatever history we read; whatever time or period we
contemplate; we find the same facts, and are forced to the same
conclusion. All are involved in sin, and are polluted, and ruined, and
helpless. Over these ruins we should sit down and weep, and lift our
eyes with gratitude to the God of mercy, that he has pitied us in our
low estate, and has devised a plan by which "these ruins may be built
again," and lost, fallen man be raised up to forfeited "glory, honor,
and immortality."

[Romans 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 3:19</span></span>

Now we know - We all admit. It is a conceded plain point.

What things soever - Whether given as precepts, or recorded as
historical facts. Whatever things are found in the Law. "The law saith."
This means here evidently the Old Testament. From that the apostle had
been drawing his arguments, and his train of thought requires us here to
understand the whole of the Old Testament by this. The same principle
applies, however, to all law, that it speaks only to those to whom it is
expressly given.

It saith to them ... - It speaks to them for whom it was expressly
intended; to them for whom the Law was made. The apostle makes this
remark in order to prevent the Jew from evading the force of his
conclusion. He had brought proofs from their own acknowledged laws, from
writings given expressly for them, and which recorded their own history,
and which they admitted to be divinely inspired. These proofs,
therefore, they could not evade.

That every mouth may be stopped - This is perhaps, a proverbial
expression, [Job 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#015.md); [Psa
107:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#042.md). It denotes that they would be
thoroughly convinced; that the argument would be so conclusive as that
they would have nothing to reply; that all objections would be silenced.
Here it denotes that the argument for the depravity of the Jews from the
Old Testament was so clear and satisfactory, that nothing could be
alleged in reply. This may be regarded as the conclusion of his whole
argument, and the expressions may refer not to the Jews only, but to all
the world. Its meaning may, perhaps, be thus expressed, "The Gentiles
are proved guilty by their own deeds, and by a violation of the laws of
nature. They sin against their own conscience; and have thus been shown
to be guilty before God Rom. 1. The Jews have also been shown to be
guilty; all their objections have been silenced by an independent train
of remark; by appeals to their own Law; by arguments drawn from the
authority which they admit. Thus, the mouths of both are stopped. Thus,
the whole world becomes guilty before God." I regard, therefore, the
word "that" here ἵνα hina as referring, not particularly to the argument
from the Law of the Jews, but to the whole previous train of argument,
embracing both Jews and Gentiles. His conclusion is thus general or
universal, drawn from arguments adapted to the two great divisions of
mankind.

And all the world - Both Jews and Gentiles, for so the strain of the
argument shows. That is, all by nature; all who are out of Christ; all
who are not pardoned. All are guilty where there is not some scheme
contemplating forgiveness, and which is not applied to purify them. The
apostle in all this argument speaks of what man is, and ever would be,
without some plan of justification appointed by God.

May become - May "be." They are not made guilty by the Law; but the
argument from the Law, and from fact, proves that they are guilty.

Guilty before God - ὑπόδικος τῷ Θεῷ hupodikos tō Theō. Margin, "subject
to the judgment of God." The phrase is taken from courts of justice. It
is applied to a man who has not vindicated or defended himself; against
whom therefore the charge or the indictment is found true; and who is in
consequence subject to punishment. The idea is that of subjection to
punishment; but always because the man personally deserves it, and
because being unable to vindicate himself, he ought to be punished. It
is never used to denote simply an obligation to punishment, but with
reference to the fact that the punishment is personally deserved." This
word, rendered "guilty," is not used elsewhere in the New Testament, nor
is it found in the Septuagint. The argument of the apostle here shows,

\(1\) That in order to guilt, there must be a law, either that of nature
or by revelation Rom. 1; 2; 3; and,

\(2\) That in order to guilt, there must be a violation of that law
which may be charged on them as individuals, and for which they are to
be held personally responsible.

[Romans 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 3:20</span></span>

By the deeds of the law - By works; or by such deeds as the Law
requires. The word "Law" has, in the Scriptures, a great variety of
significations. Its strict and proper meaning is, a rule of conduct
prescribed by superior authority. The course of reasoning in these
chapters shows the sense in which the apostle uses it here. He intends
evidently to apply it to those rules or laws by which the Jews and
Gentiles pretended to frame their lives; and to affirm that people could
be justified by no conformity to those laws. He had shown Rom. 1 that
"the pagan, the entire Gentile world," had violated the laws of nature;
the rules of virtue made known to them by reason, tradition, and
conscience. He had shown the same Rom. 2-3 in respect to the Jews. They
had equally failed in rendering obedience to their Law. In both these
cases the reference was, not to "ceremonial" or ritual laws, but to the
moral law; whether that law was made known by reason or by revelation.
The apostle had not been discussing the question whether they had
yielded obedience to their ceremonial law, but whether they had been
found holy, that is, whether they had obeyed the moral law. The
conclusion was, that in all this they had failed, and that therefore
they could not be justified by that Law. That the apostle did not intend
to speak of external works only is apparent; for he all along charges
them with a lack of conformity of the heart no less than with a lack of
conformity of the life; see [Rom 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#026.md),
[Rom 1:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#029.md); [Rom
2:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#028.md). The conclusion is therefore a
general one, that by no law, made known either by reason, conscience,
tradition, or revelation, could man be justified; that there was no form
of obedience which could be rendered, that would justify people in the
sight of a holy God.

There shall no flesh - No man; no human being, either among the Jews or
the Gentiles. It is a strong expression, denoting the absolute
universality of his conclusion; see the note at [Rom
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003.md).

Be justified - Be regarded and treated as righteous. None shall be
esteemed as having kept the Law, and as being entitled to the rewards of
obedience; see the note at [Rom 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017.md).

In his sight - Before him. God sits as a Judge to determine the
characters of people, and he shall not adjudge any to have kept the Law.

For by the law - That is, by all law. The connection shows that this is
the sense. Law is a rule of action. The effect of applying a rule to our
conduct is to show us what sin is. The meaning of the apostle clearly
is, that the application of a law to try our conduct, instead of being a
ground of justification, will be merely to show us our own sinfulness
and departures from duty. A man may esteem himself to be very right and
correct, until he compares himself with a rule, or law; so whether the
Gentiles compared their conduct with their laws of reason and
conscience, or the Jew his with his written law, the effect would be to
show them how far they had departed. The more closely and faithfully it
should be applied, the more they would see it. So far from being
justified by it, they would be more and more condemned; compare [Rom
7:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007.md). The same is the case now. This
is the way in which a sinner is converted; and the more closely and
faithfully the Law is preached, the more will it condemn him, and show
him that he needs some other plan of salvation.

[Romans 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 3:21</span></span>

But now - The apostle, having shown the entire failure of all attempts
to be justified by the "Law," whether among Jews or Gentiles, proceeds
to state fully the plan of justification by Jesus Christ in the gospel.
To do this, was the main design of the Epistle, [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017.md). He makes, therefore, in the
close of this chapter, an explicit statement of the nature of the
doctrine; and in the following parts of the Epistle he fully proves it,
and illustrates its effects.

The righteousness of God - God's plan of justifying people; see the note
at [Rom 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017.md).

Without the law - In a way different from personal obedience to the Law.
It does not mean that God abandoned his Law; or that Jesus Christ did
not regard the Law, for he came to "magnify" it [Isa
42:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#021.md); or that sinners after they are
justified have no regard to the Law; but it means simply what the
apostle had been endeavoring to show, that justification could not be
accomplished by personal obedience to any law of Jew or Gentile, and
that it must be accomplished in some other way.

Being witnessed - Being borne witness to. It was not a new doctrine; it
was found in the Old Testament. The apostle makes this observation with
special reference to the Jews. He does not declare any new thing, but
that which was rally declared in their own sacred writings.

By the law - This expression here evidently denotes, as it did commonly
among the Jews, the five books of Moses. And the apostle means to say
that this doctrine was found in those books; not that it was in the Ten
Commandments, or in the Law, strictly so called. It is not a part of
"law" to declare justification except by strict and perfect obedience.
That it was found "in" those books; the apostle shows by the case of
Abraham; Rom. 4; see also his reasoning on [Lev
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005.md); [Deu
30:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#012.md), in [Rom
10:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005.md); compare [Exo
34:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006.md).

And the prophets - Generally, the remainder of the Old Testament. The
phrase "the Law and the prophets" comprehended the whole of the Old
Testament; [Mat 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017.md); [Mat
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013.md); [Mat
22:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#040.md); [Act
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#015.md); [Act
28:23](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#023.md). That this doctrine was
contained in the prophets, the apostle showed by the passage quoted from
[Hab 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004.md), in [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017.md), "The just shall live by faith."
The same thing he showed in [Rom
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#011.md), from [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016.md); [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023.md); [Rom
4:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#006.md), from [Psa
32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001.md). The same thing is fully
taught in [Isa 53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011.md); [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024.md). Indeed, the general tenor of the
Old Testament - the appointment of sacrifices, etc. taught that man was
a sinner, and that he could not be justified by obedience to the moral
law.

[Romans 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 3:22</span></span>

Even the righteousness of God - The apostle, having stated that the
design of the gospel was to reveal a new plan of becoming just in the
sight of God, proceeds here more fully to explain it. The explanation
which he offers, makes it plain that the phrase so often used by him,
"righteousness of God," does not refer to an attribute of God, but to
his plan of making people righteous. Here he says that it is by faith in
Jesus Christ; but surely an attribute of God is not produced by faith in
Jesus Christ. It means God's mode of regarding people as righteous
through their belief in Jesus Christ.

(That the "righteousness of God" cannot be explained of the attribute of
justice, is obvious enough. It cannot be said of divine justice, that it
is "unto and upon all them that believe." But we are not reduced to the
alternative of explaining the phrase, either of God's justice, or God's
plan of justifying people. Why may we not understand it of that
righteousness which Yahweh devised, Jesus executed, and the Spirit
applies; and which is therefore justly denominated the righteousness of
God? It consists in that conformity to law which Jesus manifested in his
atoning death, and meritorious obedience. His death, by reason of his
divine nature, was of infinite value. And when he voluntarily submitted
to yield a life that was forfeited by no transgression of his own, the
Law, in its penal part, was more magnified than if every descendant of
Adam had sunk under the weight of its vengeance.

Nor was the preceptive part of the Law less honored, in the spotless
obedience of Christ. He abstained from every sin, fulfilled every duty,
and exemplified every virtue. Neither God nor man could accuse him of
failure in duty. To God he gave his piety, to man his glowing love, to
friends his heart, to foes his pity and his pardon. And by the obedience
of the Creator in human form, the precept of the Law was more honored
than if the highest angels had come down to do reverence to it, in
presence of people. Here then is a righteousness worthy of the name,
divine, spotless, broad, lasting - beyond the power of language to
characterize. It is that everlasting righteousness which Daniel
predicted the Messiah should bring in. Adam's righteousness failed and
passed away. That of once happy angels perished too, but this shall
endure. "The heavens," says Yahweh," shall vanish away like smoke, and
the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein
shall die in like manner, but my salvation shall be forever, and my
righteousness shall not be abolished," This righteousness is broad
enough to cover every sinner and every sin. It is pure enough to meet
the eye of God himself. It is therefore the sinner's only shield. See
the note at [Rom 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017.md), for the true
meaning of the expression "righteousness of God.")

By faith of Jesus Christ - That is, by faith in Jesus Christ. Thus, the
expression, [Mar 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#022.md), "Have the
faith of God" (margin), means, have faith in God. So [Act
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#016.md), the "faith of his name"
"(Greek)," means, faith in his name. So [Gal
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020.md), the "faith of the Son of God"
means, faith in the Son of God. This cannot mean that faith is the
meritorious cause of salvation, but that it is the instrument or means
by which we become justified. It is the state of mind, or condition of
the heart, to which God has been pleased to promise justification. (On
the nature of faith see the note at [Mar
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016)..md) God has promised that they who
believe in Christ shall be pardoned and saved. This is his plan in
distinction from the plan of those who seek to be justified by works.

Unto all and upon all - It is evident that these expressions are
designed to be emphatic, but why both are used is not very apparent.
Many have supposed that there was no essential difference in the
meaning. If there be a difference, it is probably this: the first
expression, "unto all" εἰς πᾶς eis pas, may denote that this plan of
justification has come "(Luther)" unto all men, to Jews and Gentiles;
that is, that it has been provided for them, and offered to them without
distinction. The plan was ample for all, was suited for all, was equally
necessary for all, and was offered to all. The second phrase, "upon all"
ἐπὶ πᾶντας epi pantas, , may be designed to guard against the
supposition that all therefore would be benefited by it, or be saved by
the mere fact that the announcement had come to all. The apostle adds
therefore, that the benefits of this plan must actually come upon all,
or must be applied to all, if they would be justified. They could not be
justified merely by the fact that the plan was provided, and that the
knowledge of it had come to all, but by their actually coming under this
plan, and availing themselves of it. Perhaps there is reference in the
last expression, "upon all," to a robe, or garment, that is placed upon
one to hide his nakedness, or sin; compare [Isa
64:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#006.md), also [Phi
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#009.md).

For there is no difference - That is, there is no difference in regard
to the matter under discussion. The apostle does not mean to say that
there is no difference in regard to the talents, dispositions,
education, and property of people; but there is no distinction in regard
to the way in which they must be justified. All must be saved, if saved
at all, in the same mode, whether Jews or Gentiles, bond or free, rich
or poor, learned or ignorant. None can be saved by works; and all are
therefore dependent on the mercy of God in Jesus Christ.

[Romans 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 3:23</span></span>

For all have sinned - This was the point which he had fully established
in the discussion in these chapters.

Have come short - Greek, "Are deficient in regard to;" are lacking, etc.
Here it means, that they had failed to obtain, or were destitute of.

The glory of God - The praise or approbation of God. They had sought to
be justified, or approved, by God; but all had failed. Their works of
the Law had not secured his approbation; and they were therefore under
condemnation. The word "glory" (δόξα doxa) is often used in the sense of
praise, or approbation, [Joh 5:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#041.md),
[Joh 5:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#044.md); [Joh
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#018.md); [Joh
8:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#050.md), [Joh
8:54](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#054.md); [Joh
12:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#043.md).

[Romans 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rom 3:24</span></span>

Being justified - Being treated as if righteous; that is, being regarded
and treated as if they had kept the Law. The apostle has shown that they
could not be so regarded and treated by any merit of their own, or by
personal obedience to the Law. He now affirms that if they were so
treated, it must be by mere favor, and as a matter not of right, but of
gift. This is the essence of the gospel. And to show this, and the way
in which it is done, is the main design of this Epistle. The expression
here is to be understood as referring to all who are justified; [Rom
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022.md). The righteousness of God by
faith in Jesus Christ, is "upon all who believe," who are all "justified
freely by his grace."

Freely - δωρεὰν dōrean. This word stands opposed to what is purchased,
or which is obtained by labor, or which is a matter of claim. It is a
free, undeserved gift, not merited by our obedience to the Law, and not
that to which we have any claim. The apostle uses the word here in
reference to those who are justified. To them it is a mere undeserved
gift, It does not mean that it has been obtained, however, without any
price or merit from anyone, for the Lord Jesus has purchased it with his
own blood, and to him it becomes a matter of justice that those who were
given to him should be justified, [Co1
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020.md); [Co1
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#023.md); [Pe2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001.md); [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009). (Greek.md). [Act
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028.md); [Isa
53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011.md). We have no offering to bring,
and no claim. To us, therefore, it is entirely a matter of gift.

By his grace - By his favor; by his mere undeserved mercy; see the note
at [Rom 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007.md).

Through the redemption - διὰ τῆς ἀπολυτρώσεως dia tēs apolutrōseōs. The
word used here occurs only 10 times in the New Testament, [Luk
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#028.md); [Rom
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024.md); [Rom
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023.md); [Co1
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030.md); [Eph
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#007.md), [Eph
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014.md); [Eph
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030.md); [Col
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#014.md); [Heb
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015.md); [Heb
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#035). Its root (λύτρον lutron.md)
properly denotes the price which is paid for a prisoner of war; the
ransom, or stipulated purchase-money, which being paid, the captive is
set free. The word used here is then employed to denote liberation from
bondage, captivity, or evil of any kind, usually keeping up the idea of
a price, or a ransom paid, in consequence of which the delivery is
effected. It is sometimes used in a large sense, to denote simple
deliverance by any means, without reference to a price paid, as in [Luk
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#028.md); [Rom
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023.md); [Eph
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014.md). That this is not the sense here,
however, is apparent. For the apostle in the next verse proceeds to
specify the price which has been paid, or the means by which this
redemption has been effected. The word here denotes that deliverance
from sin, and from the evil consequences of sin, which has been effected
by the offering of Jesus Christ as a propitiation; [Rom
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025.md).

That is in Christ Jesus - Or, that has been effected by Christ Jesus;
that of which he is the author and procurer; compare [Joh
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016.md).

[Romans 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 3:25</span></span>

Whom God hath set forth - Margin, "Fore-ordained" (προέθετο proetheto).
The word properly means, "to place in public view;" to exhibit in a
conspicuous situation, as goods are exhibited or exposed for sale, or as
premiums or rewards of victory were exhibited to public view in the
games of the Greeks. It sometimes has the meaning of decreeing,
purposing, or constituting, as in the margin (compare [Rom
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#013.md); [Eph
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#009).md); and many have supposed that this
is its meaning here. But the connection seems to require the usual
signification of the word; and it means that God has publicly exhibited
Jesus Christ as a propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of people. This
public exhibition was made by his being offered on the cross, in the
face of angels and of people. It was not concealed; it was done openly.
He was put to open shame; and so put to death as to attract toward the
scene the eyes of angels, and of the inhabitants of all worlds.

To be a propitiation - ἱλαστήριον hilastērion. This word occurs but in
one other place in the New Testament. [Heb
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#005), "and over it (the ark.md) the
cherubim of glory shadowing the mercy-seat. It is used here to denote
the lid or cover of the ark of the covenant. It was made of gold, and
over it were the cherubim. In this sense it is often used by the
Septuagint [Exo 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#017.md), "And thou shalt
make a propitiatory ἱλαστήριον hilastērion of gold," Exo. 18-20, 22;
[Exo 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#006.md); [Exo
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#007.md); [Exo
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#011.md); [Exo
37:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#006.md); [Exo
40:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#018.md); [Lev
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#002.md), [Lev
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#013.md). The Hebrew name for this was
כפּרת kaphoreth, from the verb כּפר kaaphar, "to cover" or "to conceal."
It was from this place that God was represented as speaking to the
children of Israel. [Exo 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022.md), "and I
will speak to thee from above the Hilasterion, the propitiatory, the
mercy-seat. [Lev 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#002.md), "For I will
appear in the cloud upon the mercy-seat." This seat, or cover, was
covered with the smoke of the incense, when the high priest entered the
most holy place, [Lev 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#013.md).

And the blood of the bullock offered on the great day of atonement, was
to be sprinkled "upon the mercy-seat," and "before the mercy-seat,"
"seven times," [Lev 16:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#014.md). This
sprinkling or offering of blood was called making "an atonement for the
holy place because of the uncleanness of the children of Israel," etc.
[Lev 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#016.md). It was from this
mercy-seat that God pronounced pardon, or expressed himself as
reconciled to his people. The atonement was made, the blood was
sprinkled, and the reconciliation thus effected. The name was thus given
to that cover of the ark, because it was the place from which God
declared himself reconciled to his people. Still the inquiry is, why is
this name given to Jesus Christ? In what sense is he declared to be a
propitiation? It is evident that it cannot be applied to him in any
literal sense. Between the golden cover of the ark of the covenant and
the Lord Jesus, the analogy must be very slight, if any such analogy can
be perceived. We may observe, however,

\(1\) That the main idea, in regard to the cover of the ark called the
mercy-seat, was that of God's being reconciled to his people; and that
this is the main idea in regard to the Lord Jesus whom "God hath set
forth."

\(2\) this reconciliation was effected then by the sprinkling of blood
on the mercy-seat, [Lev 16:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#015.md). The
same is true of the Lord Jesus - by blood.

\(3\) in the former case it was by the blood of atonement; the offering
of the bullock on the great day of atonement, that the reconciliation
was effected, [Lev 16:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#017.md). In the
case of the Lord Jesus it was also by blood; by the blood of atonement.
But it was by his own blood. This the apostle distinctly states in this
verse.

\(4\) in the former case there was a sacrifice, or expiatory offering;
and so it is in reconciliation by the Lord Jesus. In the former, the
mercy-seat was the visible, declared place where God would express his
reconciliation with his people. So in the latter, the offering of the
Lord Jesus is the manifest and open way by which God will be reconciled
to people.

\(5\) in the former, there was joined the idea of a sacrifice for sin,
Lev. 16. So in the latter. And hence, the main idea of the apostle here
is to convey the idea of a sacrifice for sin; or to set forth the Lord
Jesus as such a sacrifice. Hence, the word "propitiation" in the
original may express the idea of a propitiatory sacrifice, as well as
the cover to the ark. The word is an adjective, and may be joined to the
noun sacrifice, as well as to denote the mercy-seat of the ark. This
meaning accords also with its classic meaning to denote a propitiatory
offering, or an offering to produce reconciliation. Christ is thus
represented, not as a mercy-seat, which would be unintelligible; but as
the medium, the offering, the expiation, by which reconciliation is
produced between God and man.

Through faith - Or by means of faith. The offering will be of no avail
without faith. The offering has been made; but it will not be applied,
except where there is faith. He has made an offering which may be
efficacious in putting away sin; but it produces no reconciliation, no
pardon, except where it is accepted by faith.

In his blood - Or in his death - his bloody death. Among the Jews, the
blood was regarded as the seat of life, or vitality. [Lev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011.md), "the life of the flesh is in
the blood." Hence, they were commanded not to eat blood. [Gen
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004.md), "but flesh with the life thereof,
which is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat." [Lev
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#026.md); [Deu
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#023.md); [Sa1
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#034.md). This doctrine is contained
uniformly in the Sacred Scriptures. And it has been also the opinion of
not a few celebrated physiologists, as well in modern as in ancient
times. The same was the opinion of the ancient Parsees and Hindus. Homer
thus often speaks of blood as the seat of life, as in the expression
πορφυρεος θανατος porphureos thanatos, or "purple death." And Virgil
speaks of "purple life,"

Purpuream vomit ille animam.

AEniad, ix. 349.

Empedocles and Critias among the Greek philosophers, also embraced this
opinion. Among the moderns, Harvey, to whom we are indebted for a
knowledge of the circulation of the blood, fully believed it. Hoffman
and Huxham believed it Dr. John Hunter has fully adopted the belief, and
sustained it, as he supposed, by a great variety of considerations. See
Good's Book of Nature, pp. 102, 108, New York edition, 1828. This was
undoubtedly the doctrine of the Hebrews; and hence, with them to shed
the blood was a phrase signifying to kill; hence, the efficacy of their
sacrifices was supposed to consist in the blood, that is, in the life of
the victim. Hence, it was unlawful to eat it, as it were the life, the
seat of vitality; the more immediate and direct gift of God. When,
therefore, the blood of Christ is spoken of in the New Testament, it
means the offering of his life as a sacrifice, or his death as an
expiation. His life was given to make atonement. See the word "blood"
thus used in [Rom 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#009.md); [Eph
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#007.md); [Col
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#014.md); [Heb
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012.md), [Heb
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014.md); [Heb
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#012.md); [Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005.md); [Pe1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019.md); [Jo1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007.md). By faith in his death as a
sacrifice for sin; by believing that he took our sins; that he died in
our place; by thus, in some sense, making his offering ours; by
approving it, loving it, embracing it, trusting it, our sins become
pardoned, and our souls made pure.

To declare - εἰς ἔνδειξις eis endeixis. For "the purpose" of showing, or
exhibiting; to present it to man. The meaning is, that the plan was
adopted; the Saviour was given; he suffered and died: and the scheme is
proposed to people, for the purpose of making a full manifestation of
his plan, in contradistinction from all the plans of people.

His righteousness - His plan of justification. The method or scheme
which he has adopted, in distinction from that of man; and which he now
exhibits, or proffers to sinners. There is great variety in the
explanation of the word here rendered "righteousness." Some explain it
as meaning veracity; others as holiness; others as goodness; others as
essential justice. Most interpreters, perhaps, have explained it as
referring to an attribute of God. But the whole connection requires us
to understand it here as in [Rom 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017.md),
not of an attribute of God, but of his "plan" of justifying sinners. He
has adopted and proposed a plan by which people may become just by faith
in Jesus Christ, and not by their own works. His acquitting people from
sin; his regarding them and treating them as just, is set forth in the
gospel by the offering of Jesus Christ as a sacrifice on the cross. (For
the true meaning of this phrase, see the note at [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017.md); [Rom
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022)..md)

For the remission of sins - Margin, "Passing over." The word used here
πάρεσιν paresin occurs no where else in the New Testament, nor in the
Septuagint. It means "passing by," as not noticing, and hence,
forgiving. A similar idea occurs in [Sa2
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#010.md), and [Mic
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#018.md). "Who is a God like unto thee,
that passeth by the transgression of the remnant of his inheritance?" In
Romans it means for the "pardoning," or in order to pardon past
transgression.

That are past - That have been committed; or that have existed before.
This has been commonly understood to refer to past generations, as
affirming that sins under all dispensations of the world are to be
forgiven in this manner, through the sacrifice of Christ. And it has
been supposed that all who have been justified, have received pardon by
the merits of the sacrifice of Christ. This may be true; but there is no
reason to think that this is the idea in this passage. For,

\(1\) The scope of the passage does not require it. The argument is not
to show how people had been justified, but how they might be. It is not
to discuss an historical fact, but to state the way in which sin was to
be forgiven under the gospel.

\(2\) the language has no immediate or necessary reference to past
generations. It evidently refers to the past lives of the individuals
who are justified, and not to the sins of former times. All that the
passage means, therefore, is, that the plan of pardon is such as
completely to remove all the former sins of the life, not of all former
generations. If it referred to the sins of former times, it would not be
easy to avoid the doctrine of universal salvation.

(The design of the apostle is to showy the alone ground of a sinner's
justification. That ground is "the righteousness of God." To manifest
this righteousness, Christ had been set forth in the beginning of the
gospel age as a propitiatory sacrifice. But though at this time
manifested or declared, it had in reality been the ground of
justification all along. Believers in every past dispensation, looking
forward to the period of its revelation, had built their hopes on it,
and been admitted into glory.

The idea of manifestation in gospel times, seems most intimately
connected with the fact that in past ages, the ground of pardon had been
hidden, or at best but dimly seen through type and ceremony. There seems
little doubt that these two things were associated in the apostle's
mind. Though the ground of God's procedure in remitting the sins of his
people, during the former economy, had long been concealed, it was now
gloriously displayed before the eyes of the universe. Paul has the very
same idea in [Heb 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015.md), "And for this
cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of death,
for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first
testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance." It may be noticed also that the expression in [Heb
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#020.md), "at this time," that is, in the
gospel age, requires us to understand the other clause, "sins that are
past," as pointing to sin committed under former dispensations. Nor is
there any fear of lending support to the doctrine of universal
salvation. if we espouse this view. the sins remitted in past ages being
obviously those of believers only. The very same objection might be
urged against the parallel passage in [Heb
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015)..md)

Through the forbearance of God - Through his patience, his
long-suffering. That is, he did not come forth in judgment when the sin
was committed; he spared us, though deserving of punishment; and now he
comes forth completely to pardon those sins concerning which he has so
long and so graciously exercised forbearance. This expression obviously
refers not to the remission of sins, but to the fact that they were
committed while he evinced such long-suffering; compare [Act
17:30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030.md). I do not know better how to
show the practical value and bearing of this important passage of
Scripture, than by transcribing a part of the affecting experience of
the poet Cowper. It is well known that before his conversion he was
oppressed by a long and dreadful melancholy; that this was finally
heightened to despair; and that he was then subjected to the kind
treatment of Dr. Cotton in Alban's, as a melancholy case of derangement.

His leading thought was that he was doomed to inevitable destruction,
and that there was no hope. From this he was roused only by the kindness
of his brother, and by the promises of the gospel; (see Taylor's Life of
Cowper). The account of his conversion I shall now give in his own
words. "The happy period, which was to shake off my fetters, and afford
me a clear discovery of the free mercy of God in Christ Jesus, was now
arrived. I flung myself into a chair near the window, and seeing a Bible
there, ventured once more to apply to it for comfort and instruction.
The first verse I saw was [Rom 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025.md);
"Whom God hath set forth, etc." Immediately I received strength to
believe, and the full beam of the Sun of righteousness shone upon me. I
saw the sufficiency of the atonement he had made for my pardon and
justification. In a moment I believed, and received the peace of the
gospel. Unless, the Almighty arm had been under me, I think I should
have been overwhelmed with gratitude and joy. My eyes filled with tears,
and my voice choked with transport. I could only look up to heaven in
silent fear, overwhelmed with love and wonder. How glad should I now
have been to have spent every moment in prayer and thanksgiving. I lost
no opportunity of repairing to a throne of grace; but flew to it with an
earnestness irresistible, and never to be satisfied."

[Romans 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rom 3:26</span></span>

At this time - The time now since the Saviour has come, now is the time
when he manifests it.

That he might be just - This verse contains the substance of the gospel.
The word "just" here does not mean benevolent, or merciful, though it
may sometimes have that meaning; see the [Mat
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#019.md) note, also [Joh
17:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#025.md) note. But it refers to the fact
that God had retained the integrity of his character as a moral
governor; that he had shown a due regard to his Law, and to the penalty
of the Law by his plan of salvation. Should he forgive sinners without
an atonement, justice would be sacrificed and abandoned. The Law would
cease to have any terrors for the guilty, and its penalty would be a
nullity. In the plan of salvation, therefore, he has shown a regard to
the Law by appointing his Son to be a substitute in the place of
sinners; not to endure its precise penalty, for his sufferings were not
eternal, nor were they attended with remorse of conscience, or by
despair, which are the proper penalty of the Law; but he endured so much
as to accomplish the same ends as if those who shall be saved by him had
been doomed to eternal death.

That is, he showed that the Law could not be violated without
introducing suffering; and that it could not be broken with impunity. He
showed that he had so great a regard for it, that he would not pardon
one sinner without an atonement. And thus he secured the proper honor to
his character as a lover of his Law, a hater of sin, and a just God. He
has shown that if sinners do not avail themselves of the offer of pardon
by Jesus Christ, they must experience in their own souls forever the
pains which this substitute for sinners endured in behalf of people on
the cross. Thus, no principle of justice has been abandoned; no
threatening has been modified; no claim of his Law has been let down; no
disposition has been evinced to do injustice to the universe by
suffering the guilty to escape. He is, in all this great Transaction, a
just moral governor, as just to his Law, to himself, to his Son, to the
universe, when he pardons, as he is when he sends the incorrigible
sinner down to hell. A full compensation, an equivalent, has been
provided by the sufferings of the Saviour in the sinner's stead, and the
sinner may be pardoned.

And the justifier of him ... - Greek, "Even justifying him that
believeth, etc." This is the uniqueness and the wonder of the gospel.
Even while pardoning, and treating the ill-deserving as if they were
innocent, he can retain his pure and holy character. His treating the
guilty with favor does not show that be loves guilt and pollution, for
he has expressed his abhorrence of it in the atonement. His admitting
them to friendship and heaven does not show that he approves their past
conduct and character, for he showed how much he hated even their sins
by giving his Son to a shameful death for them. When an executive
pardons offenders, there is an abandonment of the principles of justice
and law. The sentence is set aside; the threatenings of the law are
departed from; and it is done without compensation. It is declared that
in certain cases the law may be violated, and its penalty "not" be
inflicted. But not so with God. He shows no less regard to his law in
pardoning than in punishing. This is the grand, glorious, special
feature of the gospel plan of salvation.

Him which believeth in Jesus - Greek, "Him who is of the faith of
Jesus;" in contradistinction from him who is of the works of the Law;
that is, who depends on his own works for salvation.

[Romans 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rom 3:27</span></span>

Where is boasting then? - Where is there ground or occasion of boasting
or pride? Since all have sinned, and since all have failed of being able
to justify themselves by obeying the Law, and since all are alike
dependent on the mere mercy of God in Christ, all ground of boasting is
of course taken away. This refers particularly to the Jews, who were
much addicted to boasting of their special privileges; See the note at
[Rom 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001.md), etc.

By what law? - The word "law "here is used in the sense of "arrangement,
rule, or economy." By what arrangement, or by the operation of what
rule, is boasting excluded? "(Stuart)." See [Gal
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#021.md); [Act
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#020.md).

Of works - The Law which commands works, and on which the Jews relied.
If this were complied with, and they were thereby justified, they would
have had ground of self-confidence, or boasting, as being justified by
their own merits. But a plan which led to this, which ended in boasting,
and self-satisfaction, and pride, could not be true.

Nay - No.

The law of faith - The rule, or arrangement which proclaims that we have
no merit; that we are lost sinners; and that we are to be justified only
by faith.

[Romans 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rom 3:28</span></span>

Therefore - As the result of the previous train of argument.

That a man - That all who are justified; that is, that there is no other
way.

Is justified by faith - Is regarded and treated as righteous, by
believing in the Lord Jesus Christ.

Without the deeds of the law - Without works as a meritorious ground of
justification. The apostle, of course, does not mean that Christianity
does not produce good works, or that they who are justified will not
obey the Law, and be holy; but that no righteousness of their own will
be the ground of their justification. They are sinners; and as such can
have no claim to he treated as righteous. God has devised a plan by
which, they may be pardoned and saved; and that is by faith alone. This
is the grand uniqueness of the Christian religion. This was the special
point in the reformation from popery. Luther often called this doctrine
of justification by faith the article upon which the church stood or
fell - articulus stantis, vel cadentis ecclesiae - and it is so. If this
doctrine is held entire, all others will be held with it. If this is
abandoned, all others will fall also. It may be remarked here, however,
that this doctrine by no means interferes with the doctrine that good
works are to be performed by Christians. Paul urges this as much as any
other writer in the New Testament. His doctrine is, that they are not to
be relied on as a ground of justification; but that he did not mean to
teach that they are not to be performed by Christians is apparent from
the connection, and from the following places in his epistles: [Rom
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#007.md); [Co2
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#008.md); [Eph
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010.md); [Ti1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#010.md); [Ti1
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#010.md), [Ti1
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#025.md); [Ti1
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#018.md); [Ti2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#017.md); [Tit
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#007.md), [Tit
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#014.md); [Tit
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#008.md); [Heb
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#024.md). That we are not justified by
our works is a doctrine which he has urged and repeated with great power
and frequency. See [Rom 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#002.md), [Rom
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#006.md); [Rom
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011.md), [Rom
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032.md); [Rom
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#006.md); [Gal
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016.md); [Gal
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#002.md), [Gal
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#005.md),[Gal
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010.md); [Eph
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#009.md); [Ti2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009.md).

[Romans 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">rom 3:29</span></span>

Is he the God ... - The Jews supposed that he was the God of their
nation only, that they only were to be admitted to his favor. In these
verses Paul showed that as all had alike sinned, Jews and Gentiles; and
as the plan of salvation by faith was adapted to sinners, without any
special reference to Jews; so God could show favors to all, and all
might be admitted on the same terms to the benefits of the plan of
salvation.

It is one God - The same God, there is but one, and his plan is equally
suited to Jews and Gentiles.

The circumcision - Those who are circumcised - the Jews.

The uncircumcision - Gentiles; all who were not Jews.

By faith ...through faith - There is no difference in the meaning of
these expressions. Both denote that faith is the instrumental cause of
justification, or acceptance with God.

[Romans 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">rom 3:31</span></span>

Do we then make void the law - Do we render it vain and useless; do we
destroy its moral obligation; and do we prevent obedience to it, by the
doctrine of justification by faith? This was an objection which would
naturally be made; and which has thousands of times been since made,
that the doctrine of justification by faith tends to licentiousness. The
word "law" here, I understand as referring to the moral law, and not
merely to the Old Testament. This is evident from [Rom
3:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020.md), where the apostle shows that
no man could be justified by deeds of law, by conformity with the moral
law. See the note.

God forbid - By no means. Note, [Rom
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004.md). This is an explicit denial of any
such tendency.

Yea, we establish the law - That is, by the doctrine of justification by
faith; by this scheme of treating people as righteous, the moral law is
confirmed, its obligation is enforced, obedience to it is secured. This
is done in the following manner:

\(1\) God showed respect to it, in being unwilling to pardon sinners
without an atonement. He showed that it could not be violated with
impunity; that he was resolved to fulfil its threatenings.

\(2\) Jesus Christ came to magnify it, and to make it honorable. He
showed respect to it in his life; and he died to show that God was
determined to inflict its penalty.

\(3\) the plan of justification by faith leads to an observance of the
Law. The sinner sees the evil of transgression. He sees the respect
which God has shown to the Law. He gives his heart to God, and yields
himself to obey his Law. All the sentiments that arise from the
conviction of sin; that flow from gratitude for mercies; that spring
from love to God; all his views of the sacredness of the Law, prompt him
to yield obedience to it. The fact that Christ endured such sufferings
to show the evil of violating the Law, is one of the strongest motives
prompting to obedience. We do not easily and readily repeat what
overwhelms our best friends in calamity; and we are brought to hate what
inflicted such woes on the Saviour's soul. The sentiment recorded by
Watts is as true as it is beautiful:

"'Twas for my sins my dearest Lord.

Hung on the cursed tree.

And groan'd away his dying life,

For thee, my soul, for thee.

"O how I hate those lusts of mine.

That crucified my Lord;

Those sins that pierc'd and nail'd his flesh.

Fast to the fatal wood.

"Yes, my Redeemer, they shall die,

My heart hath so decreed;

Nor will I spare the guilty things.

That made my Saviour bleed."

This is an advantage in moral influence which no cold, abstract law
always has over the human mind. And one of the chief glories of the plan
of salvation is, that while it justifies the sinner, it brings a new set
of influences from heaven, more tender and mighty than can be drawn from
any other source, to produce obedience to the Law of God.

(This is indeed a beautiful and just view of the moral influence of the
gospel, and especially of the doctrine of justification by faith alone.
It may be questioned, however, whether the apostle in this place refers
chiefly, or even at all, to the sanctifying tendency of his doctrine.
This he does very fully in the 6th Rom.; and therefore, if another and
consistent sense can be found, we need not resort to the supposition
that he now anticipates what he intended, in a subsequent part of his
epistle, more fully to discuss. In what other way, then, does the
apostle's doctrine establish the Law? How does he vindicate himself from
the charge of making it void? In the preceding chapter he had pointed
out the true ground of pardon in the "righteousness of God." He had
explained that none could be justified but they who had by faith
received it. "Do we then," he asks in conclusion," make void the Law by
maintaining thus, that no sinner can be accepted who does not receive a
righteousness commensurate with all its demands?." "Yea, we establish
the law," is the obvious answer. Jesus has died to satisfy its claims,
and lives to honor its precepts. Thus, he hath brought in
"righteousness," which, being imputed to them that believe, forms such a
ground of pardon and acceptance, as the Law cannot challenge.

Calvin, in his commentary on the passage, though he does not exclude the
idea of sanctification, yet gives prominence to the view now stated.
"When," says he, "we come to Christ, the exact righteousness of the Law
is first found in him, which also becomes ours by imputation; in the
next place sanctification is acquired," etc.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 4](rom004.md)

</div>
