<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Romans Index](rom.md)  
  [Previous](rom013)  [Next](rom015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001.md)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 14:0</span></span>

Romans 14 is designed to settle some difficult and delicate questions
that could not but arise between the Jews and Gentiles respecting food
and the observance of particular days, rites, etc. The "occasions" of
these questions were these: The converts to Christianity were from both
Jews and Gentiles. There were many Jews in Rome; and it is probable that
no small part of the church was composed of them. The New Testament
everywhere shows that they were disposed to bind the Gentile converts to
their own customs, and to insist on the observance of the unique laws of
Moses; see [Act 15:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001.md), etc.; [Gal
2:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003.md). The "subjects" on which
questions of this kind would be agitated were, circumcision, days of
fasting, the distinction of meats, etc. A part of these only are
discussed in this chapter. The views of the apostle in regard to
"circumcision" had been stated in Rom. 3-4. In this chapter he notices
the disputes which would be likely to arise on the following subjects;

\(1\) The use of "meat," evidently referring to the question whether it
was lawful to eat the meat that was offered in sacrifice to idols; [Rom
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002.md).

\(2\) the distinctions and observances of the days of Jewish fastings,
etc., [Rom 14:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#005.md).

\(3\) the laws observed by the Jews in relation to animals as "clean" or
"unclean;" [Rom 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014.md).

It is probable that these are mere "specimens" adduced by the apostle to
settle "principles" of conduct in regard to the Gentiles, and to show to
each party how they ought to act in "all" such questions.

The apostle's design here is to allay all these contentions by producing
peace, kindness, charity. This he does by the following considerations,
namely:

\(1\) That we have no right to "judge" another man in this case, for he
is the servant of God; [Rom 14:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#003.md).

\(2\) that whatever course is taken in these questions, it is done
conscientiously, and with a desire to glorify God. In such a case there
should be kindness and charity; [Rom
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#006.md), etc.

\(3\) that we must stand at the judgment-seat of Christ, and give an
account "there;" and that "we," therefore, should not usurp the function
of judging; [Rom 14:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010.md).

\(4\) that there is really nothing unclean of itself; [Rom
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014.md).

\(5\) that religion consisted in more important matters than "such"
questions; [Rom 14:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017.md).

\(6\) that we should follow after the things of peace, etc.; [Rom
14:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#019.md).

The principles of this chapter are applicable to all "similar" cases of
difference of opinion about rites and ceremonies, and unessential
doctrines of religion; and we shall see that if they were honestly
applied, they would settle no small part of the controversies in the
religious world.

[Romans 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 14:1</span></span>

Him that is weak - The design here is to induce Christians to receive to
their fellowship those who had scruples about the propriety of certain
things, or that might have special prejudices and feelings as the result
of education or former habits of belief. The apostle, therefore, begins
by admitting that such an one may be "weak," that is, not fully
established, or not with so clear and enlarged views about Christian
liberty others might have.

In the faith - In believing. This does not refer to "saving faith" in
Christ, for he might have that; but to belief in regard "to the things
which the apostle specifies," or which would come into controversy.
Young converts have often a special delicacy or sensitiveness about the
lawfulness of many things in relation to which older Christians may be
more fully established. To produce peace, there must be kindness,
tenderness, and faithful teaching; not denunciation, or harshness, on
one side or the other.

Receive ye - Admit to your society or fellowship: receive him kindly,
not meet with a cold and harsh repulse; compare [Rom
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#007.md).

Not to doubtful disputations - The plain meaning of this is, Do not
admit him to your society for the purpose of debating the matter in an
angry and harsh manner; of repelling him by denunciation; and thus, "by
the natural reaction of such a course," confirming him in his doubts.
Or, "do not deal with him in such a manner as shall have a tendency to
increase his scruples about meats, days, etc." (Stuart.) The "leading"
idea here - which all Christians should remember - is, that a harsh and
angry denunciation of a man in relation to things not morally wrong, but
where he may have honest scruples, will only tend to confirm him more
and more in his doubts. To denounce and abuse him will be to confirm
him. To receive him affectionately, to admit him to fellowship with us,
to talk freely and kindly with him, to do him good, will have a far
greater tendency to overcome his scruples. In questions which now occur
about modes of "dress," about "measures" and means of promoting
revivals, and about rites and ceremonies, this is by far the wisest
course, if we wish to overcome the scruples of a brother, and to induce
him to think as we do. Greek, "Unto doubts or fluctuations of opinions
or reasonings." Various senses have been given to the words, but the
above probably expresses the true meaning.

[Romans 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 14:2</span></span>

For one believeth - This was the case with the Gentiles in general, who
had none of the scruples of the Jew about the propriety of eating
certain kinds of meat. Many of the converts who had been Jews might also
have had the same view as the apostle Paul evidently had while the great
mass of Jewish converts might have cherished these scruples.

May eat all things - That is, he will not be restrained by any scruples
about the lawfulness of certain meats, etc.

Another who is weak - There is reference here, doubt less, to the Jewish
convert. The apostle admits that he was "weak," that is, not fully
established in the views of Christian liberty. The question with the Jew
doubtless was, whether it was lawful to eat the meat which was offered
in sacrifice to idols. In those sacrifices a part only of the animal was
offered, and the remainder was eaten by the worshippers, or offered for
sale in the market like other meat. It became an inquiry whether it was
lawful to eat this meat; and the question in the mind of a Jew would
arise from the express command of his Law; [Exo
34:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#015.md). This question the apostle
discussed and settled in [Co1
10:20-32](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020.md), which see. In that place the
general principle is laid down, that it was lawful to partake of that
meat as a man would of any other, "unless it was expressly pointed out
to him as having been sacrificed to idols, and unless his partaking of
it would be considered as countenancing the idolators in their worship;"
[Rom 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#028.md). But with this principle
many Jewish converts might not have been acquainted; or what is quite as
probable, they might not have been disposed to admit its propriety.

Eateth herbs - Herbs or "vegetables" only; does not partake of meat at
all, for "fear" of eating that, inadvertently, which had been offered to
idols. The Romans abounded in sacrifices to idols; and it would not be
easy to be certain that meat which was offered in the market, or on the
table of a friend, had not been offered in this manner. To avoid the
possibility of partaking of it, even "ignorantly," they chose to eat no
meat at all. The scruples of the Jews on the subject might have arisen
in part from the fact that sins of "ignorance" among them subjected them
to certain penalties; [Lev 4:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#002.md),
etc.; [Lev 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#015.md); [Num
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#024.md), [Num
15:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#027.md). Josephus says (Life, Section
3) that in his time there were certain priests of his acquaintance who
"supported themselves with figs and nuts." These priests had been sent
to Rome to be tried on some charge before Caesar: and it is probable
that they abstained from meat because it might have been offered to
idols. It is expressly declared of Daniel when in Babylon, that he lived
on pulse and water, that he might not "defile himself with the portion
of the king's meat, nor with the wine which he drank;" [Dan
1:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#008.md).

[Romans 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 14:3</span></span>

Let not him that eateth - That is, he who has no scruples about eating
"meat," etc., who is not restrained by the Law of the Jews respecting
the Clean and unclean, or by the fact that meat "may" have been offered
to idols.

Despise him - Hold him in contempt, as being unnecessarily scrupulous,
etc. The word "despise" here is happily chosen. The Gentile would be
very likely to "despise" the Jew as being restrained by foolish scruples
and mere distinctions in matters of no importance.

Him that eateth not - Him that is restrained by scruples of conscience,
and that will eat only "vegetables;" [Rom
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002.md). The reference here is doubtless
to the "Jew.

Judge him - To "judge" here has the force of "condemn." This word also
is very happily chosen. The Jew would not be so likely to "despise" the
Gentile for what he did as to "judge" or condemn him. He would deem it
too serious a matter for contempt. He would regard it as a violation of
the Law of God, and would be likely to assume the right of judging his
brother, and pronouncing him guilty. The apostle here has happily met
the whole case in all disputes about rites, and dress, and scruples in
religious matters that are not essential. One party commonly "despises"
the other as being needlessly and foolishly scrupulous; and the other
makes it a matter of "conscience," too serious for ridicule and
contempt; and a matter, to neglect which, is, in their view, deserving
of condemnation. The true direction to be given in such a case is, "to
the one party," not to treat the scruples of the other with derision and
contempt, but with tenderness and indulgence. Let him have his way in
it. If he can be "reasoned" out of it, it is well; but to attempt to
"laugh" him out of it is unkind, and will tend only to confirm him in
his views. And "to the other party," it should be said they have no
"right" to judge or condemn another. If I cannot see that the Bible
requires a particular cut to my coat, or makes it my duty to observe a
particular festival, he has no right to judge me harshly, or to suppose
that I am to be rejected and condemned for it. He has a right to "his"
opinion; and while I do not "despise" him, he has no right to "judge"
me. This is the foundation of true charity; and if this simple rule had
been followed, how much strife, and even bloodshed, would it have spared
in the church. Most of the contentions among Christians have been on
subjects of this nature. Agreeing substantially in the "doctrines" of
the Bible, they have been split up into sects on subjects just about as
important as those which the apostle discusses in this chapter.

For God hath received him - This is the same word that is translated
"receive" in [Rom 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001.md). It means here
that God hath received him kindly; or has acknowledged him as his own
friend; or he is a true Christian. These scruples, on the one side or
the other, are not inconsistent with true piety; and as "God" has
acknowledged him as "his," notwithstanding his opinions on these
subjects, so "we" also ought to recognise him as a Christian brother.
Other denominations, though they may differ from us on some subjects,
may give evidence that they are recognised by God as his, and where
there is this evidence, we should neither despise nor judge them.

[Romans 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 14:4</span></span>

Who art thou ... - That is, who gave you this right to sit in judgment
on others; compare [Luk 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#014.md). There
is reference here particularly to the "Jew," who on account of his
ancient privileges, and because he had the Law of God, would assume the
prerogative of "judging" in the case, and insist on conformity to his
own views; see Acts 15. The doctrine of this Epistle is uniformly, that
the Jew had no such privilege, but that in regard to salvation he was on
the same level with the Gentile.

That judgest ... - compare [Jam 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#012.md).
This is a principle of common sense and common propriety. It is not ours
to sit in judgment on the servant of another man. He has the control
over him; and if "he" chooses to forbid his doing anything, or to allow
him to do anything, it pertains to "his" affairs not ours. To attempt to
control him, is to intermeddle improperly, and to become a "busy-body in
other men's matters;" [Pe1 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#015.md). Thus,
Christians are the servants of God; they are answerable to him; and "we"
have no right to usurp "his" place, and to act as if we were "lords over
his heritage;" [Pe1 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#003.md).

To his own master - The servant is responsible to his master only. So it
is with the Christian in regard to God.

He standeth or falleth - He shall be approved or condemned. If his
conduct is such as pleases his master, he shall be approved; if not, he
will be condemned.

Yea, he shall be holden up - This is spoken of the Christian only. In
relation to the servant, he might stand or fall; he might be approved or
condemned. The master had no power to keep him in a way of obedience,
except by the hope of reward, or the fear of punishment. But it was not
so in regard to the Christian. The Jew who was disposed to "condemn" the
Gentile might say, that he admitted the general principle which the
apostle had stated about the servant; that it was just what he was
saying, that he might "fall," and be condemned. But no, says the
apostle, this does not follow, in relation to the Christian He shall not
fall. God has power to make him stand; to hold him; to keep him from
error, and from condemnation, and "he shall be holden up." He shall not
be suffered to fall into condemnation, for it is the "purpose" of God to
keep him; compare [Psa 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005.md). This is
one of the incidental but striking evidences that the apostle believed
that all Christians should be kept by the power of God through faith
unto salvation.

Is able - See [Joh 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029.md). Though a
master cannot exert such an influence over a servant as to "secure" his
obedience, yet "God" has this power over his people, and will preserve
them in a path of obedience.

[Romans 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 14:5</span></span>

One man esteemeth - Greek "judgeth" κρίνει krinei. The word is here
properly translated "esteemeth;" compare [Act
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046.md); [Act
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#015.md). The word originally has the
idea of "separating," and then "discerning," in the act of judging. The
expression means that one would set a higher value on one day than on
another, or would regard it as more sacred than others. This was the
case with the "Jews" uniformly, who regarded the days of their
festivals, and fasts, and Sabbaths as especially sacred, and who would
retain, to no inconsiderable degree, their former views, even after they
became converted to Christianity.

Another "esteemeth - That is, the "Gentile" Christian. Not having been
brought up amidst the Jewish customs, and not having imbibed their
opinions and prejudices, they would not regard these days as having any
special sacredness. The appointment of those days had a special
reference "to the Jews." They were designed to keep them as a separate
people, and to prepare the nation for the "reality," of which their
rites were but the shadow. When the Messiah came, the passover, the
feast of tabernacles, and the other special festivals of the Jews, of
course vanished, and it is perfectly clear that the apostles never
intended to inculcate their observance on the Gentile converts. See this
subject discussed in the second chapter of the Epistle to the Galatians.

Every day alike - The word "alike" is not in the original, and it may
convey an idea which the apostle did not design. The passage means that
he regards "every day" as consecrated to the Lord; [Rom
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#006.md). The question has been agitated
whether the apostle intends in this to include the Christian Sabbath.
Does he mean to say that it is a matter of "indifference" whether this
day be observed, or whether it be devoted to ordinary business or
amusements? This is a very important question in regard to the Lord's
day. That the apostle did not mean to say that it was a matter of
indifference whether it should be kept as holy, or devoted to business
or amusement, is plain from the following considerations.

\(1\) the discussion had reference only to the special customs of the
"Jews," to the rites and practices which "they" would attempt to impose
on the Gentiles, and not to any questions which might arise among
Christians as "Christians." The inquiry pertained to "meats," and
festival observances among the Jews, and to their scruples about
partaking of the food offered to idols, etc.; and there is no more
propriety in supposing that the subject of the Lord's day is introduced
here than that he advances principles respecting "baptism" and "the
Lord's supper."

\(2\) the "Lord's day" was doubtless observed by "all" Christians,
whether converted from Jews or Gentiles; see [Co1
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#002.md); [Act
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#007.md); [Rev
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010.md); compare the notes at [Joh
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#026.md). The propriety of observing
"that day" does not appear to have been a matter of controversy. The
only inquiry was, whether it was proper to add to that the observance of
the Jewish Sabbaths, and days of festivals and fasts.

\(3\) it is expressly said that those who did not regard the day
regarded it as not to God, or to honor God; [Rom
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#006.md). They did it as a matter of
respect to him and his institutions, to promote his glory, and to
advance his kingdom. Was this ever done by those who disregard the
Christian Sabbath? Is their design ever to promote his honor, and to
advance in the knowledge of him, by "neglecting" his holy day? Who knows
not that the Christian Sabbath has never been neglected or profaned by
any design to glorify the Lord Jesus, or to promote his kingdom? It is
for purposes of business, gain, war, amusement, dissipation, visiting,
crime. Let the heart be filled with a sincere desire to "honor the Lord
Jesus," and the Christian Sabbath will be reverenced, and devoted to the
purposes of piety. And if any man is disposed to plead "this passage" as
an excuse for violating the Sabbath, and devoting it to pleasure or
gain, let him quote it "just as it is," that is, let "him neglect the
Sabbath from a conscientious desire to honor Jesus Christ." Unless this
is his motive, the passage cannot avail him. But this motive never yet
influenced a Sabbath-breaker.

Let every man ... - That is, subjects of this kind are not to be pressed
as matters of conscience. Every man is to examine them for himself, and
act accordingly. This direction pertains to the subject under
discussion, and not to any other. It does not refer to subjects that
were "morally" wrong, but to ceremonial observances. If the "Jew"
esteemed it wrong to eat meat, he was to abstain from it; if the Gentile
esteemed it right, he was to act accordingly. The word "be fully
persuaded" denotes the highest conviction, not a matter of opinion or
prejudice, but a matter on which the mind is made up by examination; see
[Rom 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#021.md); [Ti2
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#005.md). This is the general principle on
which Christians are called to act in relation to festival days and
fasts in the church. If some Christians deem them to be for edification,
and suppose that their piety will be promoted by observing the days
which commemorate the birth, and death, and temptations of the Lord
Jesus, they are not to be reproached or opposed in their celebration.
Nor are they to attempt to impose them on others as a matter of
conscience, or to reproach others because they do not observe them.

[Romans 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 14:6</span></span>

He that regardeth - Greek, "Thinketh of;" or pays attention to; that is,
he that "observes" it as a festival, or as holy time.

The day - Any of the days under discussion; the days that the Jews kept
as religious occasions.

Regardeth unto the Lord - Regards it as "holy," or as set apart to the
service of God. He believes that he is "required" by God to keep it,
that is, that the laws of Moses in regard to such days are binding on
him.

He that regardeth not the day - Or who does not observe such
distinctions of days as are demanded in the laws of Moses.

To the Lord ... - That is, he does not believe that God "requires" such
an observance.

He that eateth - The Gentile Christian, who freely eats all kinds of
meat; [Rom 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002.md).

Eateth to the Lord - Because he believes that God does not forbid it;
and because he desires, in doing it, to glorify God; [Co1
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#031.md). "To eat to the Lord," in this
case, is to do it believing that such is his will. In all other cases,
it is to do it feeling that we receive our food from him; rendering
thanks for his goodness, and desirous of being strengthened that we may
do his commands.

He giveth God thanks - This is an incidental proof that it is our duty
to give God thanks at our meals for our food. It shows that it was the
"practice" of the early Christians, and has the commendation of the
apostle. It was, also, uniformly done by the Jews, and by the Lord
Jesus; [Mat 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#019.md); [Mat
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026.md); [Mar
6:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#041.md); [Mar
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#022.md); [Luk
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#016.md); [Luk
24:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#030.md).

To the Lord he eateth not - He abstains from eating because he believes
that God requires him to do it, and with a desire to obey and honor him.

And giveth God thanks - That is, the Jew thanked God for the Law, and
for the favor he had bestowed on him in giving him more light than he
had the Gentiles. For this privilege they valued themselves highly, and
this feeling, no doubt, the converted Jews would continue to retain;
deeming themselves as specially favored in having a "special"
acquaintance with the Law of God.

[Romans 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 14:7</span></span>

For none of us ... - Whether by nature Jews or Gentiles. In the great
principles of religion we are now united. Where there was evidence of a
sincere desire to do the will of God there should be charitable feeling,
through there was difference of opinion and judgment in many smaller
matters. The meaning of the expression is, that no Christian lives to
gratify his own inclinations or appetites. He makes it his great aim to
do the will of God; to subordinate all his desires to his Law and
gospel; and though, therefore, one should eat flesh, and should feel at
liberty to devote to common employments time that another deemed sacred,
yet it should not be uncharitably set down as a desire to indulge his
sensual appetites, or to become rich. Another motive "may be" supposed,
and where there is not positive "proof" to the contrary, "should be"
supposed; see the beautiful illustration of this in [Co1
13:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004.md). To live "to ourselves" is to
make it the great object to become rich or honored, or to indulge in the
ease, comfort, and pleasures of life. These are the aim of all people
but Christians; and in nothing else do Christians more differ from the
world than in this; see [Pe1 4:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#001.md);
[Co2 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#015.md); [Co1
6:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019.md); [Mat
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#038.md); [Mat
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#024.md); [Mar
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#034.md); [Mar
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#021.md); [Luk
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#023.md). On no point does it become
Christians more to examine themselves than on this. To "live to
ourselves" is an evidence that we are strangers to piety. And if it be
the great motive of our lives to live at ease [Amo
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001.md) - to gratify the flesh, to gain
property, or to be distinguished in places of fashion and amusement - it
is evidence that we know nothing of the power of that gospel which
teaches us "to deny ourselves, and take up our cross daily.

No man - No "one," the same Greek word οὐδείς oudeis which is used in
the former part of the verse. The word is used only in reference to
"Christians" here, and makes no affirmation about other people.

Dieth to himself - See [Rom 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#008.md). This
expression is used to denote the "universality" or the "totality" with
which Christians belong to God. Every thing is done and suffered with
reference to his will. In our conduct, in our property, in our trials,
in our death, we are "his;" to be disposed of as he shall please. In the
grave, and in the future world, we shall be equally his. As this is the
great principle on which "all" Christians live and act, we should be
kind and tender toward them, though in some respects they differ from
us.

[Romans 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 14:8</span></span>

For whether we live - As long as we live.

We live unto the Lord - We live to do his will, and to promote his
glory. This is the grand purpose of the life of the Christian. Other
people live to gratify themselves; the Christian to do those things
which the Lord requires. By "the Lord" here the apostle evidently
intends the Lord Jesus, as it is evident from [Rom
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009.md); and the truth taught here is,
that it is the leading and grand purpose of the Christian to do honor to
the Saviour. It is this which constitutes his special character, and
which distinguishes him from other people.

Whether we die - In the dying state, or in the state of the dead; in the
future world. We are "no where" our own. In all conditions we are "his,"
and bound to do his will. The connection of this declaration with the
argument is this: Since we belong to another in every state, and are
bound to do his will, we have no right to assume the prerogative of
sitting in judgment on another. "We" are subjects, and are bound to do
the will of Christ. All other Christians are subjects in like manner,
and are answerable, not to us, but directly to the Lord Jesus, and
should have the same liberty of conscience that we have. The passage
proves also that the soul does not cease to be conscious at death. We
are still the Lord's; his even when the body is in the grave; and his in
all the future world: see [Rom 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009.md).

[Romans 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 14:9</span></span>

For to this end - For this purpose or design. The apostle does not say
that this was the "only" design of his death, but that it was a main
purpose, or an object which he had distinctly in view. This declaration
is introduced in order to confirm what he had said in the previous
verse, that in all circumstances we are the Lord's. This he shows by the
fact that Jesus died "in order" that we "might" be his.

And rose - This expression is rejected by most modern critics. It is
wanting in many manuscripts, and has been probably introduced in the
text from the margin.

And revived - There is also a variation in the Greek in this place, but
not so great as to change the sense materially. It refers to his
"resurrection," and means that he was "restored to life" in order that
he might exercise dominion over the dead and the living.

That he might be Lord - Greek. That he might "rule over." The Greek word
used here implies the idea of his being "proprietor" or "owner" as well
as "ruler." It means that he might exercise entire dominion over all, as
the sovereign Lawgiver and Lord.

Both of the dead - That is, of those who "are" deceased, or who have
gone to another state of existence. This passage proves that those who
die are not annihilated; that they do not cease to be conscious; and
that they still are under the dominion of the Mediator. Though their
bodies moulder in the grave, yet the spirit lives, and is under his
control. And though the body dies and returns to its native dust, yet
the Lord Jesus is still its Sovereign, and shall raise it up again:

"God our Redeemer lives,

And often from the skies.

Looks down and watches all our dust,

Till he shall bid it rise."

It gives an additional sacredness to the grave when we reflect that the
tomb is under the watchful care of the Redeemer. Safe in his hands, the
body may sink to its native dust with the assurance that in his own time
he will again call it forth, with renovated and immortal powers, to be
for ever subject to his will. With this view, we can leave our friends
with confidence in his hands when they die, and yield our own bodies
cheerfully to the dust when he shall call our spirits hence. But it is
not only over the "body" that his dominion is established. This passage
proves that the departed souls of the saints are still subject to him;
compare [Mat 22:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#032.md); [Mar
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#027.md). He not only has "dominion" over
those spirits, but he is their protector and Lord. They are safe under
his universal dominion. And it does much to alleviate the pains of
separation from pious, beloved friends, to reflect that they depart
still to love and serve the same Saviour in perfect purity, and unvexed
by infirmity and sin. Why should we wish to recall them from his perfect
love in the heavens to the poor and imperfect service which they would
render if in the land of the living?

And living - To the redeemed, while they remain in this life. He died to
"purchase" them to himself, that they might become his obedient
subjects; and they are bound to yield obedience by all the sacredness
and value of the price which he paid, even his own precious blood;
compare [Co1 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020.md), "For ye are bought
with a price: therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit,
which are God's;" [Co1 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#023.md); [Rev
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004) (Greek, "bought".md); [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009), (Greek, "purchased".md). If it be
asked how this "dominion over the dead and the living" is connected with
the death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus, we may reply,

\(1\) That it is secured over Christians from the fact that they are
"purchased" or "ransomed" by his precious blood; and that they are bound
by this sacred consideration to live to him. This obligation every
Christian feels [Pe1 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#018.md), and its
force is continually resting on him. It was by the love of Christ that
he was ever brought to love God at all; and his deepest and tenderest
obligations to live to him arise from this source; [Co2
5:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#014.md).

\(2\) Jesus, by his death and resurrection, established a dominion over
the grave. He destroyed him that had the power of death, [Heb
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014.md), and triumphed over him; [Col
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015.md). Satan is a humbled foe; and his
sceptre over the grave is wrested from his hands. When Jesus rose, in
spite of all the power of Satan and of people, he burst the bands of
death, and made an invasion on the dominions of the dead, and showed
that he had power to control all.

\(3\) this dominion of the Lord Jesus is felt by the spirits on high.
They are subject to him because he redeemed them; [Rev
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009.md).

\(4\) it is often revealed in the Scriptures that "dominion" was to be
given to the Lord Jesus as the reward of his sufferings and death; see
the [Joh 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002.md), [Joh
17:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#004.md); 5:26-29 notes; [Phi
2:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#005.md) notes; [Eph
1:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020.md) notes; [Heb
2:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009.md); [Heb
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002.md) notes. The "extent" of his
dominion as mediator is affirmed, in this place, only to be over the
dead and the living; that is, over the human race. Other passages of the
Scripture, however, seem to imply that it extends over all worlds.

[Romans 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 14:10</span></span>

But why ... - Since we are all subjects and servants alike, and must all
stand at the same tribunal, what right have we to sit in judgment on
others?

Thou judge - Thou who art a "Jewish" convert, why dost thou attempt to
arraign the "Gentile" disciple, as if he had violated a law of God?
compare [Rom 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#003.md).

Thy brother - God has recognised him as his friend [Rom
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#003.md), and he should be regarded by
thee as "a brother" in the same family.

Or why dost thou set at nought - Despise [Rom
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#003.md); why dost thou, who art a
"Gentile" convert, despise the "Jewish" disciple as being unnecessarily
scrupulous and superstitious?

Thy brother - The Jewish convert is now a brother; and all the contempt
which you Gentiles once cherished for the Jew should cease, from the
fact that "he" is now "a Christian." Nothing will do so much, on the one
hand, to prevent a censorious disposition, and on the other, to prevent
contempt for those who are in a different rank in life, as to remember
that they are "Christians," bought with the same blood, and going to the
same heaven as ourselves.

We must all stand ... - That is, we must all be tried alike at the same
tribunal; we must answer for our conduct, not to our-fellow man, but to
Christ; and it does not become us to sit in judgment on each other.

[Romans 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 14:11</span></span>

For it is written - This passage is recorded in [Isa
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023.md). It is not quoted literally, but
the sense is preserved. In Isaiah there can be no doubt that it refers
to Yahweh. The speaker expressly calls himself Yahweh, the name which is
appropriate to God alone, and which is never applied to a creature; [Rom
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#018.md). In the place before us, the
words are applied by Paul expressly to Christ; compare [Rom
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010.md). This mode of quotation is a
strong incidental proof that the apostle regarded the Lord Jesus as
divine. On no other principle could he have made these quotations.

As I live - The Hebrew is, "I have sworn by myself." One expression is
equivalent to the other. An "oath" of God is often expressed by the
phrase "as I live;" [Num 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#021.md); [Isa
49:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#018.md); [Eze
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#011.md); [Eze
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#016.md), etc.

Saith the Lord - These words are not in the Hebrew text, but are added
by the apostle to show that the passage quoted was spoken by the Lord,
the Messiah; compare [Isa 45:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#018.md), [Isa
45:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#022.md).

Every knee shall bow to me - To bow the knee" is an act expressing
homage, submission, or adoration. It means that every person shall
acknowledge him as God, and admit his right to universal dominion. The
passage in Isaiah refers particularly to the homage which "his own
people" should render to him; or rather, it means that all who are saved
shall acknowledge "him" as their God and Saviour. The original reference
was not to "all men," but only to those who should be saved; [Isa
45:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#017.md), [Isa
45:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#021.md), [Isa
45:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#024.md). In this sense the apostle uses
it; not as denoting that "all men" should confess to God, but that all
"Christians," whether Jewish or Gentile converts, should alike give
account to Him. "They" should all bow before their common God, and
acknowledge "his" dominion over them. The passage originally did not
refer particularly to the day of judgment, but expressed the truth that
all believers should acknowledge his dominion. It is as applicable,
however, to the judgment, as to any other act of homage which his people
will render.

Every tongue shall confess to God - In the Hebrew, "Every tongue shall
swear." Not swear "by God," but "to him;" that is, pay to him our vows,
or "answer to him on oath" for our conduct; and this is the same as
confessing to him, or acknowledging him as our Judge.

[Romans 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 14:12</span></span>

So then - Wherefore; or according to the doctrine of the Old Testament.

Every one of us - That is, every Christian; for the connection requires
us to understand the argument only of Christians. At the same time it is
a truth abundantly revealed elsewhere, that "all men" shall give account
of their conduct to God; [Co2 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010.md);
Matt. 25; [Ecc 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#014.md).

Give account of himself - That is, of his character and conduct; his
words and actions; his plans and purposes. In the fearful arraignment of
that day every work and purpose shall be brought forth, and tried by the
unerring standard of justice. As we shall be called to so fearful an
account with God, we should not be engaged in condemning our brethren,
but should examine whether we are prepared to give up our account with
joy, and not with grief.

To God - The judgment will be conducted by the Lord Jesus; Mat.
25:31-46; [Act 17:31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031.md). All judgment is
committed to the Son; [Joh 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022.md), [Joh
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#027.md). Still we may be said to give
account to God,

\(1\) Because He "appointed" the Messiah to be the Judge [Act
17:31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031.md); and,

\(2\) Because the Judge himself is divine.

The Lord Jesus being God as well as man, the account will be rendered
directly to the Creator as well as the Redeemer of the world. In this
passage there are "two" incidental proofs of the divinity of the Lord
Jesus Christ. "First," the fact that the apostle applies to him language
which in the prophecy is expressly spoken by "Yahweh;" and, "Secondly,"
the fact that Jesus is declared to be the Judge of all. No being that is
not "omniscient" can be qualified to judge the secrets of all people.
None who has not "seen" human purposes at all times, and in all places;
who has not been a witness of the conduct by day and by night; who has
not been present with all the race at all times, and who in the great
day cannot discern the true character of the soul, can be qualified to
conduct the general judgment. Yet none can possess these qualifications
but God. The Lord Jesus, "the judge of quick and dead" [Ti2
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#001.md), is therefore divine.

[Romans 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 14:13</span></span>

Let us not therefore judge ... - Since we are to give account of
ourselves at the same tribunal; since we must be there on the same
"level," let us not suppose that we have a right here to sit in judgment
on our fellow-Christians.

But judge this rather - If disposed to "judge," let us be employed in a
better kind of judging; let us come "to a determination" not to injure
the cause of Christ. This is an instance of the happy "turn" which the
apostle would give to a discussion. Some people have an irresistible
propensity to sit in judgment, to pronounce opinions. Let them make good
use of that. It will be well to exercise it on what can do no injury,
and which may turn to good account. Instead of forming a judgment about
"others," let the man form a determination about his own conduct.

That no man ... - A "stumbling-block" literally means anything laid in a
man's path, over which he may fall. In the Scriptures, however, the word
is used commonly in a figurative sense to denote anything which shall
cause him to "sin," as sin is often represented by "falling;" see the
note at [Mat 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029.md). And the passage
means that we should resolve to act so as not "by any means" to be the
occasion of leading our brethren into sin, either by our example, or by
a severe and harsh judgment, provoking them to anger, or exciting
jealousies, and envyings, and suspicions. No better rule than this could
be given to promote peace. If every Christian, instead of judging his
brethren severely, would resolve that "he" would so live as to promote
peace, and so as not to lead others into sin, it would tend more,
perhaps, than any other thing to advance the harmony and purity of the
church of Christ.

[Romans 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 14:14</span></span>

I know - This is an admission made to the "Gentile" convert, who
believed that it was lawful to partake of food of every kind. This the
apostle concedes; and says he is fully apprized of this. But though he
knew this, yet he goes on to say [Rom
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#015.md), that it would be well to regard
the conscientious scruples of others on the subject. It may be remarked
here that the apostle Paul had formerly quite as many scruples as any of
his brethren had then. But his views had been changed.

And am persuaded - Am convinced.

By the Lord Jesus - This does not mean by any "personal" instruction
received from the Lord Jesus, but by all the knowledge which he had
received by inspiration of the nature of the Christian religion. The
gospel of Jesus had taught him that the rites of the Mosaic economy had
been abolished, and among those rites were the rules respecting clean
and unclean beasts, etc.

There is nothing unclean - Greek "common." This word was used by the
Jews to denote what was "unclean," because, in their apprehension,
whatever was partaken by the multitude, or all people, must be impure.
Hence, the words "common" and "impure" are often used as expressing the
same thing. It denotes what was forbidden by the laws of Moses.

To him that esteemeth ... - He makes it a matter of conscience. He
regards certain meats as forbidden by God; and while he so regards them,
it would be wrong for him to partake of them. Man may be in error, but
it would not be proper for him to act in violation of what he "supposes"
God requires.

[Romans 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 14:15</span></span>

But if thy brother ... - This address is to the "Gentile" convert. In
the previous verse, Paul admitted. that the prejudice of the Jew was not
well-founded. But admitting that still the question was, "how" he should
be treated while he had that prejudice. The apostle here shows the
Gentile that "he" ought not so to act as unnecessarily to wound his
feelings, or to grieve him.

Be grieved - Be pained; as a conscientious man always is, when he sees
another, and especially a Christian brother, do anything which "he"
esteems to be wrong. The "pain" would be real, though the "opinion" from
which it arose might not be well founded.

With thy meat - Greek, On account of meat, or food; that is, because
"you" eat what he regards as unclean.

Now walkest - To "walk," in the Sacred Scriptures, often denotes to act,
or to do a thing; [Mar 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#005.md); [Act
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#021.md); [Rom
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004.md); [Rom
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001.md), [Rom
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#004.md). Here it means that if the Gentile
convert persevered in the use of such food, notwithstanding the
conscientious scruples of the Jew, he violated the law of love.

Charitably - Greek, According to charity, or love; that is, he would
violate that law which required him to sacrifice his own comfort to
promote the happiness of his brother; [Co1
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#005.md); [Co1
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#024.md), [Co1
10:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#028.md); [Phi
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#004.md), [Phi
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021.md).

Destroy not him - The word "destroy" here refers, doubtless, to the ruin
of the soul in hell. It properly denotes ruin or destruction, and is
applied to the ruin or "corruption" of various things, in the New
Testament. To life [Mat 10:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#039.md); to a
reward, in the sense of "losing" it [Mar
10:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#041.md); [Luk
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#004.md); to food [Joh
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027.md); to the Israelites represented as
lost or wandering [Mat 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#006.md); to
"wisdom" that is rendered "vain" [Co1
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#009.md); to "bottles," rendered "useless"
[Mat 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#017.md), etc. But it is also
frequently applied to destruction in hell, to the everlasting ruin of
the soul; [Mat 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028.md), "Who is able to
destroy both soul and body in hell;" [Mat
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#014.md); [Joh
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#015.md); [Rom
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012.md). That "this" is its meaning here
is apparent from the parallel place in [Co1
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#011.md), "And through thy knowledge shall
thy weak brother perish." If it be asked how the eating of meat by the
Gentile convert could be connected with the perdition of the Jew, I
reply, that the apostle supposes that in this way an occasion of
stumbling would be afforded to him, and he would come into condemnation.
He might be led by example to partake against his own conscience, or he
might be excited to anger, disgust, and apostasy from the Christian
faith. Though the apostle believed that all who were true Christians
would be saved, [Rom 8:30-39](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030.md), yet he
believed that it would be brought about by the use of means, and that
nothing should be done that would tend to hinder or endanger their
salvation; [Heb 6:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004.md); [Heb
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#001.md). God does not bring his people to
heaven without the use of "means adapted to the end," and one of those
means is that employed here to warn professing Christians against such
conduct as might jeopard the salvation of their brethren.

For whom Christ died - The apostle speaks here of the possibility of
endangering the salvation of those for whom Christ died, just as he does
respecting the salvation of those who are in fact Christians. By those
for whom Christ died, he undoubtedly refers here to "true Christians,"
for the whole discussion relates to them, and them only; compare [Rom
14:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#003.md), [Rom
14:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#007.md). This passage should not be
brought, therefore, to prove that Christ died for all people, or for any
who shall finally perish. Such a doctrine is undoubtedly true (in this
sense; that there is in the death of Christ a "sufficiency for all," and
that the "offer" is to all.) (compare [Co2
5:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#014.md); [Jo1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002.md); [Pe2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001).md), but it is not the truth which is
taught here. The design is to show the criminality of a course that
would tend to the ruin of a brother. For these weak brethren, Christ
laid down his precious life. He loved them; and shall we, to gratify our
appetites, pursue a course which will tend to defeat the work of Christ,
and ruin the souls redeemed by his blood?

[Romans 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 14:16</span></span>

Let not then your good ... - That which you esteem to be right, and
which may be right in itself. You are not bound by the ceremonial law.
You are free from the yoke of bondage This freedom you esteem to be a
good - a favor - a high privilege. And so it is; but you should not make
such a use of it as to do injury to others.

Be evil spoken of - Greek, Be blasphemed. Do not so use your Christian
liberty as to give occasion for railing and unkind remarks from your
brethren, so as to produce contention and strife, and thus to give rise
to evil reports among the wicked about the tendency of the Christian
religion, as if it were adapted only to promote controversy. How much
strife would have been avoided if all Christians had regarded this plain
rule. In relation to dress, and rites, and ceremonies in the church, we
may be conscious that we are right; but an obstinate adherence to them
may only give rise to contention and angry discussions, and to evil
reports among men, of the tendency of religion. In such a case we should
yield our private, unimportant personal indulgence to the good of the
cause of religion and of peace.

[Romans 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 14:17</span></span>

For the kingdom of God - For an explanation of this phrase, see the note
at [Mat 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002.md). Here it means that the
uniquenesses of the kingdom of God, or of the Church of Christ on earth,
do not consist in observing the distinctions between meats and drinks,
it was true that by these things the Jews had been particularly
characterized, but the Christian church was to be distinguished in a
different manner.

Is not - Does not consist in, or is not distinguished by.

Meat and drink - In observing distinctions between different kinds of
food, or making such observances a matter of conscience as the Jews did.
Moses did not prescribe any particular drink or prohibit any, but the
Nazarites abstained from wine and all kinds of strong liquors; and it is
not improbable that the Jews had invented some distinctions on this
subject which they judged to be of importance. Hence, it is said in [Col
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016.md), "Let no man judge you in meat or
in drink;" compare [Co1 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#008.md); [Co1
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#020.md).

But righteousness - This word here means "virtue, integrity," a faithful
discharge of all the duties which we owe to God or to our fellow-men. It
means that the Christian must so live as to be appropriately denominated
a righteous man, and not a man whose whole attention is absorbed by the
mere ceremonies and outward forms of religion. To produce this, we are
told, was the main design, and the principal teaching of the gospel;
[Tit 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#012.md); Compare [Rom
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#013.md); [Pe1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#011.md). Thus, it is said [Jo1
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#029.md), "Everyone that doeth
righteousness is born of God;" [Jo1
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#010.md), "Whosoever doeth not
righteousness is not of God;" compare [Jo1
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#007.md); [Co1
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#034.md); [Co2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#009.md); [Co2
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#007.md), [Co2
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014.md); [Eph
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#009.md); [Eph
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014.md); [Ti1
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#011.md); [Pe1
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024.md); [Eph
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024.md). He that is a righteous man,
whose characteristic it is to lead a holy life, is a Christian. If his
great aim is to do the will of God, and if he seeks to discharge with
fidelity all his duties to God and man, he is renewed. On that
righteousness he will not "depend" for salvation [Phi
3:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008.md), but he will regard this
character and this disposition as evidence that he is a Christian, and
that the Lord Jesus is made unto him" wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption;" [Co1
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030.md).

And peace - This word, in this place, does not refer to the internal
"peace" and happiness which the Christian has in his own mind (compare
the notes at [Rom 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001).md); but to peace
or concord in opposition to "contention" among brethren. The tendency
and design of the kingdom of God is to produce concord and love, and to
put an end to alienation and strife. Even though, therefore, there might
be ground for the opinions which some cherished in regard to rites, yet
it was of more importance to maintain peace than obstinately to press
those matters at the expense of strife and contention. That the tendency
of the gospel is to promote peace, and to induce people to lay aside all
causes of contention and bitter strife, is apparent from the following
passages of the New Testament; [Co1
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#015.md); [Co1
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033.md); [Gal
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022.md); [Eph
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003.md); [Th1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#013.md); [Ti2
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#022.md); [Jam
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#018.md); [Mat
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009.md); [Eph
4:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#031.md); [Col
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#008.md); [Joh
13:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034.md); [Joh
17:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021.md). This is the second evidence
of piety on which Christians should examine their hearts - a disposition
to promote the peace of Jerusalem; [Psa
122:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#006.md); [Psa
37:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#011.md). A contentious, quarrelsome
spirit; a disposition to magnify trifles; to make the Shibboleth of
party an occasion of alienation, and heart-burning, and discord; to sow
dissensions on account of unimportant points of doctrine or of
discipline, is full proof that there is no attachment to Him who is the
Prince of peace. Such a disposition does infinite dishonor to the cause
of religion, and perhaps has done more to retard its progress than all
other causes put together. Contentions commonly arise from some small
matter in doctrine, in dress, in ceremonies; and often the smaller the
matter the more fierce the controversy, until he spirit of religion
disappears, and desolation comes over the face of Zion:

"The Spirit, like a peaceful dove,

Flies from the realms of noise and strife."

And joy - This refers, doubtless, to the "personal" happiness produced
in the mind by the influence of the gospel; see the notes at [Rom
5:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001.md).

In the Holy Ghost - Produced "by" the Holy Spirit; [Rom
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005.md); compare [Gal
5:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022.md).

[Romans 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 14:18</span></span>

In these things - In righteousness, peace, and joy.

Serveth Christ - Or obeys Christ, who has commanded them. He receives
Christ as his "master" or "teacher" and does his will in regard to them.
To do these things is to do honor to Christ, and to show the excellency
of his religion.

Is acceptable to God - Whether he be converted from the Jews or the
Gentiles.

And approved of men - That is, people will "approve" of such conduct;
they will esteem it to be right, and to be in accordance with the spirit
of Christianity. He does not say that the wicked world will "love" such
a life, but it will commend itself to them as such a life as people
ought to lead.

[Romans 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 14:19</span></span>

Let us therefore follow ... - The object of this verse is to persuade
the church at Rome to lay aside their causes of contention, and to live
in harmony. This exhortation is founded on the considerations which the
apostle had presented, and may be regarded as the conclusion to which
the argument had conducted him.

The things which make for peace - The high purposes and objects of the
Christian religion, and not those smaller matters which produce strife.
If men aim at the great objects proposed by the Christian religion, they
will live in peace. If they seek to promote their private ends, to
follow their own passions and prejudices, they will be involved in
strife and contention. There "are" great common objects before "all"
Christians in which they can unite, and in the pursuit of which they
will cultivate a spirit of peace. Let them all strive for holiness; let
them seek to spread the gospel; let them engage in circulating the
Bible, or in doing good in any way to others, and their smaller matters
of difference will sink into comparative unimportance, and they will
unite in one grand purpose of saving the world. Christians have more
things in which they "agree" than in which they differ. The points in
which they are agreed are of infinite importance; the points on which
they differ are commonly some minor matters in which they may "agree to
differ," and still cherish love for all who bear the image of Christ.

And things wherewith ... - That is, those things by which we may render
"aid" to our brethren; the doctrines, exhortations, counsels, and other
helps which may benefit them in their Christian life.

May edify - The word "edify" means properly to "build," as a house; then
to "rebuild" or "reconstruct;" then to adorn or ornament; then to do any
thing that will confer favor or advantage, or which will further an
object. Applied to the church, it means to do anything by teaching,
counsel, advice, etc. which will tend to promote its great object; to
aid Christians, to enable them to surmount difficulties, to remove their
ignorance, etc.; [Act 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#031.md); [Co1
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001.md); [Co1
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#004.md). In these expressions the idea of
a "building" is retained, reared on a firm, tried cornerstone, the Lord
Jesus Christ; [Eph 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020.md); [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016.md). Compare [Rom
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033.md). Christians are thus regarded,
according to Paul's noble idea [Eph
2:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020.md), as one great temple erected
for the glory of God, having no separate interest, but as united for one
object, and therefore bound to do all that is possible, that each other
may be suited to their appropriate place, and perform their appropriate
function in perfecting and adorning this temple of God.

[Romans 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 14:20</span></span>

For meat - By your obstinate, pertinacious attachment to your own
opinions about the distinctions of meat and drinks, do not pursue such a
course as to lead a brother into sin, and ruin his soul. Here is a new
argument presented why Christians should pursue a course of charity -
that the opposite would tend to the ruin of the brother's soul.

Destroy not - The word here is what properly is applied to pulling down
an edifice; and the apostle continues the figure which he used in the
previous verse. Do not pull down or destroy the "temple" which God is
rearing.

The work of God - The work of God is what God does, and here especially
refers to his work in rearing "his church." The "Christian" is regarded
specially as the work of God, as God renews his heart and makes him what
he is. Hence, he is called God's "building" [Co1
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009.md), and his "workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works" [Eph
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010.md), and is denominated "a new
creature;" [Co2 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017.md). The meaning is,
"Do not so conduct yourself, in regard to the distinction of meats into
clean and unclean, as to cause your brother to sin, and to impair or
ruin the work of religion which God is carrying on in his soul." The
expression does not refer to "man" as being the work of God, but to the
"piety" of the Christian; to what God, by his Spirit, is producing in
the heart of the believer.

All things are indeed pure - Compare [Rom
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014.md). This is a concession to those
whom he was exhorting to peace. All things under the Christian
dispensation are lawful to be eaten. The distinctions of the Levitical
law are not binding on Christians.

But it is evil - Though pure in itself, yet it may become an occasion of
sin, if another is grieved by it. It is evil to the man who pursues a
course that will give offence to a brother; that will pain him, or tend
to drive him off from the church, or lead him any way into sin.

With offence - So as to offend a brother, such as he esteems to be sin,
and by which he will be grieved.

[Romans 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 14:21</span></span>

It is good - It is right; or it is better. This verse is an explanation
or enlarged specification of the meaning of the former.

To eat flesh - That is, such flesh as the "Jewish" convert regarded as
unclean; [Rom 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002.md).

Nor to drink wine - Wine was a common drink among the Jews, and usually
esteemed lawful. But the Nazarites were not allowed to drink it [Num
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#003.md), and the Rechabites Jer. 35 drank
no wine, and it is possible that some of the early converts regarded it
as unlawful for Christians to drink it. Wine was moreover used in
libations in pagan worship, and perhaps the Jewish coverts might be
scrupulous about its use from this cause. The caution here shows us what
should be done "now" in regard to the use of wine. It may not be
possible to prove that wine is absolutely unlawful, but still many
friends of "temperance" regard it as such, and are grieved at its use.
They esteem the habit of using it as tending to intemperance, and as
encouraging those who cannot afford expensive liquors. Besides, the
wines which are now used are different from those which were common
among the ancients. That was the pure juice of the grape. That which is
now in common use is mingled with alcohol, and with other intoxicating
ingredients. Little or none of the wine which comes to this country is
pure. And in this state of the case, does not the command of the apostle
here require the friends of temperance to abstain even from the use of
wine?

Nor anything - Any article of food or drink, or any course of conduct.
So valuable is peace, and so desirable is it not to offend a brother,
that we should rather deny ourselves to any extent, than to be the
occasion of offences and scandals in the church.

Stumbleth - For the difference between this word and the word
"offended," see the note at [Rom
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011.md). It means here that by eating, a
Jewish convert might be led to eat also, contrary to his own conviction
of what was right, and thus be led into sin.

Or is made weak - That is, shaken, or rendered "less stable" in his
opinion or conduct. By being led to imitate the Gentile convert, he
would become less firm and established; he would violate his own
conscience; his course would be attended with regrets and with doubts
about its propriety, and thus he would be made "weak." In this verse we
have an eminent instance of the charity of the apostle, and of his
spirit of concession and kindness. If this were regarded by all
Christians, it would save no small amount of strife, and heart-burnings,
and contention. Let a man begin to act on the principle that peace is to
be promoted, that other Christians are not to be offended, and what a
change would it at once produce in the churches, and what an influence
would it exert over the life!

[Romans 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 14:22</span></span>

Hast thou faith? - The word "faith" here refers only to the subject
under discussion - to the subject of meats, drinks, etc. Do you believe
that it is right to eat all kinds of food, etc. The apostle had admitted
that this was the true doctrine; but he maintains that it should be so
held as not to give offence.

Have it to thyself - Do not obtrude your faith or opinion on others. Be
satisfied with cherishing the opinion, and acting on it in private,
without bringing it forward to produce disturbance in the church.

Before God - Where God only is the witness. God sees your sincerity, and
will approve your opinion. That opinion cherish and act on, yet so as
not to give offence, and to produce disturbance in the church. God sees
your sincerity; he sees that you are right; and you will not offend him.
Your brethren do "not" see that you are right, and they will be
offended.

Happy is he ... - This state of mind, the apostle says, is one that is
attended with peace and happiness; and this is a "further" reason why
they should indulge their opinion in private, without obtruding it on
others. They were conscious of doing right, and that consciousness was
attended with peace. This fact he states in the form of a universal
proposition, as applicable not only to "this" case, but to "all" cases;
compare [Jo1 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#021.md).

Condemneth not himself - Whose conscience does not reprove him.

In that which he alloweth - Which he "approves," or which he "does." Who
has a clear conscience in his opinions and conduct. Many people indulge
in practices which their consciences condemn, many in practices of which
they are in doubt. But the way to be happy is to have a "clear
conscience" in what we do; or in other words, if we have "doubts" about
a course of conduct, it is not safe to indulge in that course, but it
should be at once abandoned. Many people are engaged in "business" about
which they have many doubts; many Christians are in doubt about certain
courses of life. But they can have "no doubt" about the propriety of
abstaining from them. They who are engaged in the slave-trade; or they
who are engaged in the manufacture or sale of ardent spirits; or they
who frequent the theater or the ball-room, or who run the round of
fashionable amusements, if professing Christians, must often be troubled
with "many" doubts about the propriety of their manner of life. But they
can have no doubt about the propriety of an "opposite" course. Perhaps a
single inquiry would settle all debate in regard to these things: "Did
anyone ever become a slave-dealer, or a dealer in ardent spirits, or go
to the theater, for engage in scenes of splendid amusements, with any
belief that he was imitating the Lord Jesus Christ, or with any desire
to honor him or his religion?" But one answer would be given to this
question; and in view of it, how striking is the remark of Paul, "Happy
is he that condemneth not himself in what he alloweth."

[Romans 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 14:23</span></span>

He that doubteth - He that is not fully satisfied in his mind; who does
not do it with a clear conscience. The margin has it rendered correctly,
"He that discerneth and putteth a difference between meats." He that
conscientiously believes, as the Jew did, that the Levitical law
respecting the difference between meats was binding on Christians.

Is damned - We apply this word almost exclusively to the future
punishment of the wicked in hell. But it is of importance to remember,
in reading the Bible, that this is not of necessity its meaning. It
means properly to "condemn;" and here it means only that the person who
should thus violate the dictates of his conscience would incur guilt,
and would be blameworthy in doing it. But it does not affirm that he
would inevitably sink to hell. The same construction is to be put on the
expression in [Co1 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029.md), "He that
eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to
himself."

For whatsoever ... - "Whatever is not done with a full conviction that
it is right, is sinful; whatever is done when a man doubts whether it is
right, is sin." This is evidently the fair interpretation of this place.
Such the connection requires. It does not affirm that all or any of the
actions of impenitent and unbelieving people are sinful, which is true,
but not the truth taught here; nor does it affirm that all acts which
are not performed by those who have faith in the Lord Jesus, are sinful;
but the discussion pertains to Christians; and the whole scope of the
passage requires us to understand the apostle as simply saying that a
man should not do a thing doubting its correctness; that he should have
a strong conviction that what he does is right; and that if he has "not"
this conviction, it is sinful. The rule is of universal application. In
all cases, if a man does a thing which he does not "believe" to be
right, it is a sin, and his conscience will condemn him for it. It may
be proper, however, to observe that the converse of this is not always
true, that if a man believes a thing to be right, that therefore it is
not sin. For many of the persecutors were conscientious [Joh
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#002.md); [Act
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#009.md); and the murderers of the Son of
God did it ignorantly [Act 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#017.md); [Co1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008.md); and yet were adjudged as guilty
of enormous crimes; compare [Luk
11:50-51](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#050.md); [Act
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023.md), [Act
2:37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037.md).

In this chapter we have a remarkably fine discussion of the nature of
Christian charity. Differences of "opinion" will arise, and people will
be divided into various sects; but if the rules which are laid down in
this chapter were followed, the contentions, and altercations, and
strifes among Christians would cease. Had these rules been applied to
the controversies about rites, and forms, and festivals, that have
arisen, peace might have been preserved. Amid all such differences, the
great question is, whether there is true love to the Lord Jesus. If
there is, the apostle teaches us that we have no right to judge a
brother, or despise him, or contend harshly with him. Our object should
be to promote peace, to aid him in his efforts to become holy, and to
seek to build him up in holy faith.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 15](rom015.md)

</div>
