<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Romans Index](rom.md)  
  [Previous](act028)  [Next](rom001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001.md)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Romans

This Epistle has been, with great uniformity, attributed to the apostle
Paul and received as a part of the sacred canon. In the church it has
never been called into question as a genuine, inspired book, except by
three of the ancient sects deemed heretical - the Ebionites, the
Encratites, and Cerinthians. However, even they did not deny that it was
written by the apostle Paul. They rejected it because they could not
make its doctrines harmonize with their views of other parts of the
Scriptures. Their rejecting it, therefore, does not militate against its
genuineness. That is a question to be settled historically, like the
genuineness of any other ancient writing. On this point the testimony of
antiquity is uniform. The proof on this subject may be seen at length in
Lardner's works. The internal evidence that this was written by Paul is
stated in a most ingenious and masterly manner by Dr. Paley in his Horae
Pauline.

It is agreed by all, that this Epistle was written in Greek. Though
addressed to a people whose language was Latin, yet this Epistle to
them, like those to other churches, was in Greek. On this point, there
is also no debate. The reasons why this language was chosen were
probably the following:

\(1\) The Epistle was designed doubtless to be read by other churches as
well as the Roman congregation; compare [Col
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#016.md). Yet the Greek language, being
more generally known and spoken, was more adapted for this purpose than
the Latin tongue.

\(2\) the Greek language was then understood at Rome and extensively
spoken. It was a part of polite education to learn it. The Roman youth
were taught it; and it was the fashion of the times to study it, even so
much so as to make it a matter of complaint that the Latin was neglected
for it by the Roman youth. Thus, Cicero (Pro Arch.) says, "The Greek
language is spoken in almost all nations; the Latin is confined to our
comparatively narrow borders." Tacitus (Orator 29) says, "An infant born
now is committed to a Greek nurse." Juvenal (vi. 185) speaks of its
being considered as an indispensable part of polite education, to be
acquainted with the Greek.

\(3\) it is not impossible that the Jews at Rome, who constituted a
separate colony, were better acquainted with the Greek than the Latin.
They had a Greek translation (the Septuagint), but no Latin translation
of the Scriptures (as yet), and it is very possible that they used the
language in which they were accustomed to read their Scriptures and
which was extensively spoken by their brethren throughout the world.

\(4\) the apostle was himself probably more familiar with the Greek than
the Latin. He was a native of Cilicia, where the Greek was doubtless
spoken, and he not infrequently quotes the Greek poets in his addresses
and epistles [Act 21:37](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#037.md); [Act
17:28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028.md); [Tit
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#012.md); [Co1
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033.md).

This Epistle is placed first among Paul's epistles, not because it was
the first written, but because of the length and importance of the
Epistle itself, as well as the importance of the church in the imperial
city. It has uniformly had this place in the sacred canon, though there
is reason to believe that the Epistle to the Galatians, the first to the
Corinthians, and perhaps the two letters to the Thessalonians were
written before this.

Of the time when it was written, there can be little doubt. About the
year 52 or 54 a.d. the Emperor Claudius banished all Jews from Rome. In
[Act 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#002.md), we have an account of the
first acquaintance of Paul with Aquila and Priscilla who had departed
from Rome in consequence of that decree. This acquaintance was formed in
Corinth; and we are told that Paul stayed with them and worked at the
same occupation [Act 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#003.md). In [Rom
16:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#003.md), Paul directs the church to
greet Priscilla and Aquila, who had for his life laid down their own
necks. This service which they rendered to Paul must have been therefore
after the decree of Claudius; and of course the Epistle must have been
written after the year 52 ad.

In [Act 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#019.md), we are told that Paul
left Aquila and Priscilla at Ephesus. Paul made a journey through the
neighboring regions, and then returned to Ephesus [Act
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#001.md). Paul remained at Ephesus at
least two years [Act 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#008.md), [Act
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#009.md), [Act
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#010.md), and while here probably wrote
the First Epistle to the Corinthians. In that Epistle [Co1
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#019.md) he sends the salutation of
Priscilla and Aquila, who were, of course, still at Ephesus. The Epistle
to the Romans, therefore, in which Paul sends his salutation to Aquila
and Priscilla, as being then at Rome, could not be written until after
they had left Ephesus and returned to Rome; that is, until three years
at least after the decree of Claudius in 52 or 54 ad.

Still further, when Paul wrote this Epistle of Romans, he was about to
depart for Jerusalem to convey a collection which had been made for the
poor saints there, by the churches in Macedonia and Achaia; [Rom
15:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025.md). When he had done this, he
intended to go to Rome; [Rom 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#028.md).
Now, by looking at the Acts of the Apostles, we can determine when this
occurred. At this time, he sent Timothy and Erastus ahead of him into
Macedonia, while he remained in Asia for a season [Act
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#022.md). After this [Act
20:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#001.md), Paul himself went into
Macedonia, passed through Greece, and remained about three months there.
In this journey it is almost certain that Paul went to Corinth, the
capital of Achaia, at which time it is supposed that Romans was written.
From this place he set out for Jerusalem where he was made a prisoner,
and after remaining a prisoner for two years [Act
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#027.md), he was sent to Rome about 60
a.d. Allowing for the time of his traveling and his imprisonment, it
must have been about three years from the time that he purposed to go to
Jerusalem; that is, from the time that he finished Romans [Rom
15:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025.md) to the time when he actually
reached Rome, and thus the Epistle to the Romans must have been written
about 57 ad.

It is clear also, that the Epistle to the Romans was written from
Corinth. In [Rom 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#001.md), Phoebe, a
member of the church at Cenchrea, is commended to the Roman Christians.
She probably had charge of the letter, or she accompanied those who had
it. Cenchrea was the port of the city of Corinth, about seven or eight
miles from the city. In [Rom 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#023.md),
Gaius is spoken of as the host of Paul, or he of whose hospitality Paul
partook, but Gaius was baptized by Paul at Corinth, and Corinth was
manifestly his place of residence; [Co1
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#014.md). Erastus is also mentioned as the
chamberlain of the city where the Epistle to the Romans was written; but
this Erastus is mentioned as having his home at Corinth; [Ti2
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#020.md). From all this it is manifest
that Romans was written at Corinth about the year 57 ad.

Concerning the state of the church at Rome at that time, it is not easy
to form a precise opinion. From this Epistle it is evident that it was
composed of Jews and Gentiles and that one purpose of writing to it was
to reconcile their jarring opinions, particularly about the obligation
of the Jewish law, the advantage of the Jew, and the way of
justification. It is probable that the two parties in the church were
endeavoring to defend each their special opinions, and that the apostle
took this opportunity and mode to state to his converted countrymen the
great doctrines of Christianity, and the relation of the Law of Moses to
the Christian system. The Epistle itself is full proof that the church
to whom it was addressed was composed of Jews and Gentiles. No small
part of it is an argument expressly with the Jews; Rom. 2; Rom. 3; Rom.
4; Rom. 9; Rom. 10; Rom. 11. And no small part of the Epistle is also
designed to state the true doctrine about the character of the Gentiles
and the way in which they could be justified before God.

At this time, there was a large number of Jews at Rome. When Pompey the
Great overran Judea, he sent a large number of Jewish prisoners to Rome
to be sold as slaves, but it was not easy to control them. The Jews
persevered resolutely and obstinately in adhering to the rites of their
nation, in keeping the Sabbath, etc. So, the Romans eventually chose to
give them their freedom and assigned them a place in the vicinity of the
city across the Tiber River. Here a town was built, which was
principally inhabited by Jews. Josephus mentions that 4,000 Jews were
banished from Rome at one time to Sardinia, and that a still greater
number were punished who were unwilling to become soldiers; Ant. book
18, chapter 3, section 5. Philo (Legat. a.d. Caium) says, that many of
the Jews at Rome had obtained their freedom; for, says "he, being made
captive in war, and brought into Italy, they were set at liberty by
their masters, neither were they compelled to change the rites of their
fathers;" see also Josephus, Antiq. book 17, chapter 2, section 1;
Suetonius' Life of Tiberius, 36, and the notes at [Act
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#009.md). From that large number of Jews,
together with those converted from the Gentiles, the church at Rome was
collected, and it is easy to see that in that church there would be a
great diversity of sentiment, and, no doubt, warm discussions about the
authority of the Mosaic Law.

At what time, or by whom, the gospel was first preached at Rome has been
a matter of controversy. The Roman Catholic Church has always maintained
that it was founded by Peter, and they have thence drawn an argument for
their high claims and infallibility. On this subject they make a
confident appeal to some of the fathers. There is strong evidence to be
derived from this Epistle itself, and from the Acts , that Paul did not
regard Peter as having any such primacy and ascendency in the Roman
church as are claimed for him by the Papists.

\(1\) in this whole Epistle, there is no mention of Peter at all! It is
not suggested that he had been or was then in Rome. If he had been, and
the church had been founded by him, it is incredible that Paul did not
make mention of that fact. This is the more striking, as it was done in
other cases where churches had been founded by other men; see [Co1
1:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012). Peter (Cephas.md) is especially
mentioned repeatedly by the apostle Paul in his other epistles [Co1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#022.md); [Co1
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#005.md); [Co1
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#005.md); [Gal
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009.md); [Gal
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018.md); [Gal
2:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#007.md), [Gal
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014.md). In these places Peter is
mentioned in connection with the churches at Corinth and Galatia, yet
never there as appealing to his authority, but in regard to the latter,
expressly calling it into question. Now, it is incredible that if Peter
had been then at Rome, and had founded the church there, and was
regarded as invested with any unique authority over it, that Paul would
never once have even suggested Peter's name!

\(2\) it is clear that Peter was not there when Paul wrote this Epistle.
If he had been, he could not have failed to have sent him a salutation,
amid the numbers that he saluted in Rom. 16.

\(3\) in the Acts of the Apostles, there is no mention of Peter's having
been at Rome, but the presumption from that history is almost conclusive
that he had not been. In [Act 12:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#003.md),
we have an account of his having been imprisoned by Herod Agrippa near
the close of his reign (compare [Act
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#023).md). This occurred about the third
or fourth year of the reign of Claudius, who began to reign 41 a.d. It
is altogether improbable that he had been at Rome before this. Claudius
had not reigned more than three years, and all the testimony that the
church fathers give is that Peter came to Rome sometime during Claudius'
reign.

\(4\) Peter was still in Jerusalem in the 9th or 10th year of the reign
of Claudius; [Act 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#006.md), etc. Nor is
there any mention made then of his having been at Rome.

\(5\) Paul went to Rome about 60 a.d. There is no mention made then of
Peter's being with him or being there. If he had been, it could hardly
have failed to have been recorded. This is especially remarkable when
Paul's meeting with the brethren is expressly mentioned [Act
28:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#014.md), and when it is recorded that
he met the Jews, and stayed with them, and spent no less than two years
in Rome. If Peter had been there, such a fact could not fail to have
been recorded or alluded to, either in the Book of Acts or in the
Epistle to the Romans.

\(6\) the Epistles to the Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, to
Philemon, and the Second Epistle to Timothy (Lardner, vi. 235) were
written from Rome during the residence of Paul as a prisoner; and the
Epistle to the Hebrews probably also while he was still in Italy. In
none of these epistles is there any hint that Peter was then or had been
at Rome; a fact that cannot be accounted for if Peter were truly
regarded as the founder of that church, and especially if he were then
in that city. Yet in those epistles there are the salutations of a
number to those churches. In particular, Epaphras, Luke the beloved
physician [Col 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#012.md), [Col
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#014.md), and the saints of the household
of Caesar are mentioned [Phi 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#022.md). In
[Ti2 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#011.md), Paul expressly affirms that
only Luke was with him, a declaration utterly irreconcilable with the
supposition that Peter was then in Rome.

\(7\) if Peter was ever in Rome, therefore, of which indeed there is no
reason to doubt, he must have come there after Paul; at what time is
unknown. That he was there cannot be doubted without calling into
question the truth of all history.

When or by whom the gospel was preached first at Rome, it is not easy,
perhaps not possible, to determine. In the account of the day of
Pentecost [Act 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#010.md), we find, among
others, that there were present strangers of Rome, and it is not
improbable that they carried back the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and
they became the founders of the Roman congregation. One design and
effect of that miracle was doubtless to spread the knowledge of the
Saviour among all nations; see the notes at Acts 2. In the list of
persons who are mentioned in Rom. 16 it is not improbable that some of
those early converts are included; and that Paul thus intended to show
honor to their early conversion and zeal in the cause of Christianity.
Thus, [Rom 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#007.md), he designates
Andronicus and Junia, his kinsmen and fellow-prisoners who were
distinguished among the apostles and who had been converted before Paul,
that is, before 34 a.d., at least eight years before it was ever
pretended that Peter was in Rome. Other persons are also mentioned as
distinguished, and it is not improbable that they were the early
founders of the church at Rome ([Rom
16:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#012), etc..md)

That the church at Rome was founded early is evident from the celebrity
status which it had acquired. At the time when Paul wrote this Epistle
(57 a.d.), their faith was spoken of throughout the world [Rom
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008.md). The character of the church at
Rome cannot be clearly ascertained. Yet it is clear that it was not made
up merely of the lower classes of the community. In [Phi
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#022.md), it appears that the gospel had
made its way into the family of Caesar, and that a part of his household
had been converted to the Christian faith. Some of the church fathers
affirm that Nero himself in the beginning of his reign was favorably
impressed with regard to Christianity, and it is possible that this
might have been through the instrumentality of his family. But little on
this subject can be known. While it is probable that the great mass of
believers in all the early churches was of obscure and plebeian origin,
it is also certain that some who were rich, and noble, and learned,
became members of the church of Christ (see [Ti1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009.md); [Pe1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#003.md); [Ti1
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020.md); [Col
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008.md); [Co1
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026.md); [Act
17:34](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#034).md).

This Epistle has been usually deemed the most difficult of
interpretation of any part of the New Testament; and no small part of
the controversies in the Christian church have grown out of discussions
about its meaning. Early in the history of the church, even before the
death of the apostles, we learn from [Pe2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#016.md), that the writings of Paul were
some of them regarded as being "hard to be understood"; and that "the
unlearned and unstable wrested them to their own destruction." It is
probable that Peter has reference here to the high and mysterious
doctrines about justification and the sovereignty of God, and the
doctrines of election and decrees. From the Epistle of James, it would
seem probable also, that already the apostle Paul's doctrine of
justification by faith had been perverted and abused. It seems to have
been inferred that good works were unnecessary; and here was the
beginning of the cheerless and withering system of Antinomianism - than
which a more destructive or pestilential heresy never found its way into
the Christian church. Several reasons might be assigned for the
controversies which have grown out of this Epistle:

\(1\) The very structure of the argument, and the uniqueness of the
apostle's manner of writing. Paul is rapid, mighty, profound, often
involved, readily following a new thought, leaving the regular subject,
and returning again after a considerable interval. Hence, his writings
abound with parentheses and with complicated paragraphs.

\(2\) objections are often introduced, so that it requires close
attention to determine their precise bearing. Though Paul employs no
small part of the Epistle in answering objections, yet an objector is
never once formally introduced or mentioned.

\(3\) many of Paul's expressions and phrases are liable to be
misunderstood, and capable of perversion. Of this class are such
expressions as "the righteousness of faith," "the righteousness of God,"
etc.

\(4\) the doctrines themselves are high and mysterious. They are those
subjects upon which the most profound minds have been in all ages
exercised in vain. On them there has been, and always will be a
difference of opinion. Even with the most honest intentions that people
ever have, they find it difficult or impossible to approach the
investigation of them without the bias of early education or the
prejudice of previous opinion. In this world, it is not given to human
beings to fully understand these great doctrines. And it is not
wonderful that the discussion of them has given rise to endless
controversies: and that they who have:

Reasoned high.

Of Providence, foreknowledge, will, and fate;

Fixed fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute,

Have found no end, in wandering mazes lost.

\(5\) It cannot be denied that one reason why the epistles of Paul have
been regarded as so difficult has been an unwillingness to admit the
truth of the plain doctrines which he teaches. The heart is by nature
opposed to them and comes to believe them with great reluctance. This
feeling will account for no small part of the difficulties felt in
regard to this Epistle. There is one great maxim in interpreting the
Scriptures that can never be departed from. It is, that people can never
understand them aright, until they are willing to allow them to speak
out their fair and proper meaning. When people are determined not to
find certain doctrines in the Bible, nothing is more natural than that
they should find difficulties in it, and complain much of its great
obscurity and mystery. I add,

\(6\) That one principal reason why so much difficulty has been felt
here, has been an unwillingness to stop where the apostle does. People
have desired to advance further, and penetrate the mysteries which the
Spirit of inspiration has not disclosed. Where Paul states a simple
fact, people often advance a theory. The fact may be clear and plain;
their theory is obscure, involved, mysterious, or absurd. By degrees
they learn to unite the fact and the theory. They regard their
explanation as the only possible one; and, since the fact in question
has the authority of divine revelation, so they insensibly come to
regard their theory in the same light; and the one who calls into
question their speculation about the cause, or the mode, is set down as
heretical, and as denying the doctrine of the apostle. A melancholy
instance of this we have in the account which the apostle gives Rom. 5
about the effect of the sin of Adam. The simple fact is stated that that
sin was followed by the sin and ruin of all his posterity.

Yet he offers no explanation of the fact. He leaves it as indubitable;
and as not demanding an explanation in his argument - perhaps as not
admitting it. This is the whole of his doctrine on that subject. Yet
people have not been satisfied with that. They have sought for a theory
to account for it. And many suppose that they have found it in the
doctrine that the sin of Adam is imputed, or set over by an arbitrary
arrangement to Beings otherwise innocent, and that they are held to be
responsible for a deed committed by a man thousands of years before they
were born. This is the theory; and people insensibly forget that it is
mere theory, and they blend that and the fact which the apostle states
together; and deem the denial of the one, heresy as much as the denial
of the other, i. e., they make it as impious to call into question their
philosophy, as to doubt the facts stated on the authority of the apostle
Paul. If people desire to understand the epistles of Paul, and avoid
difficulties, they should be willing to leave it where he does; and this
single rule would have made useless several years and entire volumes of
controversy.

Perhaps, on the whole, there is no book of the New Testament that
demands more a humble, docile, and prayerful disposition in its
interpretation than this Epistle. Its profound doctrines, its abstruse
inquiries, and the opposition of many of those doctrines to the views of
the unrenewed and unsubdued heart of man, make a spirit of docility and
prayer especially necessary in its investigation. No one has ever
understood the reasonings and views of the apostle Paul except under the
influence of elevated piety. No one has ever found opposition to his
doctrines recede, and difficulties vanish, who did not bring the mind in
an humble frame to receive all that has been revealed; and that, in a
spirit of humble prayer, did not purpose to lay aside all bias and open
the heart to the full influence of the elevated truths which the apostle
Paul inculcates. Where there is a willingness that God should reign and
do all His pleasure, this Epistle to the Romans may, in its general
character, be easily understood. Where this is something lacking, it
will appear full of mystery and perplexity; the mind will be
embarrassed, and the heart dissatisfied with its doctrines; and the
unhumbled spirit will rise from its study only confused, irritated,
perplexed, and dissatisfied.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 1](rom001.md)

</div>
