<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom003)  [Next](rom005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 4:0</span></span>

The main object of this chapter is to show that the doctrine of
justification by faith, which the apostle was defending, was found in
the Old Testament. The argument is to be regarded as addressed
particularly to a Jew, to show him that no new doctrine was advanced.
The argument is derived, first, from the fact that Abraham was so
justified, [Rom 4:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#001); Secondly, from
the fact that the same thing is declared by David [Rom
4:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#006).

A question might still be asked, whether this justification was not in
consequence of their being circumcised, and thus grew out of conformity
to the Law? To answer this, the apostle shows [Rom
4:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#009) that Abraham was justified by
faith before he was circumcised, and that even his circumcision was in
consequence of his being justified by faith, and a public seal or
attestation of that fact.

Still further, the apostle shows that if people were to be justified by
works, faith would be of no use; and the promises of God would have no
effect. The Law works wrath [Rom
4:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#013), but the conferring of the
favor by faith is demonstration of the highest favor of God [Rom
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#016). Abraham, moreover, had evinced a
strong faith; he had shown what it was; he was an example to all who
should follow. And he had thus shown that as he was justified before
circumcision, and "before" the giving of the Law, so the same thing
might occur in regard to those who had never been circumcised. In Rom.
2; 3, the apostle had shown that all had failed of keeping the Law, and
that there was no other way of justification but by faith. To the
salvation of the pagan, the Jew would have strong objections. He
supposed that none could be saved but those who had been circumcised,
and who were Jews. This objection the apostle meets in this chapter by
showing that Abraham was justified in the very way in which he
maintained the pagan might be; that Abraham was justified by faith
without being circumcised. If the father of the faithful, the ancestor
on whom the Jews so much prided themselves, was thus justified, then
Paul was advancing no new doctrine in maintaining that the same thing
might occur now. He was keeping strictly within the spirit of their
religion in maintaining that the Gentile world might also be justified
by faith. This is the outline of the reasoning in this chapter. The
reasoning is such as a serious Jew must feel and acknowledge. And
keeping in mind the main object which the apostle had in it, there will
be found little difficulty in its interpretation.

[Romans 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 4:1</span></span>

What shall we say then? - See [Rom
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001). This is rather the objection of a
Jew. "How does your doctrine of justification by faith agree with what
the Scriptures say of Abraham? Was the Law set aside in his case? Did he
derive no advantage in justification from the rite of circumcision, and
from the covenant which God made with him?" The object of the apostle
now is to answer this inquiry.

That Abraham our father - Our ancestor; the father and founder of the
nation; see the note at [Mat 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009) The
Jews valued themselves much on the fact that he was their father; and an
argument, drawn from his example or conduct, therefore, would be
especially forcible.

As pertaining to the flesh - This expression is one that has been much
controverted. In the original, it may refer either to Abraham as their
father "according to the flesh," that is, their natural father, or from
whom they were descended; or it may be connected with "hath found."
"What shall we say that Abraham our father hath found in respect to the
flesh?" κατὰ σάρκα kata sarka. The latter is doubtless the proper
connection. Some refer the word "flesh" to external privileges and
advantages; others to his own strength or power (Calvin and Grotius);
and others make it refer to circumcision. This latter I take to be the
correct interpretation. It agrees best with the connection, and equally
well with the usual meaning of the word. The idea is, "If people are
justified by faith; if works are to have no place; if, therefore, all
rites and ceremonies, all legal observances, are useless in
justification; what is the advantage of circumcision? What benefit did
Abraham derive from it? Why was it appointed? And why is such an
importance attached to it in the history of his life." A similar
question was asked in [Rom 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001).

Hath found - Hath obtained. What advantage has he derived from it?

[Romans 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 4:2</span></span>

For if Abraham ... - This is the answer of the apostle. If Abraham was
justified on the ground of his own merits, he would have reason to
boast, or to claim praise. He might regard himself as the author of it,
and take the praise to himself; see [Rom
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#004). The inquiry, therefore, was,
whether in the account of the justification of Abraham, there was to be
found any such statement of a reason for self-confidence and boasting.

But not before God - In the sight of God. That is, in his recorded
judgment, he had no ground of boasting on account of works. To show
this, the apostle appeals at once to the Scriptures, to show that there
was no such record as that Abraham could boast that he was justified by
his works. As God judges right in all cases, so it follows that Abraham
had no just ground of boasting, and of course that he was not justified
by his own works. The sense of this verse is well expressed by Calvin.
"If Abraham was justified by his works, he might boast of his own
merits. But he has no ground of boasting before God. Therefore he was
not justified by works."

[Romans 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 4:3</span></span>

For what saith the Scripture? - The inspired account of Abraham's
justification. This account was final, and was to settle the question.
This account is found in [Gen 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006).

Abraham believed God - In the Hebrew, "Abraham believed Yahweh." The
sense is substantially the same, as the argument turns on the act of
believing. The faith which Abraham exercised was, that his posterity
should be like the stars of heaven in number. This promise was made to
him when he had no child, and of course when he had no prospect of such
a posterity. See the strength and nature of this faith further
illustrated in [Rom 4:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#016). The
reason why it was counted to him for righteousness was, that it was such
a strong, direct, and unwavering act of confidence in the promise of
God.

And it - The word "it" here evidently refers to the act of believing It
does not refer to the righteousness of another - of God, or of the
Messiah; but the discussion is solely of the strong act of Abraham's
faith. which in some sense was counted to him for righteousness. In what
sense this was, is explained directly after. All that is material to
remark here is, that the act of Abraham, the strong confidence of his
mind in the promises of God, his unwavering assurance that what God had
promised he would perform, was reckoned for righteousness. The same
thing is more fully expressed in [Rom
4:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#018). When therefore it is said
that the righteousness of Christ is accounted or imputed to us; when it
is said that his merits are transferred and reckoned as ours; whatever
may be the truth of the doctrine, it cannot be defended by "this"
passage of Scripture.

Faith is uniformly an act of the mind. It is not a created essence which
is placed within the mind. It is not a substance created independently
of the soul, and placed within it by almighty power. It is not a
principle, for the expression a principle of faith, is as unmeaningful
as a principle of joy, or a principle of sorrow, or a principle of
remorse. God promises; the man believes; and this is the whole of it.

(A principle is the "element or original cause," out of which certain
consequences arise, and to which they may be traced. And if faith be the
root of all acceptable obedience, then certainly, in this sense, it is a
principle. But whatever faith be, it is not here asserted that it is
imputed for, or instead of, righteousness. See the note above.)

While the word "faith" is sometimes used to denote religious doctrine,
or the system that is to be believed ([Act
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007); [Act
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#009); [Rom
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#005); [Rom
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#008); [Rom
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#026); [Eph
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017); [Eph
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005); [Ti1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#007), etc.); yet, when it is used to
denote that which is required of people, it always denotes an acting of
the mind exercised in relation to some object, or some promise, or
threatening, or declaration of some other being; see the note at [Mar
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016).

Was counted - ἐλογίσθη elogigisthē. The same word in [Rom
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#022), is is rendered "it was imputed."
The word occurs frequently in the Scriptures. In the Old Testament, the
verb חשׁב chaashab, which which is translated by the word λογίζομαι
logizomai, means literally, "to think, to intend," or "purpose; to
imagine, invent," or "devise; to reckon," or "account; to esteem; to
impute," that is, to impute to a man what belongs to himself, or what
"ought" to be imputed to him. It occurs only in the following places:
[Psa 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#002); [Psa
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#004); [Isa
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#007); [Job
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#011); [Job
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#010); [Gen
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#006); [Gen
38:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#015); [Sa1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#013); [Psa
52:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#004); [Jer
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#018); [Zac
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#010); [Job
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#026); [Job
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#016); [Isa
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017); [Kg1
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#021); [Num
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#027), [Num
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#030); [Psa
88:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#004); [Isa
40:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#017); [Lam
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#002); [Isa
40:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#015); [Gen
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#016). I have examined all the
passages, and as the result of my examination have come to the
conclusion, that there is not one in which the word is used in the sense
of reckoning or imputing to a man what does not strictly belong to him;
or of charging on him what ought not to be charged on him as a matter of
personal right. The word is never used to denote imputing in the sense
of transferring, or of charging that on one which does not properly
belong to him. The same is the case in the New Testament. The word
occurs about forty times (see "Schmidius' Concord)," and, in a similar
signification. No doctrine of transferring, or of setting over to a man
what does not properly belong to him, be it sin or holiness, can be
derived, therefore, from this word. Whatever is meant by it here, it
evidently is declared that the act of believing is what is intended,
both by Moses and by Paul.

For righteousness - In order to justification; or to regard and treat
him in connection with this as a righteous man; as one who was admitted
to the favor and friendship of God. In reference to this we may remark,

\(1\) That it is evidently not intended that the act of believing, on
the part of Abraham, was the meritorious ground of acceptance; for then
it would have been a work. Faith was as much his own act, as any act of
obedience to the Law.

\(2\) the design of the apostle was to show that by the Law, or by
works, man could not be justified; [Rom
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#028); [Rom
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#002).

\(3\) faith was not what the Law required. It demanded complete and
perfect obedience; and if a man was justified by faith, it was in some
other way than by the Law.

\(4\) as the Law did not demand this; and as faith was something
different from the demand of the Law; so if a man were justified by
that, it was on a principle altogether different from justification by
works. It was not by personal merit. It was not by complying with the
Law. It was in a mode entirely different.

\(5\) in being justified by faith, it is meant, therefore, that we are
treated as righteous; that we are forgiven; that we are admitted to the
favor of God, and treated as his friends.

\(6\) in this act, faith, is a mere instrument, an antecedent, a "sine
qua non," what God has been pleased to appoint as a condition on which
men may be treated as righteous. It expresses a state of mind which is
demonstrative of love to God; of affection for his cause and character;
of reconciliation and friendship; and is therefore that state to which
he has been graciously pleased to promise pardon and acceptance.

\(7\) since this is not a matter of law; since the Law could not be said
to demand it; as it is on a different principle; and as the acceptance
of faith, or of a believer, cannot be a matter of merit or claim, so
justification is of grace, or mere favor. It is in no sense a matter of
merit on our part, and thus stands distinguished entirely from
justification by works, or by conformity to the Law. From beginning to
end, it is, so far as we are concerned, a matter of grace. The merit by
which all this is obtained, is the work of the Lord Jesus Christ,
through whom this plan is proposed, and by whose atonement alone God can
consistently pardon and treat as righteous those who are in themselves
ungodly; see [Rom 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005). In this place
we have also evidence that faith is always substantially of the same
character. In the case of Abraham it was confidence in God and his
promises. All faith has the same nature, whether it be confidence in the
Messiah, or in any of the divine promises or truths. As this confidence
evinces the same state of mind, so it was as consistent to justify
Abraham by it, as it is to justify him who believes in the Lord Jesus
Christ under the gospel; see Heb. 11.

[Romans 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 4:4</span></span>

Now to him that worketh ... - This passage is not to be understood as
affirming that any actually have worked out their salvation by
conformity to the Law so as to be saved by their own merits; but it
expresses a general truth in regard to works. On that plan, if a man
were justified by his works, it would be a matter due to him. It is a
general principle in regard to contracts and obligations, that where a
man fulfils them he is entitled to the reward as what is due to him, and
which he can claim. This is well understood in all the transactions
among people. Where a man has fulfilled the terms of a contract, to pay
him is not a matter of favor; he has earned it; and we are bound to pay
him. So says the apostle, it would be, if a man were justified by his
works. He would have a claim on God. It would be wrong not to justify
him. And this is an additional reason why the doctrine cannot be true;
compare [Rom 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#006).

The reward - The pay, or wages. The word is commonly applied to the pay
of soldiers, day-laborers, etc.; [Mat
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#008); [Luk
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#007); [Ti1
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#018); [Jam
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#004). It has a similar meaning here.

Reckoned - Greek, Imputed. The same word which, in [Rom
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003), is rendered "counted," and in
[Rom 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#022), imputed. It is used here in
its strict and proper sense, to reckon that as belonging to a man which
is his own, or which is due to him; see the note at [Rom
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003).

Of grace - Of favor; as a gift.

Of debt - As due; as a claim; as a fair compensation according to the
contract.

[Romans 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 4:5</span></span>

But to him that worketh not - Who does not rely on his conformity to the
Law for his justification; who does not depend on his works; who seeks
to be justified in some other way. The reference here is to the
Christian plan of justification.

But believeth - Note, [Rom 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026).

On him - On God. Thus, the connection requires; for the discussion has
immediate reference to Abraham, whose faith was in the promise of God.

That justifieth the ungodly - This is a very important expression. It
implies,

\(1\) That people are sinners, or are ungodly.

\(2\) that God regards them as such when they are justified. He does not
justify them because he sees them to be, or regards them to be
righteous; but knowing that they are in fact polluted. He does not first
esteem them, contrary to fact, to be pure; but knowing that they are
polluted, and that they deserve no favor, he resolves to forgive them,
and to treat them as his friends.

\(3\) in themselves they are equally undeserving, whether they are
justified or not. Their souls have been defiled by sin; and that is
known when they are pardoned. God judges things as they are; and sinners
who are justified, he judges not as if they were pure, or as if they had
a claim; but he regards them as united by faith to the Lord Jesus; and
in this relation he judges that they should be treated as his friends,
though they have been, are, and always will be, personally undeserving.
It is not meant that the righteousness of Christ is transferred to them,
so as to become personally theirs - for moral character cannot be
transferred; nor that it is infused into them, making them personally
meritorious - for then they could not be spoken of as ungodly; but that
Christ died in their stead, to atone for their sins, and is regarded and
esteemed by God to have died; and that the results or benefits of his
death are so reckoned or imputed to believers as to make it proper for
God to regard and treat them as if they had themselves obeyed the Law;
that is, as righteous in his sight; see the note at [Rom
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003).

[Romans 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 4:6</span></span>

Even as David - The apostle having adduced the example of Abraham to
show that the doctrine which he was defending was not new, and contrary
to the Old Testament, proceeds to adduce the case of David also; and to
show that he understood the same doctrine of justification without
works.

Describeth - Speaks of.

The blessedness - The happiness; or the desirable state or condition.

Unto whom God imputeth righteousness - Whom God treats as righteous, or
as entitled to his favor in a way different from his conformity to the
Law. This is found in [Psa 32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001).
And the whole scope and design of the psalm is to show the blessedness
of the man who is forgiven, and whose sins are not charged on him, but
who is freed from the punishment due to his sins. Being thus pardoned,
he is treated as a righteous man. And it is evidently in this sense that
the apostle uses the expression "imputeth righteousness," that is, he
does not impute, or charge on the man his sins; he reckons and treats
him as a pardoned and righteous man; [Psa
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#002). See the note at [Rom
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003). He regards him as one who is
forgiven and admitted to his favor, and who is to be treated
henceforward as though he had not sinned. That is, he partakes of the
benefits of Christ's atonement, so as not henceforward to be treated as
a sinner, but as a friend of God.

[Romans 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 4:7</span></span>

Blessed - Happy are they: they are highly favored; see the note at [Mat
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003).

Whose sins are covered - Are concealed; or hidden from the view. On
which God will no more look, and which he will no more remember. "By
these words," says Calvin (in loco), "we are taught that justification
with Paul is nothing else but pardon of sin." The word "cover" here has
no reference to the atonement, but is expressive of hiding, or
concealing that is, of forgiving sin.

[Romans 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 4:8</span></span>

Will not impute sin - On whom the Lord will not charge his sins; or who
shall not be reckoned or regarded as guilty. This shows clearly what the
apostle meant by imputing faith without works. It is to pardon sin, and
to treat with favor; not to reckon or charge a man's sin to him; but to
treat him, though personally undeserving and ungodly [Rom
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005), as though the sin had not been
committed. The word "impute" here is used in its natural and appropriate
sense, as denoting to charge on man what properly belongs to him. See
the note at [Rom 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003).

[Romans 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 4:9</span></span>

Cometh ... - The apostle has now prepared the way for an examination of
the inquiry whether this came in consequence of obedience to the Law? or
whether it was without obedience to the Law? Having shown that Abraham
was justified by faith in accordance with the doctrine which he was
defending, the only remaining inquiry was whether it was after he was
circumcised or before; whether in consequence of his circumcision or
not. If it was after his circumcision. the Jew might still maintain that
it was by complying with the works of the Law; but if it was before, the
point of the apostle would be established, that it was without the works
of the Law. Still further, if he was justified by faith before he was
circumcised. then here was an instance of justification and acceptance
without conformity to the Jewish Law; and if the father of the Jewish
nation was so justified, and reckoned as a friend of God, without being
circumcised, that is, in the condition in which the pagan world then
was, then it would follow that the Gentiles might be justified in a
similar way now. It would not be departing, therefore, from the spirit
of the Old Testament itself, to maintain, as the apostle had done Rom.
3, that the Gentiles who had not been circumcised might obtain the favor
of God as well as the Jew; that is, that it was independent of
circumcision, and might be extended to all.

This blessedness - This happy state or condition. This state of being
justified by God, and of being regarded as his friends. This is the sum
of all blessedness; the only state that can be truly pronounced happy.

Upon the circumcision only - The "Jews" alone, as "they" pretended.

Or upon the uncircumcision also - The "Gentiles" who believed, as the
"apostle" maintained.

For we say - We all admit. It is a conceded point. It was the doctrine
of the apostle, as well as of the Jews; and as much theirs as his. With
this, then, as a conceded point, what is the fair inference to be drawn
from it?

[Romans 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 4:10</span></span>

How - In what circumstances, or time.

When he was in circumcision ... - Before or after he was circumcised?
This was the very point of the inquiry. For if he was justified by faith
after he was circumcised, the Jew might pretend that it was in virtue of
his circumcision; that even his faith was acceptable, because he was
circumcised. But if it was before he was circumcised, this plea could
not be set up; and the argument of the apostle was confirmed by the case
of Abraham, the great father and model of the Jewish people, that
circumcision and the deeds of the Law did not conduce to justification;
and that as Abraham was justified without those works, so might others
be, and the pagan, therefore, might be admitted to similar privileges.

Not in circumcision - Not being circumcised, or after he was
circumcised, but before. This was the record in the case; [Gen
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006); Compare [Gen
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#010).

[Romans 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 4:11</span></span>

And he received the sign ... - A sign is that by which any thing is
shown, or represented. And circumcision thus showed that there was a
covenant between Abraham and God; [Gen
17:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001). It became the public mark or
token of the relation which he sustained to God.

A seal - See the note at [Joh 3:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#033). A
seal is that mark of wax or other substance, which is attached to an
instrument of writing, as a deed, etc., to confirm, ratify it, or to
make it binding. Sometimes instruments were sealed, or made authentic by
stamping on them some word, letter, or device, which had been engraved
on silver, or on precious stones. The seal or stamp was often worn as an
ornament on the finger; [Est 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#008); [Gen
41:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#042); [Gen
38:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#018); [Exo
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#011), [Exo
28:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#036); [Exo
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#006) To affix the seal, whether of
wax, or otherwise, was to confirm contract or an engagement. In allusion
to this, circumcision is called a seal of the covenant which God had
made with Abraham. That is, he appointed this as a public attestation to
the fact that he had previously approved of Abraham, and had made
important promises to him.

Which he had, yet being circumcised - He believed [Gen
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005); was accepted, or justified; was
admitted to the favor of God, and favored with clear and remarkable
promises [Gen 15:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018); [Gen
17:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001), before he was circumcised.
Circumcision, therefore, could have contributed neither to his
justification, nor to the premises made to him by God.

That he might be the father ... - All this was done that Abraham might
be held up as an example, or a model, of the very doctrine which the
apostle was defending. The word "father" here is used evidently in a
spiritual sense, as denoting that he was the ancestor of all true
believers; that he was their model, and example. They are regarded as
his children because they are possessed of his spirit; are justified in
the same way, and are imitators of his example; see the note at [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001). In this sense the expression
occurs in [Luk 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#009); [Joh
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#033); [Gal
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#007), [Gal
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#029).

Though they be not circumcised - This was stated in opposition to the
opinion of the Jews that all ought to be circumcised. As the apostle had
shown that Abraham enjoyed the favor of God previous to his being
circumcised, that is, without circumcision; so it followed that others
might on the same principle also. This instance settles the point; and
there is nothing which a Jew can reply to this.

That righteousness ... - That is, in the same way, by faith without
works: that they might be accepted, and treated as righteous.

[Romans 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 4:12</span></span>

And the father of circumcision - The father, that is, the ancestor,
exemplar, or model of those who are circumcised, and who possess the
same faith that he did. Not only the father of all believers [Rom
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011), but in a special sense the
father of the Jewish people. In this, the apostle intimates that though
all who believed would be saved as he was, yet the Jews had a special
proprietorship in Abraham; they had special favors and privileges from
the fact that he was their ancestor.

Not of the circumcision only - Who are not merely circumcised, but who
possess his spirit and his faith. Mere circumcision would not avail; but
circumcision connected with faith like his, showed that they were
especially his descendants; see the note at [Rom
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#025).

Who walk in the steps ... - Who imitate his example; who imbibe his
spirit; who have his faith.

Being yet uncircumcised - Before he was circumcised. Compare [Gen
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006), with Gen. 17.

[Romans 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 4:13</span></span>

For the promise ... - To show that the faith of Abraham, on which his
justification depended, was not by the Law, the apostle proceeds to show
that the promise concerning which his faith was so remarkably evinced
was before the Law was given. If this was so, then it was an additional
important consideration in opposition to the Jew, showing that
acceptance with God depended on faith, and not on works.

That he should be heir of the world - An heir is one who succeeds, or is
to succeed to an estate. In this passage, the world, or the entire
earth, is regarded as the estate to which reference is made, and the
promise is that the posterity of Abraham should succeed to that, or
should possess it as their inheritance. The precise expression used
here, "heir of the world," is not found in the promises made to Abraham
Those promises were that God would make of him a great nation [Gen
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#002); that in him all the families of
the earth should be blessed [Gen 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003);
that his posterity should be as the stars for multitude [Gen
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005); and that he should be a father
of many nations [Gen 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#005). As this
latter promise is one to which the apostle particularly refers (see [Rom
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017)), it is probable that he had this
in his eye. This promise had, at first, respect to his numerous natural
descendants, and to their possessing the land of Canaan. But it is also
regarded in the New Testament as extending to the Messiah [Gal
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016) as his descendant, and to all his
followers as the spiritual seed of the father of the faithful. When the
apostle calls him "the heir of the world," he sums up in this
comprehensive expression all the promises made to Abraham, intimating
that his spiritual descendants, that is, those who possess his faith,
shall yet be so numerous as to possess all lands.

Or to his seed - To his posterity, or descendants.

Through the law - By the observance of the Law; or made in consequence
of observing the Law; or depending on the condition that he should
observe the Law. The covenant was made before the law of circumcision
was given; and long before the Law of Moses (compare [Gal
3:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016)), and was independent of both.

But through ... - In consequence of or in connection with the strong
confidence which he showed in the promises of God, [Gen
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006).

[Romans 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 4:14</span></span>

For if they which are of the law - Who seek for justification and
acceptance by the Law.

Faith is made void - Faith would have no place in the scheme; and
consequently the strong commendations bestowed on the faith of Abraham,
would be bestowed without any just cause. If people are justified by the
Law, they cannot be by faith, and faith would be useless in this work.

And the promise ... - A promise looks to the future. Its design and
tendency is to excite trust and confidence in him who makes it. All the
promises of God have this design and tendency; and consequently, as God
has given many promises, the object is to call forth the lively and
constant faith of people, all going to show that in the divine
estimation, faith is of inestimable value. But if people are justified
by the Law; if they are rendered "acceptable" by conformity to the
institutions of Moses; then they cannot depend for acceptance on any
promise made to Abraham, or his seed. They cut themselves off from that
promise, and stand independent of it. That promise, like all other
promises, was made to excite faith. If, therefore, the Jews depended on
the Law for justification, they were cut off from all the promises made
to Abraham; and if they could be justified by the Law, the promise was
useless. This is as true now as it was then. If people seek to be
justified by their morality or their forms of religion, they cannot
depend on any promise of God; for he has made no promise to any such
attempt. They stand independently of any promise, covenant, or compact,
and are depending on a scheme of their own; a scheme which would render
his plan vain and useless; which would render his promises, and the
atonement of Christ, and the work of the Spirit of no value. It is
clear, therefore, that such an attempt at salvation cannot be
successful.

[Romans 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 4:15</span></span>

Because the law - All law. It is the tendency of law.

Worketh wrath - Produces or causes wrath. While man is fallen, and a
sinner, its tendency, so far from justifying him, and producing peace,
is just the reverse. It condemns, denounces wrath, and produces
suffering. The word "wrath" here is to be taken in the sense of
punishment. [Rom 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#008). And the meaning
is, that the Law of God, demanding perfect purity, and denouncing every
sin condemns the sinner, and consigns him to punishment. As the apostle
had proved Rom. 1; 2; 3 that all were sinners, so it followed that if
any attempted to be justified by the Law, they would be involved only in
condemnation and wrath.

For where no law is ... - This is a general principle; a maxim of common
justice and of common sense. Law is a rule of conduct. If no such rule
is given and known, there can be no crime. Law expresses what may be
done, and what may not be done. If there is no command to pursue a
certain course, no injunction to forbid certain conduct, actions will be
innocent. The connection in which this declaration is made here, seems
to imply that as the Jews had a multitude of clear laws, and as the
Gentiles had the laws of nature, there could be no hope of escape from
the charge of their violation. Since human nature was depraved, and
people were prone to sin, the more just and reasonable the laws, the
less hope was there of being justified by the Law, and the more
certainty was there that the Law would produce wrath and condemnation.

[Romans 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 4:16</span></span>

Therefore - In view of the course of reasoning which has been pursued.
We have come to this conclusion.

It is of faith - Justification is by faith; or the plan which God has
devised of saving people is by faith, [Rom
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026).

That it might be by grace - As a matter of mere undeserved mercy. If
people were justified by law, it would be by their own merits; now it is
of mere unmerited favor.

To the end - For the purpose, or design.

The promise ... - [Rom 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#013).

Might be sure - Might be firm, or established. On any other ground, it
could not be established. If it had depended on entire conformity to the
Law, the promise would never have been established, for none would have
yielded such obedience. But now it may be secured to all the posterity
of Abraham.

To all the seed - [Rom 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#013).

Not to that only - Not to that part of his descendants alone who were
Jews, or who had the Law.

But to that ... - To all who should possess the same faith as Abraham.
The father of us all. Of all who believe, whether they be Jews or
Gentiles.

[Romans 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 4:17</span></span>

As it is written - [Gen 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#005).

I have made thee - The word used here in the Hebrew [Gen
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#005) means literally, to give, to
grant; and also, to set, or constitute. This is also the meaning of the
Greek word used both by the Septuagint and the apostle. The quotation is
taken literally from the Septuagint. The argument of the apostle is
founded in part on the fact that the past tense is used - I have made
thee - and that God spoke of a thing as already done, which he had
promised or purposed to do. The sense is, he had, in his mind or
purpose, constituted him the father of many nations; and so certain was
the fulfillment of the divine purposes, that he spoke of it as already
accomplished.

Of many nations - The apostle evidently understands this promise as
referring, not to his natural descendants only, but to the great
multitude who should believe as he did.

Before him - In his view, or sight; that is, God regarded him as such a
father.

Whom he believed - Whose promise he believed; or in whom he trusted.

Who quickeneth the dead - Who gives life to the dead, [Eph
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001), [Eph
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#005). This expresses the power of God
to give life. But why it is used here has been a subject of debate. I
regard it as having reference to the strong natural improbability of the
fulfillment of the prophecy when it was given, arising from the age of
Abraham and Sarah, [Rom 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#019). Abraham
exercised power in the God who gives life, and who gives it as he
pleases. It is one of his prerogatives to give life to the dead (νεκρους
nekrous), to raise up those who are in their graves; and a power similar
to that, or strongly reminding of that, was manifested in fulfilling the
promise to Abraham. The giving of this promise, and its fulfillment,
were such as strongly to remind us that God has power to give life to
the dead.

And calleth ... - That is, those things which he foretels and promises
are so certain, that he may speak of them as already in existence. Thus,
in relation to Abraham, God, instead of simply promising that he would
make him the father of many nations, speaks of it as already done, "I
have made thee," etc. In his own mind, or purpose, he had so constituted
him, and it was so certain that it would take place, that he might speak
of it as already done.

[Romans 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 4:18</span></span>

Who against hope - Who against all apparent or usual ground of hope. He
refers here to the prospect of a posterity; see [Rom
4:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#019).

Believed in hope - Believed in what was promised to excite his hope.
Hope here is put for the object of his hope - what was promised.

According to what was spoken - [Gen
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005).

So shall thy seed be - That is, as the stars in heaven for multitude.
Thy posterity shall be very numerous.

[Romans 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 4:19</span></span>

And being not weak in faith - That is, having strong faith.

He considered not - He did not regard the fact that his body was now
dead, as any obstacle to the fulfillment of the promise. He did not
suffer that fact to influence him, or to produce any doubt about the
fulfillment. Faith looks to the strength of God, not to second causes,
or to difficulties that may appear formidable to man.

Now dead - Aged; dead as to the purpose under consideration; compare
[Heb 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#012), "As good as dead." That
is, he was now at an age when it was highly improbable that he would
have any children; compare [Gen 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#017).

Deadness ... - [Heb 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#011), "When she
was past age;" compare [Gen 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#011).

[Romans 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 4:20</span></span>

He staggered not - He was not moved, or agitated; he steadily and firmly
believed the promise.

Giving glory to God - Giving honor to God by the firmness with which he
believed his promises. His conduct was Such as to honor God; that is, to
show Abraham's conviction that he was worthy of implicit confidence and
trust. In this way all who believe in the promises of God do honor to
him. They bear testimony to him that he is worthy of confidence. They
become so many witnesses in his favor; and furnish to their fellow-men
evidence that God has a claim on the credence and trust of mankind.

[Romans 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 4:21</span></span>

And being fully persuaded - Thoroughly or entirely convinced; [Luk
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001); [Rom
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#005); [Ti2
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#005), [Ti2
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#017).

He was able - Compare [Gen 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#014). This
was not the only time in which Abraham evinced this confidence. His
faith was equally implicit and strong when he was commanded to sacrifice
his promised son; [Heb 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#019).

[Romans 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 4:22</span></span>

And therefore - His faith was so implicit, and so unwavering, that it
was a demonstration that he was the firm friend of God. He was tried,
and he had such confidence in God that he showed that he was supremely
attached to him, and would obey and serve him. This was reckoned as a
full proof of friendship; and he was recognised and treated as
righteous; that is, as the friend of God. (The true sense of faith being
imputed for righteousness is given in a note at the beginning of the
chapter.) See the note at [Rom 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003), 5.

[Romans 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 4:23</span></span>

Now it was not written - The record of this extraordinary faith was not
made on his account only; but it was made to show the way in which men
may be regarded and treated as righteous by God. If Abraham was so
regarded and treated, then, on the same principle, all others may be.
God has but one mode of justifying people.

Imputed - Reckoned; accounted. He was regarded and treated as the friend
of God.

[Romans 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rom 4:24</span></span>

But for us also - For our use; (compare [Rom
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004); [Co1
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011)), that we might have an example
of the way in which people may be accepted of God. It is recorded for
our encouragement and imitation, to show that we may in a similar manner
be accepted and saved.

If we believe on him ... - Abraham showed his faith in God by believing
just what God revealed to him. This was his faith, and it might be as
strong and implicit as could be exercised under the fullest revelation.
Faith, now, is belief in God just so far as he has revealed his will to
us. It is therefore the same in principle, though it may have reference
to different objects. It is confidence in the same God, according to
what we know of his will. Abraham showed his faith mainly in confiding
in the promises of God respecting a numerous posterity. This was the
leading truth made known to him, and this he believed.

(The promise made to Abraham was, "in thy seed shall all nations of the
earth be blessed," on which we have the following inspired commentary:
"And the scriptures foreseeing that God would justify the pagan through
faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall
all nations be blessed," [Gal 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#008). It
would seem, then, that this promise, like that made immediately after
the fall, contained the very germ and principles of the gospel. So that
after all there is not so great difference between the object of
Abraham's faith, and that of ours. Indeed the object in both cases is
manifestly the same.)

The main or leading truths that God has made known to us are, that he
has given his Son to die; that he has raised him up; and that through
him he is ready to pardon. To put confidence in these truths is to
believe now. Doing this, we believe in the same God that Abraham did; we
evince the same spirit; and thus show that we are the friends of the
same God, and may be treated in the same manner. This is faith under the
gospel (compare the notes at [Mar
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016)), and shows that the faith of
Abraham and of all true believers is substantially the same, and is
varied only by the difference of the truths made known.

[Romans 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 4:25</span></span>

Who was delivered - To death; compare the notes at [Act
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023).

For our offences - On account of our crimes. He was delivered up to
death in order to make expiation for our sins.

And was raised again - From the dead.

For our justification - On account of our justification. In order that
we may be justified. The word "justification" here seems to be used in a
large sense, to denote acceptance with God; including not merely the
formal act by which God pardons sins, and by which we become reconciled
to him, but also the completion of the work - the treatment of us as
righteous, and raising us up to a state of glory. By the death of Christ
an atonement is made for sin. If it be asked how his resurrection
contributes to our acceptance with God, we may answer,

\(1\) It rendered his work complete. His death would have been
unavailing, his work would have been imperfect, if he had not been
raised up from the dead. He submitted to death as a sacrifice, and it
was needful that he should rise, and thus conquer death and subdue our
enemies, that the work which he had undertaken might be complete.

\(2\) his resurrection was a proof that his work was accepted by the
Father. What he had done, in order that sinners might be saved, was
approved. Our justification, therefore, became sure, as it was for this
that he had given himself up to death.

\(3\) his resurrection is the main-spring of all our hopes, and of all
our efforts to be saved. Life and immortality are thus brought to light,
[Ti2 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#010). God "hath begotten us again
to a lively hope (a living, active, real hope), by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead," [Pe1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#003).
Thus, the fact that he was raised becomes the ground of hope that we
shall be raised and accepted of God. The fact that he was raised, and
that all who love him shall be raised also, becomes one of the most
efficient motives to us to seek to be justified and saved. There is no
higher motive that can be presented to induce man to seek salvation than
the fact that he maybe raised up from death and the grave, and made
immortal. There is no satisfactory proof that man can be thus raised up,
but the resurrection of Jesus Christ. In that resurrection we have a
pledge that all his people will rise. "For if we believe that Jesus died
and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring
with him," [Th1 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#014). "Because I
live," said the Redeemer, "ye shall live also," [Joh
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#019); compare [Pe1
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#021).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 5](rom005)

</div>
