<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Romans Index](rom.md)  
  [Previous](rom012)  [Next](rom014.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001.md)

[Romans 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 13:1</span></span>

Let every soul - Every person. In the seven first verses of this
chapter, the apostle discusses the subject of the duty which Christians
owe to civil government; a subject which is extremely important, and at
the same time exceedingly difficult. There is no doubt that he had
express reference to the special situation of the Christians at Rome;
but the subject was of so much importance that he gives it a "general"
bearing, and states the great principles on which all Christians are to
act. The circumstances which made this discussion proper and important
were the following:

\(1\) The Christian religion was designed to extend throughout the
world. Yet it contemplated the rearing of a kingdom amid other kingdoms,
an empire amid other empires. Christians professed supreme allegiance to
the Lord Jesus Christ; he was their Lawgiver, their Sovereign, their
Judge. It became, therefore, a question of great importance and
difficulty, "what kind" of allegiance they were to render to earthly
magistrates.

\(2\) the kingdoms of the world were then "pagan" kingdoms. The laws
were made by pagans, and were adapted to the prevalence of paganism.
Those kingdoms had been generally founded in conquest, and blood, and
oppression. Many of the monarchs were blood-stained warriors; were
unprincipled men; and were polluted in their private, and oppressive in
their public character. Whether Christians were to acknowledge the laws
of such kingdoms and of such men, was a serious question, and one which
could not but occur very early. It would occur also very soon, in
circumstances that would be very affecting and trying. Soon the hands of
these magistrates were to be raised against Christians in the fiery
scenes of persecution; and the duty and extent of submission to them
became a matter of very serious inquiry.

\(3\) many of the early Christians were composed of Jewish converts. Yet
the Jews had long been under Roman oppression, and had borne the foreign
yoke with great uneasiness. The whole pagan magistracy they regarded as
founded in a system of idolatry; as opposed to God and his kingdom; and
as abomination in his sight. With these feelings they had become
Christians; and it was natural that their former sentiments should exert
an influence on them after their conversion. How far they should submit,
if at all, to heathen magistrates, was a question of deep interest; and
there was danger that the "Jewish" converts might prove to be disorderly
and rebellious citizens of the empire.

\(4\) nor was the case much different with the "Gentile" converts. They
would naturally look with abhorrence on the system of idolatry which
they had just forsaken. They would regard all as opposed to God. They
would denounce the "religion" of the pagans as abomination; and as that
religion was interwoven with the civil institutions, there was danger
also that they might denounce the government altogether, and be regarded
as opposed to the laws of the land,

\(5\) there "were" cases where it was right to "resist" the laws. This
the Christian religion clearly taught; and in cases like these, it was
indispensable for Christians to take a stand. When the laws interfered
with the rights of conscience; when they commanded the worship of idols,
or any moral wrong, then it was their duty to refuse submission. Yet in
what cases this was to be done, where the line was to be drawn, was a
question of deep importance, and one which was not easily settled. It is
quite probable, however, that the main danger was, that the early
Christians would err in "refusing" submission, even when it was proper,
rather than in undue conformity to idolatrous rites and ceremonies.

\(6\) in the "changes" which were to occur in human governments, it
would be an inquiry of deep interest, what part Christians should take,
and what submission they should yield to the various laws which might
spring up among the nations. The "principles" on which Christians should
act are settled in this chapter.

Be subject - Submit. The word denotes that kind of submission which
soldiers render to their officers. It implies "subordination;" a
willingness to occupy our proper place, to yield to the authority of
those over us. The word used here does not designate the "extent" of the
submission, but merely enjoins it in general. The general principle will
be seen to be, that we are to obey in all things which are not contrary
to the Law of God.

The higher powers - The magistracy; the supreme government. It
undoubtedly here refers to the Roman magistracy, and has relation not so
much to the rulers as to the supreme "authority" which was established
as the constitution of government; compare [Mat
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001.md); [Mat
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018.md).

For - The apostle gives a "reason" why Christians should be subject; and
that reason is, that magistrates have received their appointment from
God. As Christians, therefore, are to be subject to God, so they are to
honor "God" by honoring the arrangement which he has instituted for the
government of mankind. Doubtless, he here intends also to repress the
vain curiosity and agitation with which men are prone to inquire into
the "titles" of their rulers; to guard them from the agitation and
conflicts of party, and of contentions to establish a favorite on the
throne. It might be that those in power had not a proper title to their
office; that they had secured it, not according to justice, but by
oppression; but into that question Christians were not to enter. The
government was established, and they were not to seek to overturn it.

No power - No office; no magistracy; no civil rule.

But of God - By God's permission, or appointment; by the arrangements of
his providence, by which those in office had obtained their power. God
often claims and asserts that "He" sets up one, and puts down another;
[Psa 75:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#007.md); [Dan
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#021.md); [Dan
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#017.md), [Dan
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#025.md), [Dan
4:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#034.md).

The powers that be - That is, all the civil magistracies that exist;
those who have the "rule" over nations, by whatever means they may have
obtained it. This is equally true at all times, that the powers that
exist, exist by the permission and providence of God.

Are ordained of God - This word "ordained" denotes the "ordering" or
"arrangement" which subsists in a "military" company, or army. God sets
them "in order," assigns them their location, changes and directs them
as he pleases. This does not mean that he "originates" or causes the
evil dispositions of rulers, but that he "directs" and "controls" their
appointment. By this, we are not to infer:

\(1\) That he approves their conduct; nor,

\(2\) That what they do is always right; nor,

\(3\) That it is our duty "always" to submit to them.

Their requirements "may be" opposed to the Law of God, and then we are
to obey God rather than man; [Act
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#019.md); [Act
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#029.md). But it is meant that the power
is intrusted to them by God; and that he has the authority to remove
them when he pleases. If they abuse their power, however, they do it at
their peril; and "when" so abused, the obligation to obey them ceases.
That this is the case, is apparent further from the nature of the
"question" which would be likely to arise among the early Christians. It
"could not be" and "never was" a question, whether they should obey a
magistrate when he commanded a thing that was plainly contrary to the
Law of God. But the question was, whether they should obey a pagan
magistrate at "all." This question the apostle answers in the
affirmative, because "God" had made government necessary, and because it
was arranged and ordered by his providence. Probably also the apostle
had another object in view. At the time in which he wrote this Epistle,
the Roman Empire was agitated with civil dissensions. One emperor
followed another in rapid succession. The throne was often seized, not
by right, but by crime. Different claimants would rise, and their claims
would excite controversy. The object of the apostle was to prevent
Christians from entering into those disputes, and from taking an active
part in a political controversy. Besides, the throne had been "usurped"
by the reigning emperors, and there was a prevalent disposition to rebel
against a tyrannical government. Claudius had been put to death by
poison; Caligula in a violent manner; Nero was a tyrant; and amidst
these agitations, and crimes, and revolutions, the apostle wished to
guard Christians from taking an active part in political affairs.

[Romans 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 13:2</span></span>

Whosoever therefore resisteth ... - That is, they who rise up against
"government itself;" who seek anarchy and confusion; and who oppose the
regular execution of the laws. It is implied, however, that those laws
shall not be such as to violate the rights of conscience, or oppose the
laws of God.

Resisteth the ordinance of God - What God has ordained, or appointed.
This means clearly that we are to regard "government" as instituted by
God, and as agreeable to his will. "When" established, we are not to be
agitated about the "titles" of the rulers; not to enter into angry
contentions, or to refuse to submit to them, because we are apprehensive
of a defect in their "title," or because they may have obtained it by
oppression. If the government is established, and if its decisions are
not a manifest violation of the laws of God, we are to submit to them.

Shall receive to themselves damnation - The word "damnation" we apply
now exclusively to the punishment of hell; to future torments. But this
is not necessarily the meaning of the word which is used here κρίμα
krima. It often simply denotes "punishment;" [Rom
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008.md); [Co1
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029.md); [Gal
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#010.md). In this place the word implies
"guilt" or "criminality" in resisting the ordinance of God, and affirms
that the man that does it shall be punished. Whether the apostle means
that he shall be punished by "God," or by the "magistrate," is not quite
clear. Probably the "latter," however, is intended; compare [Rom
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004.md). It is also true that such
resistance shall be attended with the displeasure of God, and be
punished by him.

[Romans 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 13:3</span></span>

For rulers - The apostle here speaks of rulers "in general." It may not
be "universally" true that they are not a terror to good works, for many
of them have "persecuted" the good; but it is generally true that they
who are virtuous have nothing to fear from the laws. It is "universally"
true that the design of their appointment by God was, not to injure and
oppress the good, but to detect and punish the evil. Magistrates, "as
such," are not a terror to good works.

Are not a terror ... - Are not appointed to "punish the good." Their
appointment is not to inspire terror in those who are virtuous and
peaceable citizens; compare [Ti1 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#009.md).

But to the evil - Appointed to detect and punish evildoers; and
therefore an object of terror to them. The design of the apostle here is
evidently to reconcile Christians to submission to the government, from
its "utility." It is appointed to protect the good against the evil; to
restrain oppression, injustice, and fraud; to bring offenders to
justice, and thus promote the peace and harmony of the community. As it
is designed to promote order and happiness, it should be submitted to;
and so long as "this" object is pursued, and obtained, government should
receive the countenance and support of Christians. But if it departs
from this principle, and becomes the protector of the evil and the
oppressor of the good, the case is reversed, and the obligation to its
support must cease.

Wilt thou not ... - If you do evil by resisting the laws, and in any
other manner, will you not fear the power of the government? Fear is
"one" of the means by which men are restrained from crime in a
community. On many minds it operates with much more power than any other
motive. And it is one which a magistrate must make use of to restrain
men from evil.

Do that which is good - Be a virtuous and peaceable citizen; abstain
from crime, and yield obedience to all the just laws of the land,

And thou shalt have praise of the same - Compare [Pe1
2:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#014.md). You shall be unmolested and
uninjured, and shall receive the commendation of being peaceable and
upright citizens. The prospect of that protection, and even of that
reputation, is not an unworthy motive to yield obedience to the laws.
Every Christian should desire the reputation of being a man seeking the
welfare of his country, and the just execution of the laws.

[Romans 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 13:4</span></span>

The minister of God - The "servant" of God he is appointed by God to do
his will, and to execute his purposes. "To thee." For your benefit.

For good - That is, to protect you in your rights; to vindicate your
name, person, or property; and to guard your liberty, and secure to you
the results of your industry. The magistrate is not appointed directly
to "reward" people, but they "practically" furnish a reward by
protecting and defending them, and securing to them the interests of
justice.

If thou do that ... - That is, if any citizen should do evil.

Be afraid - Fear the just vengeance of the laws.

For he beareth not the sword in vain - The "sword" is an instrument of
punishment, as well as an emblem of war. Princes were accustomed to wear
a sword as an emblem of their authority; and the "sword" was often used
for the purpose of "beheading," or otherwise punishing the guilty. The
meaning of the apostle is, that he does not wear this badge of authority
as an unmeaningful show, but that it will be used to execute the laws.
As this is the design of the power intrusted to him, and as he will
"exercise" his authority, people should be influenced "by fear" to keep
the law, even if there were no better motive.

A revenger ... - In [Rom 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019.md),
vengeance is said to belong to God. Yet he "executes" his vengeance by
means of subordinate agents. It belongs to him to take vengeance by
direct judgments, by the plague, famine, sickness, or earthquakes; by
the appointment of magistrates; or by letting loose the passions of
people to prey upon each other. When a magistrate inflicts punishment on
the guilty, it is to be regarded as the act of God taking vengeance "by
him;" and on this principle only is it right for a judge to condemn a
man to death. It is not because one man has by nature any right over the
life of another, or because "society" has any right collectively which
it has not as individuals; but because "God" gave life, and because he
has chosen to take it away when crime is committed by the appointment of
magistrates, and not by coming forth himself visibly to execute the
laws. Where "human" laws fail, however, he often takes vengeance into
his own hands, and by the plague, or some signal judgments, sweeps the
guilty into eternity.

To execute wrath - For an explanation of the word "wrath," see the notes
at [Rom 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018.md). It denotes here
"punishment," or the just execution of the laws. It may be remarked that
this verse is an "incidental" proof of the propriety of "capital
punishment." The sword was undoubtedly an instrument for this purpose,
and the apostle mentions its use without any remark of "disapprobation."
He enjoins subjection to those who "wear the sword," that is, to those
who execute the laws "by that;" and evidently intends to speak of the
magistrate "with the sword," or in inflicting capital punishment, as
having received the appointment of God. The tendency of society now is
"not" to too sanguinary laws. It is rather to forget that God has doomed
the murderer to death; and though humanity should be consulted in the
execution of the laws, yet there is no humanity in suffering the
murderer to live to infest society, and endanger many lives, in the
place of his own, which was forfeited to justice. Far better that one
murderer should die, than that he should be suffered to live, to imbrue
his hands perhaps in the blood of many who are innocent. But the
authority of God has settled this question [Gen
9:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#005.md), and it is neither right nor
safe for a community to disregard his solemn decisions; see
"Blackstone's Commentaries," vol. iv. p. 8, (9.)

[Romans 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 13:5</span></span>

Wherefore - διό dio. The "reasons" why we should be subject, which the
apostle had given, were two,

\(1\) That government was appointed by God.

\(2\) that violation of the laws would necessarily expose to punishment.

Ye must needs be - It is "necessary" ἀναγκή anagkē to be. This is a word
stronger than what implies mere "fitness" or propriety. It means that it
is a matter of high obligation and of "necessity" to be subject to the
civil ruler.

Not only for wrath - Not only on account of the "fear of punishment;" or
the fact that wrath will be executed on evil doers.

For conscience' sake - As a matter of conscience, or of "duty to God,"
because "he" has appointed it, and made it necessary and proper. A good
citizen yields obedience because it is the will of God; and a Christian
makes it a part of his religion to maintain and obey the just laws of
the land; see [Mat 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#021.md); compare [Ecc
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#002.md), "I counsel them to keep the
king's commandments, and "that in regard of the oath of God."

[Romans 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 13:6</span></span>

For this cause - Because they are appointed by God; for the sake of
conscience, and in order to secure the execution of the laws. As they
are appointed by God, the tribute which is needful for their support
becomes an act of homage to God, an act performed in obedience to his
will, and acceptable to him.

Tribute also - Not only be subject [Rom
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#005.md), but pay what may be necessary to
support the government. "Tribute" properly denotes the "tax," or annual
compensation, which was paid by one province or nation to a superior, as
the price of protection, or as an acknowledgment of subjection. The
Romans made all conquered provinces pay this "tribute;" and it would
become a question whether it was "right" to acknowledge this claim, and
submit to it. Especially would this question be agitated by the Jews and
by Jewish Christians. But on the principle which the apostle had laid
down [Rom 13:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001.md), it was right to do
it, and was demanded by the very purposes of government. In a larger
sense, the word "tribute" means any tax paid on land or personal estate
for the support of the government.

For they are God's ministers - His servants; or they are appointed by
him. As the government is "his" appointment, we should contribute to its
support as a matter of conscience, because we thus do honor to the
arrangement of God. It may be observed here, also, that the fact that
civil rulers are the ministers of God, invests their character with
great sacredness, and should impress upon "them" the duty of seeking to
do his will, as well as on others the duty of submitting to them.

Attending continually - As they attend to this, and devote their time
and talents to it, it is proper that they should receive a suitable
support. It becomes then a duty for the people to contribute cheerfully
to the necessary expenses of the government. If those taxes should be
unjust and oppressive, yet, like other evils, they are to be submitted
to, until a remedy can be found in a proper way.

[Romans 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 13:7</span></span>

Render therefore ... - This injunction is often repeated in the Bible;
see the notes at [Mat 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#021.md); see also
[Mat 17:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#025.md); [Pe1
2:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013.md); [Pro
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#021.md). It is one of the most lovely
and obvious of the duties of religion. Christianity is not designed to
break in upon the proper order of society, but rather to establish and
confirm that order. It does not rudely assail existing institutions: but
it comes to put them on a proper footing, to diffuse a mild and pure
influence over all, and to secure "such" an influence in all the
relations of life as shall tend best to promote the happiness of man and
the welfare of the community.

Is due - To whom it properly belongs by the law of the land, and
according to the ordinance of God. It is represented here as a matter of
"debt," as something which is "due" to the ruler; a fair "compensation"
to him for the service which he renders us by devoting his time and
talents to advance "our" interests, and the welfare of the community. As
taxes are a "debt," a matter of strict and just obligation, they should
be paid as conscientiously and as cheerfully as any other just debts,
however contracted.

Custom - τέλος telos. The word rendered "tribute" means, as has been
remarked, the tax which is paid by a tributary prince or dependent
people; also the tax imposed on land or real estate. The word here
translated "custom" means properly the revenue which is collected on
"merchandise," either imported or exported.

Fear - See [Rom 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004.md). We should stand
in awe of those who wear the sword, and who are appointed to execute the
laws of the land. Since the execution of their office is suited to
excite "fear," we should render to them that reverence which is
appropriate to the execution of their function. It means a solicitous
anxiety lest we do anything to offend them.

Honour - The difference between this and "fear" is, that this rather
denotes "reverence, veneration, respect" for their names, offices, rank,
etc. The former is the "fear" which arises from the dread of punishment.
Religion gives to people all their just titles, recognizes their rank
and function, and seeks to promote due subordination in a community. It
was no part of the work of our Saviour, or of his apostles, to quarrel
with the mere "titles" of people, or to withhold from them the customary
tribute of respect and homage; compare [Act
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#003.md); [Act
26:25](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#025.md); [Luk
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#003.md); [Pe1
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#017.md). In this verse there is summed up
the duty which is owed to magistrates. It consists in rendering to them
proper honor contributing cheerfully and conscientiously to the
necessary expenses of the government; and in yielding obedience to the
laws. These are made a part of the duty which we owe to God, and should
be considered as enjoined by our religion.

On the subject discussed in these seven verses, the following
"principles" seem to be settled by the authority of the Bible, and are
now understood,

\(1\) That government is essential; and its necessity is recognised by
God, and it is arranged by his providence. God has never been the patron
of anarchy and disorder.

\(2\) Civil rulers are dependent on God. He has the entire control over
them, and can set them up or put them down when he pleases.

\(3\) the authority of God is superior to that of civil rulers. They
have no right to make enactments which interfere with "his" authority.

\(4\) it is not the business of civil rulers to regulate or control
religion. That is a distinct department, with which they have no
concern, except to protect it.

\(5\) the rights of all people are to be preserved. People are to be
allowed to worship God according to the dictates of their own
conscience, and to be protected in those rights, provided they do not
violate the peace and order of the community.

\(6\) Civil rulers have no right to persecute Christians, or to attempt
to secure conformity to their views by force. The conscience cannot be
compelled; and in the affairs of religion man must be free.

In view of this subject we may remark,

\(1\) That the doctrines respecting the rights of civil rulers, and the
line which is to be drawn between their powers and the rights of
conscience, have been slow to be understood. The struggle has been long;
and a thousand persecutions have shown the anxiety of the magistrate to
rule the conscience, and to control religion. In pagan countries it has
been conceded that the civil ruler had a right to control the "religion"
of the people: church and state there have been one. The same thing was
attempted under Christianity. The magistrate still claimed this right,
and attempted to enforce it. Christianity resisted the claim, and
asserted the independent and original rights of conscience. A conflict
ensued, of course, and the magistrate resorted to persecutions, to
"subdue" by force the claims of the new religion and the rights of
conscience. Hence, the ten fiery and bloody persecutions of the
primitive church. The blood of the early Christians flowed like water;
thousands and tens of thousands went to the stake, until Christianity
triumphed, and the right of religion to a free exercise was acknowledged
throughout the empire.

\(2\) it is matter of devout thanksgiving that the subject is now
settled, and the principle is now understood. In our own land (America)
there exists the happy and bright illustration of the true principle on
this great subject. The rights of conscience are regarded, and the laws
peacefully obeyed. The civil ruler understands his province; and
Christians yield a cheerful and cordial obedience to the laws. The
church and state move on in their own spheres, united only in the
purpose to make men happy and good; and divided only as they relate to
different departments, and contemplate, the one, the rights of civil
society, the other, the interests of eternity. Here, every man worships
God according to his own views of duty; and at the same time, here is
rendered the most cordial and peaceful obedience to the laws of the
land. Thanks should be rendered without ceasing to the God of our
fathers for the wondrous train of events by which this contest has been
conducted to its issue; and for the clear and full understanding which
we now have of the different departments pertaining to the church and
the state.

[Romans 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 13:8</span></span>

Owe no man anything - Be not "in debt" to anyone. In the previous verse
the apostle had been discoursing of the duty which we owe to
magistrates. He had particularly enjoined on Christians to pay to "them"
their just dues. From this command to discharge fully this obligation,
the transition was natural to the subject of debts "in general," and to
an injunction not to be indebted to "any one." This law is enjoined in
this place:

\(1\) Because it is a part of our duty as good citizens; and,

\(2\) Because it is a part of that law which teaches us to love our
neighbor, and to "do no injury to him," [Rom
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010.md).

The interpretation of this command is to be taken with this limitation,
that we are not to be indebted to him so as to "injure" him, or to work
"ill" to him.

This rule, together with the other rules of Christianity, would propose
a remedy for all the evils of bad debts in the following manner.

\(1\) it would teach people to be "industrious," and this would commonly
prevent the "necessity" of contracting debts.

\(2\) it would make them "frugal, economical," and "humble" in their
views and manner of life.

\(3\) it would teach them to bring up their families in habits of
industry. The Bible often enjoins that; see the note at [Rom
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#011.md); compare [Phi
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008.md); [Pro
24:30-34](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#030.md); [Th1
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#011.md); [Th2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#010.md); [Eph
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025.md).

\(4\) Religion would produce sober, chastened views of the end of life,
of the great design of living; and would take off the affections from
the splendor, gaiety, and extravagances which lead often to the
contraction of debts; [Th1 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#006.md), [Th1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#008.md); [Pe1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#013.md); [Pe1
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#007.md); [Tit
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#012.md); [Pe1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#003.md), [Pe1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#005.md); [Ti1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009.md).

\(5\) Religion would put a period to the "vices" and unlawful desires
which now prompt people to contract debts.

\(6\) it would make them "honest" in paying them. It would make them
conscientious, prompt, friends of truth, and disposed to keep their
promises.

But to love one another - Love is a debt which "can" never be
discharged. We should feel that we "owe" this to all people, and though
by acts of kindness we may be constantly discharging it, yet we should
feel that it can "never" be fully met while there is opportunity to do
good.

For he that loveth ... - In what way this is done is stated in [Rom
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010.md). The law in relation to our
neighbor is there said to be simply that we do no "ill" to him. Love to
him would prompt to no injury. It would seek to do him good, and would
thus fulfil all the purposes of justice and truth which we owe to him.
In order to illustrate this, the apostle, in the next verse, runs over
the laws of the Ten Commandments in relation to our neighbor, and shows
that all those laws proceed on the principle that we are to "love" him,
and that love would prompt to them all.

[Romans 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 13:9</span></span>

For this - "This" which follows is the sum of the laws. "This" is to
regulate us in our conduct toward our neighbor. The word "this" here
stands opposed to "that" in [Rom
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#011.md). This law of love would prompt
us to seek our neighbor's good; "that" fact, that our salvation is near,
would prompt us to be active and faithful in the discharge of all the
duties we owe to him.

Thou shalt not commit adultery - All the commands which follow are
designed as an illustration of the duty of loving our neighbor; see
these commands considered in the notes at [Mat
19:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#018.md). The apostle has not
enumerated "all" the commands of the second table. He has shown
generally what they required. The command to honor our parents he has
omitted. The reason might have been that it was not so immediately to
his purpose when discoursing of love to a "neighbor" - a word which does
not immediately suggest the idea of near relatives. The expression,
"Thou shalt not bear false witness," is rejected by the best critics as
of doubtful authority, but it does not materially affect the spirit of
the passage. It is missing in many manuscripts and in the Syriac
version.

If there be any other commandment - The law respecting parents; or if
there be any duty which does not seem to be "specified" by these laws,
it is implied in the command to love our neighbor as ourselves.

It is briefly comprehended - Greek, It may be reduced to "this head;" or
it is summed up in this.

In this saying - This word, or command,

Thou shalt love ... - This is found in [Lev
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018.md). See it considered in the notes
at [Mat 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#019.md). If this command were
fulfilled, it would prevent all fraud, injustice, oppression, falsehood,
adultery, murder, theft, and covetousness. It is the same as our
Saviour's golden rule. And if every man would do to others as he would
wish them to do to him, all the design of the Law would be at once
fulfilled.

[Romans 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 13:10</span></span>

Love worketh no ill ... - Love would seek to do him good; of course it
would prevent all dishonesty and crime toward others. It would prompt to
justice, truth, and benevolence. If this law were engraved on every
man's heart, and practiced in his life, what a change would it
immediately produce in society! If all people would at once "abandon"
what is suited to "work ill" to others, what an influence would it have
on the business and commercial affairs of people. How many plans of
fraud and dishonesty would it at once arrest. How many schemes would it
crush. It would silence the voice of the slanderer; it would stay the
plans of the seducer and the adulterer; it would put an end to cheating,
and fraud, and all schemes of dishonest gain. The gambler desires the
property of his neighbor without any compensation; and thus works "ill"
to him. The dealer in "lotteries" desires property for which he has
never toiled, and which must be obtained at the expense and loss of
others. And there are many "employments" all whose tendency is to work
"ill" to a neighbor. This is pre-eminently true of the traffic in
"ardent spirits." It cannot do him good, and the almost uniform result
is to deprive him of his property, health, reputation, peace, and
domestic comfort. He that sells his neighbor liquid fire, knowing what
must be the result of it, is not pursuing a business which works no ill
to him; and love to that neighbor would prompt him to abandon the
traffic; see [Hab 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#015.md), "Wo unto him
that giveth his neighbor drink, that putteth thy bottle to him, and
makest him drink also, that thou mayest look on their nakedness."

Therefore ... - "Because" love does no harm to another, it is
"therefore" the fulfilling of the Law, implying that all that the Law
requires is to "love" others.

Is the fulfilling - Is the "completion," or meets the requirements of
the Law. The Law of God on this "head," or in regard to our duty to our
neighbor, requires us to do justice toward him, to observe truth, etc.
"All" this will be met by "love;" and if people truly "loved" others,
all the demands of the Law would be satisfied.

Of the law - Of the Law of Moses, but particularly the Ten Commandments.

[Romans 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 13:11</span></span>

And that - The word "that," in this place, is connected in signification
with the word ""this" in [Rom 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#009.md).
The meaning may be thus expressed: All the requirements of the Law
toward our neighbor may be met by two things: one is [Rom
13:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#009.md) by love; the other is [Rom
13:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#011.md) by remembering that we are
near to eternity; keeping a deep sense of "this" truth before the mind.
"This" will prompt to a life of honesty, truth, and peace, and
contentment, [Rom 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013.md). The doctrine
in these verses [Rom 13:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#011.md),
therefore, is, "that a deep conviction of the nearness of eternity will
prompt to an upright life in the contact of man with man.

Knowing the time - Taking a proper "estimate" of the time. Taking just
views of the shortness and the value of time; of the design for which it
was given, and of the fact that it is, in regard to us, rapidly coming
to a close. And still further considering, that the time in which you
live is the time of the gospel, a period of light and truth, when you
are particularly called on to lead holy lives, and thus to do justly to
all. The "previous" time had been a period of ignorance and darkness,
when oppression, and falsehood, and sin abounded. This, the time of the
"gospel," when God had "made known" to people his will that they should
be pure.

High time - Greek, "the hour."

To awake ... - This is a beautiful figure. The dawn of day, the
approaching light of the morning, is the time to arouse from slumber. In
the darkness of night, people sleep. So says the apostle. The world has
been sunk in the "night" of paganism and sin. At that time it was to be
expected that they would sleep the sleep of spiritual death. But now the
morning light of the gospel dawns. The Sun of righteousness has arisen.
It is "time," therefore, for people to cast off the deeds of darkness,
and rise to life, and purity, and action; compare [Act
17:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030.md). The same idea is beautifully
presented in [Th1 5:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#005.md). The meaning
is," Hitherto we have walked in darkness and in sin. Now we walk in the
light of the gospel. We know our duty. We are sure that the God of light
is around us, and is a witness of all we do. We are going soon to meet
him, and it becomes us to rouse, and to do those deeds, and those only,
which will bear the bright shining of the light of truth, and the
scrutiny of him who is "light, and in whom is no darkness at all;" [Jo1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005.md).

Sleep - Inactivity; insensibility to the doctrines and duties of
religion. People, by nature, are active only in deeds of wickedness. In
regard to religion they are insensible, and the slumbers of night are on
their eyelids. Sleep is "the kinsman of death," and it is the emblem of
the insensibility and stupidity of sinners. The deeper the ignorance and
sin, the greater is this insensibility to spiritual things, and to the
duties which we owe to God and man.

For now is our salvation - The word "salvation" has been here variously
interpreted. Some suppose that by it the apostle refers to the personal
reign of Christ on the earth. (Tholuck, and the Germans generally.)
Others suppose it refers to deliverance from "persecutions." Others, to
increased "light" and knowledge of the gospel, so that they could more
clearly discern their duty than when they became believers.
(Rosenmuller.) It probably, however, has its usual meaning here,
denoting that deliverance from sin and danger which awaits Christians in
heaven; and is thus equivalent to the expression, "You are advancing
nearer to heaven. You are hastening to the world of glory. Daily we are
approaching the kingdom of light; and in prospect of that state, we
ought to lay aside every sin, and live more and more in preparation for
a world of light and glory."

Than when we believed - Than when we "began" to believe. Every day
brings us nearer to a world of perfect light.

[Romans 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 13:12</span></span>

The night - The word "night," in the New Testament, is used to denote
"night" literally ([Mat 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#014), etc..md);
the starry heavens [Rev 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#012.md); and then
it denotes a state of "ignorance" and "crime," and is synonymous with
the word "darkness," as such deeds are committed commonly in the night;
[Th1 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#005.md). In this place it seems to
denote our present imperfect and obscure condition in this world as
contrasted with the pure light of heaven The "night," the time of
comparative obscurity and sin in which we live even under the gospel, is
far gone in relation to us, and the pure splendors of heaven are at
hand,

Is far spent - Literally, "is cut off." It is becoming "short;" it is
hastening to a close.

The day - The full splendors and glory of redemption in heaven. Heaven
is often thus represented as a place of pure and splendid day; [Rev
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023.md), [Rev
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#025.md); [Rev
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#005.md). The times of the "gospel" are
represented as times of "light" ([Isa
60:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001.md); [Isa
60:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019), etc..md); but the reference
here seems to be rather to the still brighter glory and splendor of
heaven, as the place of pure, unclouded, and eternal day.

Is at hand - Is near; or is drawing near. This is true respecting all
Christians. The day is near, or the time when they shall be admitted to
heaven is not remote. This is the uniform representation of the New
Testament; [Heb 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#025.md); [Pe1
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#007.md); [Jam
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#008.md); [Rev
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#010.md); [Th1
5:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#002.md); [Phi
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005.md). That the apostle did not mean,
however, that the end of the world was near, or that the day of judgment
would come soon, is clear from his own explanations; see [Th1
5:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#002.md); compare 2 Thes. 2.

Let us therefore - As we are about to enter on the glories of that
eternal day, we should be pure and holy. The "expectation" of it will
teach us to "seek" purity; and a pure life alone will fit us to enter
there; [Heb 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014.md).

Cast off - Lay aside, or put away.

The works of darkness - Dark, wicked deeds, such as are specified in the
next verse. They are called "works of darkness," because darkness in the
Scriptures is an emblem of crime, as well as of ignorance, and because
such deeds are commonly committed in the night; [Th1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#007.md), "They that be drunken, are
drunken in the night;" compare [Joh
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#020.md); [Eph
5:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#011.md).

Let us put on - Let us clothe ourselves with.

The armour of light - The word "armor" ὅπλα hopla properly means "arms,"
or instruments of war, including the helmet, sword, shield, etc. [Eph
6:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#011.md). It is used in the New
Testament to denote the "aids" which the Christian has, or the "means of
defense" in his warfare, where he is represented as a soldier contending
with his foes, and includes truth, righteousness, faith, hope, etc. as
the instruments by which he is to gain his victories. In [Co2
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#007.md), it is called "the armor of
righteousness on the right hand and on the left." It is called armor of
light, because it is not to accomplish any deeds of darkness or of
crime; it is appropriate to one who is pure, and who is seeking a pure
and noble object. Christians are represented as the "children of light;"
[Th1 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#005.md); Note, [Luk
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#008.md). By the armor of light,
therefore, the apostle means those graces which stand opposed to the
deeds of darkness [Rom 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013.md); those
graces of faith, hope, humility, etc. which shall be appropriate to
those who are the children of the day, and which shall be their defense
in their struggles with their spiritual foes. see the description in
full in [Eph 4:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011.md).

[Romans 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 13:13</span></span>

Let us walk - To "walk" is an expression denoting "to live;" let us
"live," or "conduct," etc.

Honestly - The word used here means rather in a "decent' or "becoming"
manner; in a manner "appropriate" to those who are the children of
light.

As in the day - As if all our actions were seen and known. People by
day, or in open light, live decently; their foul and wicked deeds are
done in the night. The apostle exhorts Christians to live as if all
their conduct were seen, and they had nothing which they wished to
conceal.

In rioting - Revelling; denoting the licentious conduct, the noisy and
obstreperous mirth, the scenes of disorder and sensuality, which attend
luxurious living.

Drunkenness - Rioting and drunkenness constitute the "first" class of
sins from which he would keep them. It is scarcely necessary to add that
these were common crimes among the pagan.

In chambering - "Lewd, immodest behavior." (Webster.) The Greek word
includes illicit indulgences of all kinds, adultery, etc. The words
chambering and wantonness constitute the "second" class of crimes from
which the apostle exhorts Christians to abstain. That these were common
crimes among the pagan, it is not necessary to say; see the Rom. 1
notes; also [Eph 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#012.md) note. It is not
possible, nor would it be proper, to describe the scenes of licentious
indulgence of which all pagans are guilty. Since Christians were to be a
special people, therefore the apostle enjoins on them purity and
holiness of life.

Not in strife - Strife and envying are the "third" class of sins from
which the apostle exhorts them. The word "strife" means "contention,
disputes, litigations." The exhortation is that they should live in
peace.

Envying - Greek, Zeal. It denotes any intense, vehement, "fervid"
passion. It is not improperly rendered here by envying. These vices are
properly introduced in connection with the others. They usually
accompany each other. Quarrels and contentions come out of scenes of
drunkenness and debauchery. But for such scenes, there would be little
contention, and the world would be comparatively at peace.

[Romans 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 13:14</span></span>

But put ye on - Compare [Gal 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#017.md). The
word rendered "put ye on" is the same used in [Rom
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#012.md), and is commonly employed in
reference to "clothing" or "apparel." The phrase to "put on" a person,
which seems a harsh expression in our language, was one not infrequently
used by Greek writers, and means to imbibe his principles, to imitate
his example, to copy his spirit, to become like him. Thus, in Dionysius
Halicarnassus the expression occurs, "having put on or clothed
themselves with Tarquin;" i. e., they imitated the example and morals of
Tarquin. So Lucian says, "having put on Pythagoras;" having received him
as a teacher and guide. So the Greek writers speak of putting on Plato,
Socrates, etc. meaning to take them as instructors, to follow them as
disciples. (See Schleusner.) Thus, to put on the Lord Jesus means to
take him as a pattern and guide, to imitate his example, to obey his
precepts, to become like him, etc. In "all" respects the Lord Jesus was
unlike what had been specified in the previous verse. He was temperate,
chaste, pure, peaceable, and meek; and to "put him on" was to imitate
him in these respects; [Heb 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015.md); [Heb
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026.md); [Pe1
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022.md); [Isa
53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009.md); [Jo1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#005.md).

And make not provision - The word "provision" here is what is used to
denote "provident care," or preparation for future needs. It means that
we should not make it an object to gratify our lusts, or study to do
this by laying up anything beforehand with reference to this design.

For the flesh - The word "flesh" is used here evidently to denote the
corrupt propensities of the body, or those which he had specified in
[Rom 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013.md).

To fulfil the lusts thereof - With reference to its corrupt desires. The
gratification of the flesh was the main object among the Romans. Living
in luxury and licentiousness, they made it their great object of study
to multiply and prolong the means of licentious indulgence. In respect
to this, Christians were to be a separate people, and to show that they
were influenced by a higher and purer desire than this grovelling
propensity to minister to sensual gratification. It is right, it is a
Christian duty, to labor to make provision for all the real needs of
life. But the real wants are few; and with a heart disposed to be pure
and temperate, the necessary wants of life are easily satisfied; and the
mind may be devoted to higher and purer purposes.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 14](rom014.md)

</div>
