<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom006)  [Next](rom008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 7:0</span></span>

Few chapters in the bible have been the subject of more decidedly
different interpretations than this. And after all that has been written
on it by the learned, it is still made a matter of discussion, whether
the apostle has reference in the main scope of the chapter to his own
experience before he became a Christian; or to the conflicts in the mind
of a man who is renewed. Which of these opinions is the correct one I
shall endeavor to state in the notes at the particular verses in the
chapter. The main design of the chapter is not very difficult to
understand. It is, evidently, to show the insufficiency of the Law to
produce peace of mind to a troubled sinner. In the previous chapters he
had shown that it was incapable of producing justification, Rom. 1-3. He
had shown the way in which people were justified by faith; [Rom
3:21-31](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021); Rom. 4. He had shown how that
plan produced peace, and met the evils introduced by the fall of Adam;
Rom. 5.

He had shown that Christians were freed from the Law as a matter of
obligation, and yet that this freedom did not lead to a licentious life;
Rom. 6. And he now proceeds still further to illustrate the tendency of
the Law on a man both in a state of nature and of grace; to show that
its uniform effect in the present condition of man, whether impenitent
and under conviction, or in a state of grace under the gospel, so far
from promoting peace, as the Jew maintained, was to excite the mind to
conflict, and anxiety, and distress. Nearly all the special opinions of
the Jews the apostle had overthrown in the previous argument. He here
gives the finishing stroke, and shows that the tendency of the Law, as a
practical matter, was everywhere the same. It was not in fact to produce
peace, but agitation, conflict, distress. Yet this was not the fault of
the Law, which was in itself good, but of sin, [Rom
6:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#007).

I regard this chapter as not referring exclusively to Paul in a state of
nature, or of grace. The discussion is conducted without particular
reference to that point. It is rather designed to group together the
actions of a man's life, whether in a state of conviction for sin, or in
a state of grace, and to show that the effect of the Law is everywhere
substantially the same. It equally fails everywhere in producing peace
and sanctification. The argument of the Jew respecting the efficacy of
the Law, and its sufficiency for the condition of man, is thus
overthrown by a succession of proofs relating to justification, to
pardon, to peace, to the evils of sin, and to the agitated and
conflicting moral elements in man's bosom. The effect is everywhere the
same. The deficiency is apparent in regard to all the great interests of
man. And having shown this, the apostle and the reader are prepared for
the language I of triumph and gratitude, that deliverance from all these
evils is to be traced to the gospel of Jesus Christ the Lord; [Rom
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025); Rom. 8.

[Romans 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 7:1</span></span>

Know ye not - This is an appeal to their own observation respecting the
relation between husband and wife. The illustration [Rom
7:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#002) is designed simply to show that
as when a man dies, and the connection between him and his wife is
dissolved, his Law ceases to be binding on her, so also a separation has
taken place between Christians and the Law, in which they have become
dead to it, and they are not now to attempt to draw their life and peace
from it, but from that new source with which they are connected by the
gospel, [Rom 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#004).

For I speak to them ... - Probably the apostle refers here more
particularly to the Jewish members of the Roman church, who were
qualified particularly to understand the nature of the Law, and to
appreciate the argument. That there were many Jews in the church at Rome
has been shown (see Introduction); but the illustration has no exclusive
reference to them. The Law to which he appeals is sufficiently general
to make the illustration intelligible to all people.

That the law - The immediate reference here is probably to the Mosaic
Law. But what is here affirmed is equally true of all laws.

Hath dominion - Greek, Rules; exercises lordship. The Law is here
personified, and represented as setting up a lordship over a man, and
exacting obedience.

Over a man - Over the man who is under it.

As long as he liveth - The Greek here may mean either "as he liveth,"
or" as it liveth," that is, the law. But our translation has evidently
expressed the sense. The sense is, that death releases a man from the
laws by which he was bound in life. It is a general principle, relating
to the laws of the land, the law of a parent, the law of a contract,
etc. This general principle the apostle proceeds to apply in regard to
the Law of God.

[Romans 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 7:2</span></span>

For the woman - This verse is a specific illustration of the general
principle in [Rom 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#001), that death
dissolves those connections and relations which make law binding in
life. It is a simple illustration; and if this had been kept in mind, it
would have saved much of the perplexity which has been felt by many
commentators, and much of their wild vagaries in endeavoring to show
that "men are the wife, the law of the former husband, and Christ the
new one;" or that "the old man is the wife, sinful desires the husband,
sins the children." Beza. (See Stuart.) Such expositions are sufficient
to humble us, and to make us mourn over the puerile and fanciful
interpretations which even wise and good people often give to the Bible.

Is bound by the law ... - See the same sentiment in [Co1
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#039).

To her husband - She is united to him; and is under his authority as the
head of the household. To him is particularly committed the headship of
the family, and the wife is subject to his law, in the Lord, [Eph
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#023), [Eph
5:33](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#033).

She is loosed ... - The husband has no more authority. The connection
from which obligation resulted is dissolved.

[Romans 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 7:3</span></span>

So then if ... - compare [Mat 5:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032).

She shall be called - She will be. The word used here χρηματίσει
chrēmatisei is often used to denote being called by an oracle or by
divine revelation. But it is here employed in the simple sense of being
commonly called, or of being so regarded.

[Romans 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 7:4</span></span>

Wherefore - This verse contains an application of the illustration in
the two preceding. The idea there is, that death dissolves a connection
from which obligation resulted. This is the single point of the
illustration, and consequently there is no need of inquiring whether by
the wife the apostle meant to denote the old man, or the Christian, etc.
The meaning is, as death dissolves the connection between a wife and her
husband, and of course the obligation of the law resulting from that
connection, so the death of the Christian to the Law dissolves that
connection, so far as the scope of the argument here is concerned, and
prepares the way for another union, a union with Christ, from which a
new and more efficient obligation results. The design is to show that
the new connection would accomplish more important effects than the old.

Ye also are become dead to the law - Notes, [Rom
6:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003), [Rom
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008). The connection between us and the
Law is dissolved, so far as the scope of the apostle's argument is
concerned. He does not say that we are dead to it, or released from it
as a rule of duty, or as a matter of obligation to obey it; for there
neither is, nor can be, any such release, but we are dead to it as a way
of justification and sanctification. In the great matter of acceptance
with God, we have ceased to rely on the Law, having become dead to it,
and having embraced another plan.

By the body of Christ - That is, by his body crucified; or in other
words, by his death; compare [Eph
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015), "Having abolished in his flesh
the enmity," etc. that is, by his death. [Col
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#022), "in the body of his flesh
through death," etc. [Col 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014); [Pe1
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024), "who bare our sins in his own
body on the tree." The sense, is, therefore, that by the death of Christ
as an atoning sacrifice; by his suffering for us what would be
sufficient to meet the demands of the Law; by his taking our place, he
has released us from the Law as a way of justification; freed us from
its penalty; and saved us from its curse. Thus released, we are at
liberty to be united to the law of him who has thus bought us with his
blood.

That ye should be married to another - That you might be united to
another, and come under his law. This is the completion of the
illustration in [Rom 7:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#002). As the
woman that is freed from the law of her husband by his death, when
married again comes under the authority of another, so we who are made
free from the Law and its curse by the death of Christ, are brought
under the new law of fidelity and obedience to him with whom we are thus
united. The union of Christ and his people is not unfrequently
illustrated by the most tender of all earthly connections, that of a
husband and wife, [Eph 5:23-30](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#023); [Rev
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009). "I will show thee the bride, the
Lamb's wife," [Rev 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#007).

Even to him who is raised ... - See the force of this explained, [Rom
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008).

That we should bring forth fruit unto God - That we should live a holy
life. This is the point and scope of all this illustration. The new
connection is such as will make us holy. It is also implied that the
tendency of the Law was only to bring forth fruit unto death [Rom
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#005), and that the tendency of the
gospel is to make man holy and pure; compare [Gal
5:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022).

[Romans 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 7:5</span></span>

For when ... - The illustration in this verse and the following is
designed to show more at length the effect of the Law, whenever and
whereever applied; whether in a state of nature or of grace. It was
always the same. It was the occasion of agitation and conflict in a
man's own mind. This was true when a sinner was under conviction; and it
was true when a man was a Christian. In all circumstances where the Law
was applied to the corrupt mind of man, it produced this agitation and
conflict. Even in the Christian's mind it produced this agitation [Rom
7:14-24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014), as it had done and would do
in the mind of a sinner under conviction [Rom
7:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007), and consequently there was no
hope of release but in the delivering and sanctifying power of the
gospel [Rom 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025); [Rom
8:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001).

In the flesh - Unconverted; subject to the controlling passions and
propensities of a corrupt nature; compare [Rom
8:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#008). The connection shows that this
must be the meaning here, and the design of this illustration is to show
the effect of the Law before a man is converted, [Rom
7:5-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#005). This is the obvious meaning,
and all the laws of interpretation require us so to understand it.

The motions of sins - (τα παθήματα ta pathēmata.) This translation is
unhappy. The expression "motions of sins" conveys no idea. The original
means simply the passions, the evil affections, the corrupt desires; see
the margin. The expression, passions of sins, is a Hebraism meaning
sinful passions, and refers here to the corrupt propensities and
inclinations of the unrenewed heart.

Which were by the law - Not that they were originated or created by the
Law; for a law does not originate evil propensities, and a holy law
would not cause sinful passions; but they were excited, called up,
inflamed by the Law, which forbids their indulgence.

Did work in our members - In our body; that is, in us. Those sinful
propensities made use of our members as instruments, to secure
gratification; Note, [Rom 6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012);
compare [Rom 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023).

To bring forth fruit unto death - To produce crime, agitation, conflict,
distress, and to lead to death. We were brought under the dominion of
death; and the consequence of the indulgence of those passions would be
fatal; compare the note at [Rom 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021).

[Romans 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 7:6</span></span>

But now - Under the gospel. This verse states the consequences of the
gospel, in distinction from the effects of the Law. The way in which
this is accomplished, the apostle illustrates more at length in Rom. 8
with which this verse is properly connected. The remainder of Rom. 7 is
occupied in illustrating the statement in [Rom
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#005), of the effects of the Law; and
after having shown that its effects always were to increase crime and
distress, he is prepared in Rom. 8 to take up the proposition in this
verse, and to show the superiority of the gospel in producing peace.

We are delivered - We who are Christians. Delivered from it as a means
of justification, as a source of sanctification, as a bondage to which
we were subjected, and which tended to produce pain and death. It does
not mean that Christians are freed from it as a rule of duty.

That being dead - Margin, "Being dead to that." There is a variation
here in the manuscripts. Some read it, as in the text, as if the Law was
dead; others, as in the margin. as if we were dead. The majority is in
favor of the reading as in the margin; and the connection requires us to
understand it in this sense. So the Syriac, the Arabic, the Vulgate,
AEthiopic. The sentiment here, that we are dead to the Law, is what is
expressed in [Rom 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#004).

Wherein we were held - That is, as captives, or as slaves. We were held
in bondage to it; [Rom 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#001).

That we should serve - That we may now serve or obey God.

In newness of spirit - In a new spirit; or in a new and spiritual
manner. This is a form of expression implying,

\(1\) That their service under the gospel was to be of a new kind,
differing from that under the former dispensation.

\(2\) that it was to be of a spiritual nature, as distinguished from
that practiced by the Jews; compare [Co2
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006); Note, [Rom
2:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#028).

The worship required under the gospel is uniformly described as that of
the spirit and the heart, rather than that of form and ceremony; [Joh
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#023), "The true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and in truth; [Phi
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#003).

And not in the oldness of the letter - Not in the old letter. It is
implied here in this,

\(1\) That the form of worship here described pertained to an old
dispensation that had now passed away; and,

\(2\) That that was a worship that was in the letter.

To understand this, it is necessary to remember that the Law which
prescribed the forms of worship among the Jews, was regarded by the
apostle as destitute of that efficacy and power in renewing the heart
which he attributed to the gospel. It was a service consisting in
external forms and ceremonies; in the offering of sacrifices and of
incense, according to the literal requirements of the Law rather than
the sincere offering of the heart; [Co2
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006), "The letter killeth; the spirit
giveth life;" [Joh 6:63](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#063); [Heb
10:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001); [Heb
9:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009). It is not to be denied that
there were many holy persons under the Law, and that there were many
spiritual offerings presented, but it is at the same time true that the
great mass of the people rested in the mere form; and that the service
offered was the mere service of the letter, and not of the heart. The
main idea is, that the services under the gospel are purely and entirely
spiritual, the offering of the heart, and not the service rendered by
external forms and rites.

(But the contrast here is not between services required under the legal
and gospel dispensations respectively, but between service yielded in
the opposite states of nature and grace. In the former state, we are
"under the law" though we live in gospel times, and in the latter, we
are "delivered from the law" as a covenant of works, or of life, just as
pious Jews might be though they lived under the dispensation of Moses.
The design of God in delivering us from the Law, is, that we might
"serve him in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter,"
that is, in such a spiritual way as the new state requires, and from
such spiritual motives and aids as it furnishes; and not in the manner
we were accustomed to do, under our old condition of subjection to the
Law, in which we could yield only an external and forced obedience. "It
is evident," says Prof. Hodge that the clause "in the oldness of the
letter is substituted by the apostle, for 'under the law' and 'in the
flesh;' all which he uses to describe the legal and corrupt condition of
people, prior to the believing reception of the gospel.")

[Romans 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 7:7</span></span>

What shall we say then? - The objection which is here urged is one that
would very naturally rise, and which we may suppose would be urged with
no slight indignation. The Jew would ask, "Are we then to suppose that
the holy Law of God is not only insufficient to sanctify us, but that it
is the mere occasion of increased sin? Is its tendency to produce sinful
passions, and to make people worse than they were before?" To this
objection the apostle replies with great wisdom, by showing that the
evil was not in the Law, but in man; that though these effects often
followed, yet that the Law itself was good and pure.

Is the law sin? - Is it sinful? Is it evil? For if, as it is said in
[Rom 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#005), the sinful passions were "by
the law," it might naturally be asked whether the Law itself was not an
evil thing?

God forbid - Note, [Rom 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004).

Nay, I had not known sin - The word translated "nay" ἀλλὰ alla means
more properly but; and this would have more correctly expressed the
sense, "I deny that the Law is sin. My doctrine does not lead to that;
nor do I affirm that it is evil. I strongly repel the charge; but,
notwithstanding this, I still maintain that it had an effect in exciting
sins, yet so as that I perceived that the Law itself was good;" [Rom
7:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008). At the same time, therefore,
that the Law must be admitted to be the occasion of exciting sinful
feelings, by crossing the inclinations of the mind, yet the fault was
not to be traced to the Law. The apostle in these verses refers,
doubtless, to the state of his mind before he found that peace which the
gospel furnishes by the pardon of sins.

But by the law - [Rom 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020). By "the
law" here, the apostle has evidently in his eye every law of God,
however made known. He means to say that the effect which he describes
attends all law, and this effect he illustrates by a single instance
drawn from the Tenth Commandment. When he says that he should not have
known sin, he evidently means to affirm, that he had not understood that
certain things were sinful, unless they had been forbidden; and having
stated this, he proceeds to another thing, to show the effect of their
being thus forbidden on his mind. He was not merely acquainted
abstractly with the nature and existence of sin, with what constituted
crime because it was forbidden, but he was conscious of a certain effect
on his mind resulting from this knowledge, and from the effect of
strong, raging desires when thus restrained, [Rom
7:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008).

For I had not known lust - I should not have been acquainted with the
nature of the sin of covetousness. The desire might have existed, but he
would not have known it to be sinful, and he would not have experienced
that raging, impetuous, and ungoverned propensity which he did when he
found it to be forbidden. Man without law might have the strong feelings
of desire He might covet what others possessed. He might take property,
or be disobedient to parents; but he would not know it to be evil. The
Law fixes bounds to his desires, and teaches him what is right and what
is wrong. It teaches him where lawful indulgence ends, and where sin
begins. The word "lust" here is not limited as it is with us. It refers
to all covetous desires; to all wishes for what is forbidden us.

Except the law had said - In the tenth commandment; [Exo
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#017).

Thou shalt not covet - This is the beginning of the command, and all the
rest is implied. The apostle knew that it would be understood without
repeating the whole. This particular commandment he selected because it
was more pertinent than the others to his purpose. The others referred
particularly to external actions. But his object was to show the effect
of sin on the mind and conscience. He therefore chose one that referred
particularly to the desires of the heart.

[Romans 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 7:8</span></span>

But sin - To illustrate the effect of the Law on the mind, the apostle
in this verse depicts its influence in exciting to evil desires and
purposes. Perhaps no where has he evinced more consummate knowledge of
the human heart than here. He brings an illustration that might have
escaped most persons, but which goes directly to establish his position
that the Law is insufficient to promote the salvation of man. Sin here
is personified. It means not a real entity; not a physical subsistence;
not something independent of the mind, having a separate existence, and
lodged in the soul, but it means the corrupt passions, inclinations, and
desires of the mind itself. Thus, we say that lust burns, and ambition
rages, and envy corrodes the mind, without meaning that lust, ambition,
or envy are any independent physical subsistences, but meaning that the
mind that is ambitious, or envious, is thus excited.

Taking occasion - The word "occasion" ἀφορμὴν aphormēn properly denotes
any material, or preparation for accomplishing anything; then any
opportunity, occasion, etc. of doing it. Here it means that the Law was
the exciting cause of sin; or was what called the sinful principle of
the heart into exercise. But for this, the effect here described would
not have existed. Thus, we say that a tempting object of desire
presented is the exciting cause of covetousness. Thus, an object of
ambition is the exciting cause of the principle of ambition. Thus, the
presentation of wealth, or of advantages possessed by others which we
have not, may excite covetousness or envy. Thus, the fruit presented to
Eve was the exciting cause of sin; the wedge of gold to Achan excited
his covetousness. Had not these objects been presented, the evil
principles of the heart might have slumbered, and never have been called
forth. And hence, no one understand the full force of their native
propensities until some object is presented that calls them forth into
decided action. The occasion which called these forth in the mind of
Paul was the Law crossing his path, and irritating and exciting the
native strong inclinations of the mind.

By the commandment - By all law appointed to restrain and control the
mind.

Wrought in me - Produced or worked in me. The word used here means often
to operate in a powerful and efficacious manner. (Doddridge.)

All manner of - Greek, "All desire." Every species of unlawful desire.
It was not confined to one single desire, but extended to everything
which the Law declared to be wrong.

Concupiscence - Unlawful or irregular desire. Inclination for unlawful
enjoyments. The word is the same which in [Rom
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007) is rendered "lust." If it be asked
in what way the Law led to this, we may reply, that the main idea here
is, that opposition by law to the desires and passions of wicked men
only tends to inflame and exasperate them. This is the case with regard
to sin in every form. An attempt to restrain it by force; to denounce it
by laws and penalties; to cross the path of wickedness; only tends to
irritate, and to excite into living energy, what otherwise would be
dormant in the bosom. This it does, because,

\(1\) It crosses the path of the sinner, and opposes his intention, and
the current of his feelings and his life.

\(2\) the Law acts the part of a detector, and lays open to view that
which was in the bosom, but was concealed.

\(3\) such is the depth and obstinacy of sin in man, that the very
attempt to restrain often only serves to exasperate, and to urge to
greater deeds of wickedness. Restraint by law rouses the mad passions;
urges to greater deeds of depravity; makes the sinner stubborn,
obstinate, and more desperate. The very attempt to set up authority over
him throws him into a posture of resistance, and makes him a party, and
excites all the feelings of party rage. Anyone may have witnessed this
effect often on the mind of a wicked and obstinate child.

\(4\) this is particularly true in regard to a sinner. He is calm often,
and apparently tranquil. But let the Law of God be brought home to his
conscience, and he becomes maddened and enraged. He spurns its
authority, yet his conscience tells him it is right; he attempts to
throw it off, yet trembles at its power; and to show his independence,
or his purpose to sin, he plunges into iniquity, and becomes a more
dreadful and obstinate sinner. It becomes a struggle for victory; in the
controversy with God he re solves not to be overcome. It accordingly
happens that many a man is more profane, blasphemous, and desperate when
under conviction for sin than at other times. In revivals of religion it
often happens that people evince violence, and rage, and cursing, which
they do not in a state of spiritual death in the church; and it is often
a very certain indication that a man is under conviction for sin when he
becomes particularly violent, and abusive, and outrageous in his
opposition to God.

\(5\) the effect here noticed by the apostle is one that has been
observed at all times, and by all classes of writers. Thus, Cato says
(Livy, xxxiv. 4,) "Do not think, Romans, that it will be hereafter as it
was before the Law was enacted. It is more safe that a bad man should
not be accused, than that he should be absolved; and luxury not excited
would be more tolerable than it will be now by the very chains irritated
and excited as a wild beast." Thus, Seneca says (de Clementia, i. 23,)
"Parricides began with the law." Thus, Horace (Odes, i. 3,) "The human
race, bold to endure all things, rushes through forbidden crime." Thus,
Ovid (Amor. iii. 4,) "We always endeavour to obtain what is forbidden,
and desire what is denied." (These passages are quoted from Tholuck.)
See also [Pro 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#017), "Stolen waters are
sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant." If such be the effect of
the Law, then the inference of the apostle is unavoidable, that it is
not adapted to save and sanctify man.

For without the law - Before it was given; or where it was not applied
to the mind.

Sin was dead - It was inoperative, inactive, unexcited. This is
evidently in a comparative sense. The connection requires us to under
stand it only so far as it was excited by the Law. People's passions
would exist; but without law they would not be known to be evil, and
they would not be excited into wild and tumultuous raging.

[Romans 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 7:9</span></span>

For I - There seems to be no doubt that the apostle here refers to his
own past experience. Yet in this he speaks the sentiment of all who are
unconverted, and who are depending on their own righteousness.

Was alive - This is opposed to what he immediately adds respecting
another state, in which he was when he died. It must mean, therefore,
that he had a certain kind of peace; he deemed himself secure; he was
free from the convictions of conscience and the agitations of alarm. The
state to which he refers here must be doubtless that to which he himself
alludes elsewhere, when he deemed himself to be righteous, depending on
his own works, and esteeming himself to be blameless, [Phi
3:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#004); [Act
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001); [Act
26:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#004). It means that he was then free
from those agitations and alarms which he afterward experienced when he
was brought under conviction for sin. At that time, though he had the
Law, and was attempting to obey it, yet he was unacquainted with its
spiritual and holy nature. He aimed at external conformity. Its claims
on the heart were unfelt. This is the condition of every self-confident
sinner, and of everyone who is unawakened.

Without the law - Not that Paul was ever really without the Law, that
is, without the Law of Moses; but he means before the Law was applied to
his heart in its spiritual meaning, and with power.

But when the commandment came - When it was applied to the heart and
conscience. This is the only intelligible sense of the expression; for
it cannot refer to the time when the Law was given. When this was, the
apostle does not say. But the expression denotes whenever it was so
applied; when it was urged with power and efficacy on his conscience, to
control, restrain, and threaten him, it produced this effect. We are
unacquainted with the early operations of his mind, and with his
struggles against conscience and duty. We know enough of him before
conversion, however, to be assured that he was proud, impetuous, and
unwilling to be restrained; see Acts 8; 9. In the state of his
self-confident righteousness and impetuosity of feeling, we may easily
suppose that the holy Law of God, which is designed to restrain the
passions, to humble the heart, and to rebuke pride, would produce only
irritation, and impatience of restraint, and revolt.

Sin revived - Lived again. This means that it was before dormant [Rom
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008), but was now quickened into new
life. The word is usually applied to a renewal of life, [Rom
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#019); [Luk
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#024), [Luk
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#032), but here it means substantially
the same as the expression in [Rom
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008), "Sin ...wrought in me all manner
of concupiscence." The power of sin, which was before dormant, became
quickened and active.

I died - That is, I was by it involved in additional guilt and misery.
It stands opposed to "I was alive," and must mean the opposite of that;
and evidently denotes that the effect of the commandment was to bring
him under what he calls death, (compare [Rom
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012), [Rom
5:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014);) that is, sin reigned, and
raged, and produced its withering and condemning effects; it led to
aggravated guilt and misery. It may also include this idea, that before,
he was self-confident and secure, but that by the commandment he was
stricken down and humbled, his self-confidence was blasted, and his
hopes were prostrated in the dust. Perhaps no words would better express
the humble, subdued, melancholy, and helpless state of a converted
sinner than the expressive phrase "I died." The essential idea here is,
that the Law did not answer the purpose which the Jew would claim for
it, to sanctify the soul and to give comfort, but that all its influence
on the heart was to produce aggravated, unpardoned guilt and woe.

[Romans 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 7:10</span></span>

And the commandment - The Law to which he had referred before.

Which was ordained to life - Which was intended to produce life, or
happiness. Life here stands opposed to death, and means felicity, peace,
eternal bliss; Note, [Joh 3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036). When
the apostle says that it was ordained to life, he probably has reference
to the numerous passages in the Old Testament which speak of the Law in
this manner, [Lev 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005), "Ye shall keep
my statutes and my judgments; which if a man do, he shall live in them,"
[Eze 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#011), [Eze
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#013), [Eze
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#021); [Eze
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#009), [Eze
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#021). The meaning of these passages,
in connection with this declaration of Paul, may be thus expressed:

\(1\) The Law is good; it has no evil, and is itself suited to produce
no evil.

\(2\) if man was pure, and it was obeyed perfectly, it would produce
life and happiness only. On those who have obeyed it in heaven, it has
produced only happiness.

\(3\) for this it was ordained; it is adapted to it; and when perfectly
obeyed, it produces no other effect. But,

\(4\) Man is a sinner; he has not obeyed it; and in such a case the Law
threatens woe.

It crosses the inclination of man, and instead of producing peace and
life, as it would on a being perfectly holy, it produces only woe and
crime. The law of a parent may be good, and may be appointed to promote
the happiness of his children; it may be admirably suited to it if all
were obedient; yet in the family there may be one obstinate,
self-willed, and stubborn child, resolved to indulge his evil passions,
and the results to him would be woe and despair. The commandment, which
was ordained for the good of the family, and which would be adapted to
promote their welfare, he alone, of all the number, would find to be
unto death.

I found - It was to me. It produced this effect.

Unto death - Producing aggravated guilt and condemnation, [Rom
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#009).

[Romans 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 7:11</span></span>

For sin - This verse is a repetition, with a little variation of the
sentiment in [Rom 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008).

Deceived me - The word used here properly means to lead or seduce from
the right way; and then to deceive, solicit to sin, cause to err from
the way of virtue, [Rom 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#018); [Co1
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018); [Co2
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003), "The serpent beguiled Eve
through his subtilty," [Th2 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003). The
meaning here seems to be, that his corrupt and rebellious propensities,
excited by the Law, led him astray; caused him more and more to sin;
practiced a species of deception on him by urging him on headlong, and
without deliberation, into aggravated transgression. In this sense, all
sinners are deceived. Their passions urge them on, deluding them, and
leading them further and further from happiness, and involving them,
before they are aware, in crime and death. No being in the universe is
more deladed than a sinner in the indulgence of evil passions. The
description of Solomon in a particular case will apply to all, [Pro
7:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#021).

"With much fair speech she caused him to yield,

With the flattering of her lips she forced him.

He goeth after her straightway,

As an ox goeth to the slaughter,

Or as a fool to the correction of the stocks;

Till a dart strike through his liver,

As a bird hasteth to the snare."

By it - By the Law, [Rom 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008).

Slew me - Meaning the same as "I died," [Rom
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008).

[Romans 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 7:12</span></span>

Wherefore - So that. The conclusion to which we come is, that the Law is
not to be blamed, though these are its effects under existing
circumstances. The source of all this is not the Law, but the corrupt
nature of man. The Law is good; and yet the position of the apostle is
true, that it is not adapted to purify the heart of fallen man. Its
tendency is to excite increased guilt, conflict, alarm, and despair.
This verse contains an answer to the question in [Rom
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007), "Is the law sin?"

Is holy - Is not sin; compare [Rom
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007). It is pure in its nature.

And the commandment - The word "commandment" is here synonymous with the
Law. It properly means what is enjoined.

Holy - Pure.

Just - Righteous in its claims and penalties. It is not unequal in its
exactions.

Good - In itself good; and in its own nature tending to produce
happiness. The sin and condemnation of the guilty is not the fault of
the Law. If obeyed, it would produce happiness everywhere. See a most
beautiful description of the law of God in [Psa
19:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007).

[Romans 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 7:13</span></span>

Was then that which is good ... - This is another objection which the
apostle proceeds to answer. The objection is this, "Can it be possible
that what is admitted to be good and pure, should be changed into evil?
Can what tends to life, be made death to a man?" In answer to this, the
apostle repeats that the fault was not in the Law, but was in himself,
and in his sinful propensities.

Made death - [Rom 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008), [Rom
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#010).

God forbid - Note, [Rom 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004).

But sin - This is a personification of sin as in [Rom
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008).

That it might appear sin - That it might develope its true nature, and
no longer be dormant in the mind. The Law of God is often applied to a
man's conscience, that he may see how deep and desperate is his
depravity. No man knows his own heart until the Law thus crosses his
path, and shows him what he is.

By the commandment - Note, [Rom 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008).

Might become exceeding sinful - In the original this is a very strong
expression, and is one of those used by Paul to express strong emphasis,
or intensity καθ ̓ ὑπερβολὴν kath huperbolēn by hyperboles. In an
excessive degree; to the utmost possible extent, [Co1
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031); [Co2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#008); [Co2
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007); [Co2
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007); [Gal
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#013). The phrase occurs in each of
these places. The sense here is, that by the giving of the command, and
its application to the mind, sin was completely developed; it was
excited, inflamed, aggravated, and showed to be excessively malignant
and deadly. It was not a dormant, slumbering principle; but it was
awfully opposed to God and His Law. Calvin has well expressed the sense:
"It was proper that the enormity of sin should be revealed by the Law;
because unless sin should break forth by some dreadful and enormous
excess (as they say,) it would not be known to be sin. This excess
exhibits itself the more violently, while it turns life into death." The
sentiment of the whole is, that the tendency of the Law is to excite the
dormant sin of the bosom into active existence, and to reveal its true
nature. It is desirable that that should be done, and as that is all
that the Law accomplishes, it is not adapted to sanctify the soul. To
show that this was the design of the apostle, it is desirable that sin
should be thus seen in its true nature, because,

\(1\) Man should be acquainted with his true character. He should not
deceive himself.

\(2\) because it is one part of God's plan to develope the secret
feelings of the heart, and to show to all creatures what they are.

\(3\) because only by knowing this, will the sinner be induced to take a
remedy, and strive to be saved. So God often allows people to plunge
into sin; to act out their nature, so that they may see themselves, and
be alarmed at the consequences of their own crimes.

[Romans 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 7:14</span></span>

The remainder of this chapter has been the subject of no small degree of
controversy. The question has been whether it describes the state of
Paul before his conversion, or afterward. It is not the purpose of these
notes to enter into controversy, or into extended discussion. But after
all the attention which I have been able to give to this passage, I
regard it as describing the state of a man under the gospel, as
descriptive of the operations of the mind of Paul subsequent to his
conversion. This interpretation is adopted for the following reasons:

\(1\) Because it seems to me to be the most obvious. It is what will
strike plain people as being the natural meaning; people who do not have
a theory to support, and who understand language in its usual sense.

\(2\) because it agrees with the design of the apostle, which is to show
that the Law is not adapted to produce sanctification and peace. This he
had done in regard to a man before he was converted. If this relates to
the same period, then it is a useless discussion of a point already
discussed, If it relates to that period also, then there is a large
field of action, including the whole period after a man's conversion to
Christianity, in which the question might still be unsettled, whether
the Law there might not be adapted to sanctify. The apostle therefore
makes thorough work with the argument, and shows that the operation of
the Law is everywhere the same.

\(3\) because the expressions which occur are such as cannot be
understood of an impenitent sinner; see the notes at [Rom
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#015), [Rom
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#021).

\(4\) because it accords with parallel expressions in regard to the
state of the conflict in a Christian's mind.

\(5\) because there is a change made here from the past tense to the
present. In [Rom 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007), etc. he had used
the past tense, evidently describing some former state. In [Rom
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014) there is a change to the present,
a change inexplicable, except on the supposition that he meant to
describe some state different from that before described. That could be
no other than to carry his illustration forward in showing the
inefficacy of the Law on a man in his renewed state; or to show that
such was the remaining depravity of the man, that it produced
substantially the same effects as in the former condition.

\(6\) because it accords with the experience of Christians, and not with
sinners. It is just such language as plain Christians, who are
acquainted with their own hearts, use to express their feelings. I admit
that this last consideration is not by itself conclusive; but if the
language did not accord with the experience of the Christian world, it
would be a strong circumstance against any proposed interpretation. The
view which is here expressed of this chapter, as supposing that the
previous part [Rom 7:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007) refers to a
man in his unregenerate state, and that the remainder describes the
effect of the Law on the mind of a renewed man, was adopted by studying
the chapter itself, without aid from any writer. I am happy, however, to
find that the views thus expressed are in accordance with those of the
late Dr. John P. Wilson, than whom, perhaps, no man was ever better
quailfled to interpret the Scriptures. He says, "In the fourth verse, he
(Paul) changes to the first person plural, because he intended to speak
of the former experience of Christians, who had been Jews. In the
seventh verse, he uses the first person singular, but speaks in the past
tense, because he describes his own experience when he was an uncoverted
Pharisee. In the fourteenth verse, and unto the end of the chapter, he
uses the first person singular, and the present tense, because he
exhibits his own experience since he became a Christian and an apostle."

We know - We admit. It is a conceded, well understood point.

That the law is spiritual - This does not mean that the Law is designed
to control the spirit, in contradistinction from the body, but it is a
declaration showing that the evils of which he was speaking were not the
fault of the Law. That was not, in its nature, sensual, corrupt,
earthly, carnal; but was pure and spiritual. The effect described was
not the fault of the Law, but of the man, who was sold under sin. The
word "spiritual" is often thus used to denote what is pure and hoy, in
opposition to that which is fleshly or carnal; [Rom
8:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#005); [Gal
5:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#016). The flesh is described as the
source of evil passions and desires; The spirit as the source of purity;
or as what is agreeable to the proper influences of the Holy Spirit.

But I am - The present tense shows that he is describing himself as he
was at the time of writing. This is the natural and obvious
construction, and if this be not the meaning, it is impossible to
account for his having changed the past tense [Rom
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007) to the present.

Carnal - Fleshly; sensual; opposed to spiritual. This word is used
because in the Scriptures the flesh is spoken of as the source of
sensual passions and propensities, [Gal
5:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019). The sense is, that these
corrupt passions still retained a strong and withering and distressing
influence over the mind. The renewed man is exposed to temptations from
his strong native appetites; and the power of these passions,
strengthened by long habit before he was converted, has traveled over
into religion, and they continue still to influence and distress him. It
does not mean that he is wholly under their influence; but that the
tendency of his natural inclinations is to indulgence.

Sold under sin - This expression is often adduced to show that it cannot
be of a renewed man that the apostle is speaking. The argument is, that
it cannot be affirmed of a Christian that he is sold under sin. A
sufficient answer to this might be, that in fact, this is the very
language which Christians often now adopt to express the strength of
that native depravity against which they struggle, and that no language
would better express it. It does not, mean that they choose or prefer
sins. It strongly implies that the prevailing bent of their mind is
against it, but that such is its strength that it brings them into
slavery to it. The expression used here, "sold under sin," is "borrowed
from the practice of selling captives taken in war, as slaves."
(Stuart.) It hence, means to deliver into the power of anyone, so that
he shall be dependent on his will and control. (Schleusner.) The
emphasis is not on the word "sold," as if any act of selling had taken
place, but the effect was as if he had been sold; that is, he was
subject to it, and under its control, and it means that sin, contrary to
the prevailing inclination of his mind [Rom
7:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#015), had such an influence over
him as to lead him to commit it, and thus to produce a state of conflict
and grief; [Rom 7:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#019). The verses
which follow this are an explanation of the sense, and of the manner in
which he was "sold under sin."

[Romans 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 7:15</span></span>

For that which I do - That is, the evil which I do, the sin of which I
am conscious, and which troubles me.

I allow not - I do not approve; I do not wish it; the prevailing bent of
my inclinations and purposes is against it. Greek, "I know not;" see the
margin. The word "know," however, is sometimes used in the sense of
approving, [Rev 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#024), "Which have not
known (approved) the depths of Satan;" compare [Psa
101:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#004), I will not know a wicked
person." [Jer 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005).

For what I would - That which I approve; and which is my prevailing and
established desire. What I would wish always to do.

But what I hate - What I disapprove of: what is contrary to my judgment;
my prevailing inclination; my established principles of conduct.

That do I - Under the influence of sinful propensities, and carnal
inclinations and desires. This represents the strong native propensity
to sin; and even the power of corrupt propensity under the restraining
influence of the gospel. On this remarkable and important passage we may
observe,

\(1\) That the prevailing propensity; the habitual fixed inclination of
the mind of the Christian, is to do right. The evil course is hated, the
right course is loved. This is the characteristic of a pious mind. It
distinguishes a holy man from a sinner.

\(2\) the evil which is done is disapproved; is a source of grief; and
the habitual desire of the mind is to avoid it, and be pure. This also
distinguishes the Christian from the sinner.

\(3\) there is no need of being embarrassed here with any metaphysical
difficulties or inquiries how this can be; for.

\(a\) it is in fact the experience of all Christians. The habitual,
fixed inclination and desire of their minds is to serve God. They have a
fixed abhorrence of sin; and yet they are conscious of imperfection, and
error, and sin, that is the source of uneasiness and trouble. The
strength of natural passion may in an unguarded moment overcome them.
The power of long habits of previous thoughts may annoy them. A man who
was an infidel before his conversion, and whose mind was filled with
scepticism, and cavils, and blasphemy, will find the effect of his
former habits of thinking lingering in his mind, and annoying his peace
for years. These thoughts will start up with the rapidity of lightning.
Thus, it is with every vice and every opinion. It is one of the effects
of habit. "The very passage of an impure thought through the mind leaves
pollution behind it," and where sin has been long indulged, it leaves
its withering, desolating effect on the soul long after conversion, and
produces that state of conflict with which every Christian is familiar.

\(b\) An effect somewhat similar is felt by all people. All are
conscious of doing that, under the excitement of passion and prejudice,
which their conscience and better judgment disapprove. A conflict thus
exists, which is attended with as much metaphysical difficulty as the
struggle in the Christian's mind referred to here.

\(c\) The same thing was observed and described in the writings of the
heathen. Thus, Xenophon (Cyrop. vi. 1), Araspes, the Persian, says, in
order to excuse his treasonable designs," Certainly I must have two
souls; for plainly it is not one and the same which is both evil and
good; and at the same time wishes to do a thing and not to do it.
Plainly then, there are two souls; and when the good one prevails, then
it does good; and when the evil one predominates, then it does evil." So
also Epictetus (Enchixid. ii. 26) says, "He that sins does not do what
he would, but what he would not, that he does." With this passage it
would almost seem that Paul was familiar, and had his eye on it when he
wrote. So also the well-known passage from Ovid, Meta. vii. 9.

Aliudque Cupido,

Mens aliud suadet. Video meliora, proboque,

Deteriora sequor.

"Desire prompts to one thing, but the mind persuades to another. I see
the good, and approve it, and yet pursue the wrong." - See other
passages of similar import quoted in Grotius and Tholuck.

[Romans 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 7:16</span></span>

I consent unto the law - The very struggle with evil shows that it is
not loved, or approved, but that the Law which condemns it is really
loved. Christians may here find a test of their piety. The fact of
struggling against evil, the desire to be free from it, and to overcome
it, the anxiety and grief which it causes, is an evidence that we do not
love it, and that there. fore we are the friends of God. Perhaps nothing
can be a more decisive test of piety than a long-continued and painful
struggle against evil passions and desires in every form, and a panting
of the soul to be delivered from the power and dominion of sin.

[Romans 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 7:17</span></span>

It is no more I that do it - This is evidently figurative language, for
it is really the man that sins when evil is committed. But the apostle
makes a distinction between sin and what he intends by the pronoun "I".
By the former he evidently means his corrupt nature. By the latter he
refers to his renewed nature, his Christian principles. He means to say
that he does not approve or love it in his present state, but that it is
the result of his native propensities and passions. In his heart, and
conscience, and habitual feeling, he did not choose to commit sin, but
abhorred it. Thus, every Christian can say that he does not choose to do
evil, but would wish to be perfect; that he hates sin, and yet that his
corrupt passions lead him astray.

But sin - My corrupt passions and native propensities.

That dwelleth in me - Dwelling in me as its home. This is a strong
expression, denoting that sin had taken up its habitation in the mind,
and abode there. It had not been yet wholly dislodged. This expression
stands in contrast with another that occurs, where it is said that "the
Spirit of God dwells" in the Christian, [Rom
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009); [Co1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016). The sense is, that he is
strongly influenced by sin on the one hand, and by the Spirit on the
other. From this expression has arisen the phrase so common among
Christians, in-dwelling sin.

[Romans 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 7:18</span></span>

For I know - This is designed as an illustration of what he had just
said, that sin dwelt in him.

That is, in my flesh - In my unrenewed nature; in my propensities and
inclinations before conversion. Does not this qualifying expression show
that in this discussion he was speaking of himself as a renewed man?
Hence, he is careful to imply that there was at that time in him
something that was right or acceptable with God, but that that did not
pertain to him by nature.

Dwelleth - His soul was wholly occupied by what was evil. It had taken
entire possession.

No good thing - There could not be possibly a stronger expression of
belief of the doctrine of total depravity. It is Paul's own
representation of himself. It proves that his heart was wholly evil. And
if this was true of him, it is true of all others. It is a good way to
examine ourselves, to inquire whether we have such a view of our own
native character as to say that we know that in our flesh there dwelleth
no good thing. The sense here is, that so far as the flesh was
concerned, that is, in regard to his natural inclinations and desires,
there was nothing good; all was evil. This was true in his entire
conduct before conversion, where the desires of the flesh reigned and
rioted without control; and it was true after conversion, so far as the
natural inclinations and propensities of the flesh were concerned. All
those operations in every stake were evil, and not the less evil because
they are experienced under the light and amidst the influences of the
gospel.

To will - To purpose or intend to do good.

Is present with me - I can do that. It is possible; it is in my power.
The expression may also imply that it was near to him παράκειται
parakeitai, that is, it was constantly before him; it was now his
habitual inclination and purpose of mind. It is the uniform, regular,
habitual purpose of the Christian's mind to do right.

But how - The sense would have been better retained here if the
translators had not introduced the word "how." The difficulty was not in
the mode of performing it, but to do the thing itself.

I find not - I do not find it in my power; or I find strong, constant
obstacles, so that I fail of doing it. The obstacles are not natural,
but such as arise from long indulgence in sin; the strong native
propensity to evil.

[Romans 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 7:19</span></span>

For the good ... - This is substantially a repetition of what is said in
[Rom 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#015). The repetition shows how
full the mind of the apostle was of the subject; and how much inclined
he was to dwell upon it, and to place it in every variety of form. It is
not uncommon for Paul thus to express his intense interest in a subject,
by placing it in a great variety of aspects, even at the hazard of much
repetition.

[Romans 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 7:20</span></span>

Now if I do ... - This verse is also a repetition of what was said in
[Rom 7:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#016).

[Romans 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 7:21</span></span>

I find then a law - There is a law whose operation I experience whenever
I attempt to do good. There have been various opinions about the meaning
of the word "law" in this place. It is evident that it is used here in a
sense somewhat unusual. But it retains the notion which commonly
attaches to it of what binds, or controls. And though this to which he
refers differs from a law, inasmuch as it is not imposed by a superior,
which is the usual idea of a law, yet it has so far the sense of law
that it binds, controls, influences, or is that to which he was subject.
There can be no doubt that he refers here to his carnal and corrupt
nature; to the evil propensities and dispositions which were leading him
astray. His representing this as a law is in accordance with all that he
says of it, that it is servitude, that he is in bondage to it, and that
it impedes his efforts to be holy and pure. The meaning is this, "I find
a habit, a propensity, an influence of corrupt passions and desires,
which, when I would do right, impedes my progress, and prevents my
accomplishing what I would." Compare [Gal
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017). Every Christian is as much
acquainted with this as was the apostle Paul.

Do good - Do right. Be perfect.

Evil - Some corrupt desire, or improper feeling, or evil propensity.

Is present with me - Is near; is at hand. It starts up unbidden, and
undesired. It is in the path, and never leaves us, but is always ready
to impede our going, and to turn us from our good designs; compare [Psa
65:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#003), "Iniquities prevail against me.'
The sense is, that to do evil is agreeable to our strong natural
inclinations and passions.

[Romans 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 7:22</span></span>

For I delight - The word used here Συνήδομαι Sunēdomai, occurs no where
else in the New Testament. It properly means to rejoice with anyone; and
expresses not only approbation of the understanding, as the expression,
"I consent unto the law," in [Rom
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#016), but more than that it denotes
sensible pleasure in the heart. It indicates not only intellectual
assent, but emotion, an emotion of pleasure in the contemplation of the
Law. And this shows that the apostle is not speaking of an unrenewed
man. Of such a man it might be said that his conscience approved the
Law; that his understanding was convinced that the Law was good; but
never yet did it occur that an impenitent sinner found emotions of
pleasure in the contemplation of the pure and spiritual Law of God. If
this expression can be applied to an unrenewed man, there is, perhaps,
not a single mark of a pious mind which may not with equal propriety be
so applied. It is the natural, obvious, and usual mode of denoting the
feelings of piety, an assent to the divine Law followed with emotions of
sensible delight in the contemplation. Compare [Psa
119:97](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#097), "O how love I thy law; it is
my meditation all the day." [Psa 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002),
"but his delight is in the law of the Lord." [Psa
19:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007); [Job
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#012).

In the law of God - The word "law" here is used in a large sense, to
denote all the communications which God had made to control man. The
sense is, that the apostle was pleased with the whole. One mark of
genuine piety is to be pleased with the whole of the divine
requirements.

After the inward man - In respect to the inward man. The expression "the
inward man" is used sometimes to denote the rational part of man as
opposed to the sensual; sometimes the mind as opposed to the body
(compare [Co2 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016); [Pe1
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#004)). It is thus used by the Greek
classic writers. Here it is used evidently in opposition to a carnal and
corrupt nature; to the evil passions and desires of the soul in an
unrenewed state; to what is called elsewhere "the old man which is
corrupt according to the deceitful lusts." [Eph
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022). The "inward man" is called
elsewhere "the new man" [Eph 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024); and
denotes not the mere intellect, or conscience, but is a personification
of the principles of action by which a Christian is governed; the new
nature; the holy disposition; the inclination of the heart that is
renewed.

[Romans 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 7:23</span></span>

But I see another law - Note, [Rom
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#021).

In my members - In my body; in my flesh; in my corrupt and sinful
propensities; Note, [Rom 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013); compare
[Co1 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#015); [Col
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005). The body is composed of many
members; and as the flesh is regarded as the source of sin [Rom
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#018), the law of sin is said to be in
the members, that is, in the body itself.

Warring against - Fighting against; or resisting.

The law of my mind - This stands opposed to the prevailing inclinations
of a corrupt nature. It means the same as was expressed by the phrase
"the inward man," and denotes the desires and purposes of a renewed
heart.

And bringing me into captivity - Making me a prisoner, or a captive.
This is the completion of the figure respecting the warfare. A captive
taken in war was at the disposal of the victor. So the apostle
represents himself as engaged in a warfare; and as being overcome, and
made an unwilling captive to the evil inclinations of the heart. The
expression is strong; and denotes strong corrupt propensities. But
though strong, it is believed it is language which all sincere
Christians can adopt of themselves, as expressive of that painful and
often disastrous conflict in their bosoms when they contend against the
native propensities of their hearts.

[Romans 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rom 7:24</span></span>

O wretched man that I am! - The feeling implied by this lamentation is
the result of this painful conflict; and this frequent subjection to
sinful propensities. The effect of this conflict is,

\(1\) To produce pain and distress. It is often an agonizing struggle
between good and evil; a struggle which annoys the peace, and renders
life wretched.

\(2\) it tends to produce humility. It is humbling to man to be thus
under the influence of evil passions. It is degrading to his nature; a
stain on his glory; and it tends to bring him into the dust, that he is
under the control of such propensities, and so often gives indulgence to
them. In such circumstances, the mind is overwhelmed with wretchedness,
and instinctively sighs for relief. Can the Law aid? Can man aid? Can
any native strength of conscience or of reason aid? In vain all these
are tried, and the Christian then calmly and thankfully acquiesces in
the consolations of the apostle, that aid can be obtained only through
Jesus Christ.

Who shall deliver me - Who shall rescue me; the condition of a mind in
deep distress, and conscious of its own weakness, and looking for aid.

The body of this death - Margin, "This body of death." The word "body"
here is probably used as equivalent to flesh, denoting the corrupt and
evil propensities of the soul; Note, [Rom
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#018). It is thus used to denote the
law of sin in the members, as being that with which the apostle was
struggling, and from which he desired to be delivered. The expression
"body of this death" is a Hebraism, denoting a body deadly in its
tendency; and the whole expression may mean the corrupt principles of
man; the carnal, evil affections that lead to death or to condemnation.
The expression is one of vast strength, and strongly characteristic of
the apostle Paul. It indicates,

\(1\) That it was near him, attending him, and was distressing in its
nature.

\(2\) an earnest wish to be delivered from it.

Some have supposed that he refers to a custom practiced by ancient
tyrants, of binding a dead body to a captive as a punishment, and
compelling him to drag the cumbersome and offensive burden with him
wherever he went. I do not see any evidence that the apostle had this in
view. But such a fact may be used as a striking and perhaps not improper
illustration of the meaning of the apostle here. No strength of words
could express deeper feeling; none more feelingly indicate the necessity
of the grace of God to accomplish that to which the unaided human powers
are incompetent.

[Romans 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 7:25</span></span>

I thank God - That is, I thank God for effecting a deliverance to which
I am myself incompetent. There is a way of rescue, and I trace it
altogether to his mercy in the Lord Jesus Christ. What conscience could
not do, what the Law could not do, what unaided human strength could not
do, has been accomplished by the plan of the gospel; and complete
deliverance can be expected there, and there alone. This is the point to
which all his reasoning had tended; and having thus shown that the Law
was insufficient to effect this deliverance. he is now prepared to utter
the language of Christian thankfulness that it can be effected by the
gospel. The superiority of the gospel to the Law in overcoming all the
evils under which man labors, is thus triumphantly established; compare
[Co1 15:57](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#057).

So then - As the result of the whole inquiry we have come to this
conclusion.

With the mind - With the understanding, the conscience, the purposes, or
intentions of the soul. This is a characteristic of the renewed nature.
Of no impenitent sinner could it be ever affirmed that with his mind he
served the Law of God.

I myself - It is still the same person, though acting in this apparently
contradictory manner.

Serve the law of God - Do honor to it as a just and holy law [Rom
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#012), [Rom
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#016), and am inclined to obey it, [Rom
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#022), [Rom
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024).

But with the flesh - The corrupt propensities and lusts, [Rom
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#018),

The law of sin - That is, in the members. The flesh throughout, in all
its native propensities and passions, leads to sin; it has no tendency
to holiness; and its corruptions can be overcome only by the grace of
God. We have thus,

\(1\) A view of the sad and painful conflict between sin and God. They
are opposed in all things.

\(2\) we see the raging, withering effect of sin on the soul. In all
circumstances it tends to death and woe.

\(3\) we see the feebleness of the Law and of conscience to overcome
this. The tendency of both is to produce conflict and woe. And,

\(4\) We see that the gospel only can overcome sin. To us it should be a
subject of everincreasing thankfulness, that what could not be
accomplished by the Law, can be thus effected by the gospel; and that
God has devised a plan that thus effects complete deliverance, and which
gives to the captive in sin an everlasting triumph.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 8](rom008)

</div>
