<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](ecc012)  [Next](sol001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Song of Solomon

1\. "The Song of Songs which is Solomon's," so designated by its most
ancient (Hebrew) title, holds a unique position in sacred literature. It
may be said to be the enigma of the Old Testament, just as the
Apocalypse (Revelation) is of the New Testament.

The Song was regarded as an integral and venerated portion of the Hebrew
canon before the commencement of the Christian era, and passed as such
into the canon of the primitive church. It has been always held both by
the church and by the synagogue in the highest and most reverent
estimation.

One or two allusions have been found in the Song to at least one older
canonical book (Genesis); and a few references to it occur in books of
later composition (Proverbs, Isaiah, Hosea); while two or three doubtful
allusions have been thought to be made to it by writers of the New
Testament. These references are sufficient to establish the recognition
of the Song as a part of Holy Scripture by some among the canonical
writers.

2\. The difficulties of the interpreter of the Song are unusually great.
One lies in the special form of composition. The Song of Songs might be
called a lyrico-dramatic poem, but it is not a drama in the sense that
it was either intended or adapted for representation.

Though the Song is a well-organized poetical whole, its unity is made up
of various parts and sections, of which several have so much
independence and individuality as to have been not inaptly called
Idylls, i. e. short poetic pieces of various forms containing each a
distinct subject of representation. These shorter pieces are all,
however, so closely linked by a common purpose, as to form, when viewed
in their right connection, constituent parts of a larger and complete
poem.

The earliest Jewish expositor of the Song as a whole, the author of the
so-called Chaldee Targum, divides it in his historico-prophetic
interpretation into two nearly equal halves at [Sol
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001). All that precedes the close of
that verse he makes refer to the times of the Exodus and of the first
temple, and all that follows to times subsequent to the deportation to
Babylon down to the final restoration of Israel and the glories of the
latter day. Whatever we may think of this allegorical interpretation,
the division itself may, with other divisions - suggested by refrains
and recurrent phrases, used it would seem of set purpose to indicate the
commencement or the close of various sections - prove a valuable clue to
the true significance of the whole.

The two most important of these refrains are, first, the bride's
three-fold adjuration to the chorus [Sol
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#007); [Sol
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#005); [Sol
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#004), marking at each place, as most
interpreters agree, the close of one division of the poem; secondly, the
question asked three times by a chorus on as many distinct appearances
of the bride [Sol 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#006); [Sol
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#010); [Sol
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#005), marking, in like manner, a fresh
commencement. These two refrains enable us to divide each half of the
Song into three parts of nearly equal length, and make the whole poem
consist of six parts; an arrangement which, in its main features, has
obtained a majority of suffrages among modern interpreters.

The Song is throughout so far dramatic in form that it consists entirely
of dialogue or monologue, the writer nowhere speaking in his own person;
and the dialogue is connected with the development of a certain action.
There are, we believe, only three chief speakers, "the bride," "the
beloved," and a chorus of "virgins" or "daughters of Jerusalem," having
each their own manner and peculiar words and phrases, and these so
carefully adhered to as to help us, in some cases of doubt, to determine
the particular speaker (see [Sol 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#008)
note)

If in other Scriptures are found words of indignation and wrath and
terrible threatenings, the characteristics of this book are sweetness,
cheerfulness, and joy, characteristics somewhat at variance with "the
hypothesis" so-called "of the shepherd lover." According to the view
taken in this commentary, there is only one lover in the Song, and one
object of his affection, without rival or disturbing influence on either
side. The beloved of the bride is in truth a king, and if she
occasionally speaks of him as a shepherd, she intimates [Sol
6:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#002) that she is speaking
figuratively. Being herself a rustic maiden of comparatively lowly
station she, by such an appellation, seeks to draw down him "whom her
soul loveth" [Sol 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#007); [Sol
3:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001), though he be the king of
Israel, within her narrower circle of thoughts and aspirations. And,
therefore, while the whole poem breathes of almost more than regal
splendor and magnificence, the bride is nowhere represented as dwelling
with any pride or satisfaction on the riches or grandeur of her beloved,
but only on what he is to her in his own person as" chiefest among ten
thousand" and "altogether lovely" ([Sol
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#010), note; [Sol
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#016), note).

3\. Most recent critics have agreed in assigning to the Song an early
date.

The diction of the Song (on the character of which several critics have
insisted when arguing for a later date) is unquestionably peculiar. The
poem is written in pure Hebrew of the best age, but with a large
sprinkling of uncommon idioms and some very remarkable and apparently
foreign words. Diction apart, most of the references and allusions in
the Song would lead us to assign it, in accordance with its title, to
the age of Solomon, nor does there seem to be sufficient reason for
departing from the traditional belief that Solomon was himself the
author; unless it be considered a panegyric composed in his honor by a
prophet or poet of the king's own circle. In that case some of the
peculiarities of diction and phraseology might be accounted for by
assuming the author to have been a native of the northern part of
Solomon's dominions.

One striking characteristic of the writer of the Song is a love of
natural scenes and objects, and familiarity with them as they would be
presented, in the wide area of the Hebrew monarchy, to an observant eye
in the age of Solomon. Thus, it has been observed that this short poem
contains 18 names of plants and 13 of animals. No less delight is
exhibited in the enumeration of those works of human art and labor and
those articles of commerce, which in the time of Solomon so largely
ministered to royal pomp and luxury.

The time in which the Song was written was unquestionably one of peace
and general prosperity, such as occurred but very rarely in the
chequered history of Israel. All the indications named above concur with
this in fixing that time as the age of Solomon.

4\. The interpretation of the Song of Songs followed in this commentary
proceeds on the assumption that the primary subject and occasion of the
poem was a real historical event, of which we have here the only record,
the marriage union of Solomon with a shepherd-maiden of northern
Palestine, by whose beauty and nobility of soul the great king had been
captivated. Starting from this historical basis, the Song of Songs is in
its essential character an ideal representation of human love in the
relation of marriage [Sol 8:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006).

5\. According to this literal and historical interpretation, Parts I -
III constitute the first half or one main division of the poem, which
may be called: the bride and her espousals with the king Cant. 1:2-5:1.
The three parts represent each a different scene and distinct action.

Part I. The Bride in the King's Chambers

Cant. 1:2-2:7 subdivisible into four sections, corresponding to so many
pauses in the action or dialogue.

The scene is laid apparently in a wooded district of northern Palestine
near the bride's home, where the king is spending part of the summer
season in tents. The three chief speakers of the poem are now introduced
in succession: first, a female chorus (the "daughters of Jerusalem")
commence by singing a short ode of two stanzas in praise of the absent
king [Sol 1:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#002). The next speaker, the
Shulamite maiden ("the bride"), appears to have been recently brought
from her country home to the king's pavilion, to be there affianced to
him. A brief dialogue ensues between her and the chorus [Sol
1:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#005). The king himself appears, in
the third place, and commending the beauty of the bride, receives from
her in return words of praise and affection [Sol
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#016); [Sol
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#007). Throughout this part the bride is
represented as of inferior rank to him whom she calls her "beloved,"
shrinking at times from the splendors of the royal station that awaits
her. She speaks of him both as a shepherd and as a king; but, in either
character, as of one in whose favor and society she finds supreme
satisfaction and entire rest. It is a day of early love, but not that of
their first meeting.

Part II. Monologues of the Bride

Cant. 2:8-3:5, comprising two sections.

This part carries us back to an earlier period than the former, and
affords a glance at the previous history of the Shulamite in her
relations to the king. She describes to the chorus in two monologues how
the beloved had visited her on a spring morning, and how she had
afterward dreamed of him at night.

Part III. Royal Espousals

Cant. 3:6-5:1, subdivisible into three sections.

The scene changes to Jerusalem, where the bride is brought in royal
state to be united to the king in marriage.

Parts IV - VI. The Bride, the King's Wife

Cant. 5:2-7:1. The once lowly Shulamite, though now sharing with her
beloved the high places of Israel, yet retains that sweetness, humility,
and devoted affection, which in other scenes and circumstances had
gained his heart. She invites him to revisit with her rural scenes, and
share once more their simple pleasures [Sol
7:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#011).

Part IV. Seeking and Finding

Cant. 5:2-6:9 may be divided into three sections.

The scene of this part is still Jerusalem. The bride after relating to
the chorus a second dream concerning her beloved, pours forth a stream
of richest fancies in his praise, who, as she complains, has departed
from her. The Chorus offering to aid her in her search of him, suddenly
the beloved reappears and gives in his turn the noblest commendations to
the bride.

Part V. Homeward Thoughts

Cant. 6:10-8:4, subdivisible into four sections.

The scene is still Jerusalem, or a palace-garden in the neighborhood;
but the bride's thoughts are now reverting to her northern home. She
relates how in early spring she had first met the king in a
walnut-garden in her own country. The chorus ask her to perform a sacred
dance seemingly well known to the bride and her country-folk. The bride
complies, and while she is dancing and the chorus are singing some
stanzas in her praise, the king himself appears. The bride invites him
to return with her into the country and to her mother's house.

Part VI. The Return Home

[Sol 8:5-14](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#005), containing three very
brief sections.

The scene changes to the bride's birthplace, to which she has now
returned with the king. The bride commends her brothers to the good
graces of the king, and ends, at his request, by charming his ear with
one last song, recalling to his memory a strain of other days (see [Sol
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#014) note).

The history, which forms its groundwork is, however, throughout the
poem, contemplated from an ideal point of view; and the fundamental idea
expressed and illustrated is the awful all-constraining, the at once
leveling and elevating power of the mightiest and most universal of
human affections. The refrains and phrases, to which allusion has been
already made, give expression at regular intervals to this idea.

The ideal character of the whole poem is further evidenced by the way in
which the chief points whereon the action turns are indicated; and it
will be found that the two halves, or main divisions of the Song have
numerous well-balanced contrasts and correspondences throughout.

These and other peculiarities, which impart to the Song of Songs its
unique and enigmatical character, seem chiefly due to its idealizing
treatment of an actual history felt at the time, and especially by the
writer, to be profoundly interesting and significant.

Further, that the history thus idealized and the form in which it is
presented have meanings beyond themselves and point to something higher,
has ever been a deep-seated conviction in the mind both of the church
and of the synagogue.

The two axes, so to speak, on which the main action of the poem appears
alternately to revolve, may be found in the king's invitation to the
bride on bringing her to Jerusalem [Sol
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008), and in the bride's to the king in
recalling him to Shunem [Sol 7:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#011);
[Sol 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#002); in these two invitations and
their immediate consequences - the willing obedience of the bride and
the ready condescension of the king, the first surrender on her part and
the final vow on his - the writer of the Song seems to have intended to
exhibit the two-fold energy, both for elevation and abasement, of that
affection, to the delineation of which his work is dedicated. The
omnipotent, transforming, and yet conserving power of faithful love is
here seen in like yet diverse operation in the two personalities through
whom it is exhibited. In the case of the bride we see the lowly
rejoicing in unforeseen elevation without loss of virginal simplicity,
in that of the beloved the highest is made happy through self-abasement
without compromise of kingly honor.

It is then no mere fancy, which for so many ages past has been
accustomed to find in the pictures and melodies of the Song of Songs
types and echoes of the actings and emotions of the highest love - of
Love Divine - in its relations to humanity. Christians may trace in the
noble and gentle history thus presented foreshadowings of the infinite
condescensions of Incarnate Love; - that Love which, first stooping in
human form to visit us in our low estate in order to seek out and win
its object [Psa 136:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#023), and then
raising along with itself a sanctified humanity to the heavenly places
[Eph 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006), is finally awaiting there an
invitation from the mystic Bride to return to earth once more and seal
the union for eternity [Rev 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#017).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 1](sol001)

</div>
