<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol001)  [Next](sol003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 2:1</span></span>

The division of the chapters is unfortunate; Cant. 2 ought to have begun
at [Sol 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#015), or Cant. 1 to have been
continued to [Sol 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#007). The bride
replies, "And I am like a lovely wild flower springing at the root of
the stately forest-trees." The majority of Christian fathers assigned
this verse to the King (Christ). Hebrew commentators generally assign it
to the bride. It is quite uncertain what flower is meant by the word
rendered (here and [Isa 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001)) "rose."
The etymology is in favor of its being a bulbous plant (the white
narcissus, Conder). "Sharon" is usually the proper name of the
celebrated plain from Joppa to Caesarea, between the hill-country and
the sea, and travelers have remarked the abundance of flowers with which
this plain is still carpeted in spring. But in the time of Eusebius and
Jerome there was a smaller plain of Sharon (Saron) situated between
Mount Tabor and the sea of Tiberias, which would be very near the
bride's native home if that were Shunem.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 2:2</span></span>

The king resumes, taking up the bride's comparison: "As the lily excels
in beauty the thorny shrubs among which it grows, so my friend excels
her companions."

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sol 2:3</span></span>

The bride's answer: "As the 'tappuach' with its fragrant fruit excels
the barren trees of the wild wood, so my beloved his associates and
friends etc." תפוח tappûach may in early Hebrew have been a generic name
for apple, quince, citron, orange etc.

[Sol 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#004)

His banner - As the standard is the rallying-point and guide of the
individual soldier, so the bride, transplanted from a lowly station to
new scenes of unaccustomed splendor, finds support and safety in the
known attachment of her beloved. His "love" is her "banner." The thought
is similar to that expressed in the name "Jehovah-nissi" (see the [Exo
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#015) note).

[Sol 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#005)

Flagons - More probably cakes of raisins or dried grapes ([Sa2
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#019) note; [Ch1
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#003); [Hos
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#001)). For an instance of the reviving
power of dried fruit, see [Sa1 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#012).

[Sol 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#006)

Render as a wish or prayer: "O that his left hand were under my head,
and that his right hand did embrace me!" Let him draw me to him with
entire affection. Compare [Deu 33:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#027);
[Pro 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#008).

[Sol 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#007)

Render: "I adjure you ... by the gazelles, or by the hinds of the field,
that ye stir not up nor awaken love until it please." The King James
Version, "my love," is misleading. The affection or passion in itself,
not its object, is here meant. This adjuration, three times
significantly introduced as a concluding formula (marginal references),
expresses one of the main thoughts of the poem; namely, that genuine
love is a shy and gentle affection which dreads intrusion and scrutiny;
hence the allusion to the gazelles and hinds, shy and timid creatures.

The complementary thought is that of [Sol
8:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006), where love is again described,
and by the bride, as a fiery principle.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sol 2:8</span></span>

The bride relates to the chorus a visit which the beloved had paid her
some time previously in her native home. He on a fair spring morning
solicits her company. The bride, immersed in rustic toils, refuses for
the present, but confessing her love, bids him return at the cool of
day. It is a spring-time of affection which is here described, still
earlier than that of the former chapter, a day of pure first-love, in
which, on either side, all royal state and circumstance is forgotten or
concealed. Hence, perhaps, the annual recitation of the Song of Songs by
the synagogue with each return of spring, at the Feast of Passover, and
special interpretations of this passage by Hebrew doctors, as referring
to the paschal call of Israel out of Egypt, and by Christian fathers, as
foreshadowing the evangelic mysteries of Easter - Resurrection and
Regeneration. The whole scene has also been thought to represent the
communion of a newly-awakened soul with Christ, lie gradually revealing
Himself to her, and bidding her come forth into fuller communion.

[Sol 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#008)

Voice - Better, "sound." Not a voice, but the sound of approaching
footsteps is meant (compare "noise," [Isa
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#004)).

[Sol 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#009)

Like a roe - Gazelle (compare [Pro
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#019) note). The points of comparison
here are beauty of form, grace, and speed of movement. In [Sa2
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#018); [Ch1
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#008), princes are compared to
"gazelles."

Wall - The clay-built wall of the house or vineyard of the bride's
family, different from the strong wall of a city or fortress [Sol
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#007); [Sol
8:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#009).

Looketh forth at the windows - The meaning evidently is, that he is
looking in at, or through, the window from the outside. Compare [Sol
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#004) note.

Shewing himself - Or, peering. Some, taking the marginal rendering,
imagine that the radiant face of the beloved is thus compared to some
beautiful flower entangled in the lattice-work which protects the
opening of the window, from where he gazes down upon the bride.

[Sol 2:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#010)

Arise, my friend, my beautiful one, and come away - The stanza begins
and ends with this refrain, in which the bride reports the invitation of
the beloved that she should come forth with him into the open champaign,
now a scene of verdure and beauty, and at a time of mirth and mutual
affection. The season indicated by six signs [Sol
2:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#011) is that of spring after the
cessation of the latter rain in the first or paschal month [Joe
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#023), i. e., Nisan or Abib,
corresponding to the latter part of March and early part of April. Cyril
interpreted [Sol 2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#011) of our Lord's
Resurrection in the spring.

[Sol 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#012)

The time of the singing ... - i. e., The song of pairing birds. This is
better than the rendering of the ancient versions, "the pruning time is
come."

[Sol 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#013)

The vines ... - The vines in blossom give forth fragrance. The fragrance
of the vine blossom ("semadar"), which precedes the appearance of "the
tender grape," is very sweet but transient.

[Sol 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#014)

The secret places of the stairs - A hidden nook approached by a zig-zag
path. The beloved urges the bride to come forth from her rock-girt home.

[Sol 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#015)

The bride answers by singing what appears to be a fragment of a
vine-dresser's ballad, insinuating the vineyard duties imposed on her by
her brethren [Sol 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#006), which prevent
her from joining him. The destructive propensities of foxes or jackals
in general are referred to, no grapes existing at the season indicated.
Allegorical interpretations make these foxes symbolize "false teachers"
(compare [Eze 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#004)).

[Sol 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#016)

Feedeth among the lilies - Pursues his occupation as a shepherd among
congenial scenes and objects of gentleness and beauty.

[Sol 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#017)

Until the day break - Or, rather, until the day breathe, i. e., until
the fresh evening breeze spring up in what is called [Gen
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#008) "the cool" or breathing time of
the day.

And the shadows flee - i. e., Lengthen out, and finally lose their
outlines with the sinking and departure of the sun (compare [Jer
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#004)). As the visit of the beloved is
most naturally conceived of as taking place in the early morning, and
the bride is evidently dismissing him until a later time of day, it
seems almost certain that this interpretation is the correct one which
makes that time to be evening after sunset. The phrase recurs in [Sol
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#006).

Mountains of Bether - If a definite locality, identical with Bithron, a
hilly district on the east side of the Jordan valley [Sa2
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#029), not far from Mahanaim ([Sol
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#013) margin). If used in a symbolic
sense, mountains of "separation," dividing for a time the beloved from
the bride. This interpretation seems to be the better, though the local
reference need not be abandoned.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 3](sol003)

</div>
