<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Thessalonians Index](th1)  
  [Previous](th1000)  [Next](th1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Thessalonians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001)

Analysis Of The Chapter

The first chapter of this Epistle embraces the following subjects:

1\. The inscription by Paul, Silas, and Timothy, to the Thessalonians,
and the usual salutations; [Th1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001).

2\. An expression of thanks for their fidelity in the gospel; [Th1
1:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#002). The apostle says that he made
mention of them continually in his prayers; that he remembered their
faith, and love, and patience, for by these things they had shown that
they were among the elect of God.

3\. He reminds them of the manner in which they received the gospel when
it was first preached to them; [Th1
1:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#005). The power of God had been
manifested among them in a remarkable manner; they had embraced the
gospel with strong assurance, and though in the midst of deep
afflictions, they had received the word with joy.

4\. The effect of the establishment of the church in Thessalonica had
been felt far abroad, and had been of the most happy character; [Th1
1:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#007). They had become examples to
all that believed in Macedonia and Achaia. From them the gospel had been
sounded abroad throughout Greece, and indeed in all places with which
they had connection by their commercial relations. Those who dwelt in
distant places bore witness to the influence of the gospel on them, and
to the power of that religion which had turned them from idols to serve
the living God. These verses contain a beautiful illustration of the
effect of the gospel in a place favorably situated for commerce, and
having extensive contact with other regions.

[1 Thessalonians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th1 1:1</span></span>

Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus - On the reasons why Paul associated
other names with his in his epistles, see the [Co1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001) note, and [Co2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#001) note. Silvanus, or Silas, and
Timothy were properly united with him on this occasion, because they had
been with him when the church was founded there, Acts 17, and because
Timothy had been sent by the apostle to visit them after he had himself
been driven away; [Th1 2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#001). Silas is
first mentioned in the New Testament as one who was sent by the church
at Jerusalem with Paul to Antioch (notes, [Act
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022)); and he afterward became his
traveling companion.

Which is in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ - Who are
united to the true God and to the Redeemer; or who sustain an intimate
relation to the Father and the Lord Jesus. This is strong language,
denoting, that they were a true church; compare [Jo1
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020). "Grace be unto you," etc.; see
the notes, [Rom 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007).

[1 Thessalonians 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">th1 1:2</span></span>

We give thanks to God always for you all - see the notes, [Rom
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#009).

Making mention of you in our prayers - See the notes at [Eph
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#016). It may be observed here:

\(1\) that the apostle was in the habit of constant prayer.

\(2\) that he was accustomed to extemporary prayer, and not to written
prayer. It is not credible that "forms" of prayer had been framed for
the churches at Thessalonica and Ephesus, and the other churches for
which Paul says he prayed, nor would it have been possible to have
adapted such forms to the varying circumstances attending the
organization of new churches.

[1 Thessalonians 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">th1 1:3</span></span>

Remembering without ceasing - Remembering your faith and love whenever
we pray. This is not to be understood literally, but it is language such
as we use respecting anything that interests us much. It is constantly
in our mind. Such an interest the apostle had in the churches which he
had established.

Your work of faith - That is, your showing or evincing faith. The
reference is probably to acts of duty, holiness, and benevolence, which
proved that they exercised faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. Works of
faith are those to which faith prompts, and which show that there is
faith in the heart. This does not mean, therefore, a work of their own
producing faith, but a work which showed that they had faith.

And labour of love - Labour produced by love, or showing that you are
actuated by love. Such would be all their kindness toward the poor, the
oppressed, and the afflicted; and all their acts which showed that they
loved the souls of people.

And patience of hope - Patience in your trials, showing that you have
such a hope of future blessedness as to sustain you in your afflictions.
It was the hope of heaven through the Lord Jesus that gave them
patience; see the notes on [Rom 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024).
"The phrases here are Hebraisims, meaning active faith, and laborious
love, and patient hope, and might have been so translated." Doddridge.

In our Lord Jesus Christ - That is, your hope is founded only on him.
The only hope that we have of heaven is through the Redeemer.

In the sight of God and our Father - Before God, even our Father. It is
a hope which we have through the merits of the Redeemer, and which we
are permitted to cherish before God; that is, in his very presence. When
we think of God; when we reflect that we must soon stand before him, we
are permitted to cherish this hope. It is a hope which will be found to
be genuine even in the presence of a holy and heart-searching God. This
does not mean that it had been merely professed before God, but that it
was a hope which they might dare to entertain even in the presence of
God, and which would bear the scrutiny of his eye.

[1 Thessalonians 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">th1 1:4</span></span>

Knowing, brethren beloved, your election of God - The margin here reads,
"beloved of God, your election." The difference depends merely on the
pointing, and that which would require the marginal reading has been
adopted by Hahn, Tittman, Bloomfield, and Griesbach. The sense is not
materially varied, and the common version may be regarded as giving the
true meaning. There is no great difference between "being beloved of
God," and "being chosen of God." The sense then is, "knowing that you
are chosen by God unto salvation;" compare notes on [Eph
1:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004), [Eph
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#011). The word "knowing" here refers
to Paul himself, and to Silas and Timothy, who united with him in
writing the Epistle, and in rendering thanks for the favors shown to the
church at Thessalonica. The meaning is, that they had so strong
confidence that they had been chosen of God as a church unto salvation,
that they might say they knew it.

The way in which they knew it seems not to have been by direct
revelation or by inspiration, but by the evidence which they had
furnished, and which constituted such a proof of piety as to leave no
doubt of the fact. Calvin. What this evidence was, the apostle states in
the following verses. I was shown by the manner in which they embraced
the gospel, and by the spirit which they had evinced under its influence
The meaning here seems to be, not that all the members of the church at
Thessalonica were certainly chosen of God to salvation - for, as in
other churches, there might have been those there who were false
professors - but that the church, as such, had given evidence that it
was a true church - that it was founded on Christian principles - and
that, as a church, it had furnished evidence of its "election by God."
Nor can it mean, as Clarke and Bloomfield suppose, that God "had chosen
and called the Gentiles to the same privileges to which he chose and
called the Jews; and that as they (the Jews) had rejected the gospel,
God had now elected the Gentiles in their stead;" for a considerable
portion of the church was composed of Jews (see [Act
17:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#004)), and it cannot, therefore,
mean that the Gentiles had been selected in the place of the Jews.
Besides, the election of the Gentiles, or any portion of the human
family, to the privileges of salvation, to the neglect or exclusion of
any other part, would be attended with all the difficulties which occur
in the doctrine of personal and individual election. Nothing is gained
on this subject in removing the difficulties, by supposing that God
chooses masses of people instead of individuals. How can the one be more
proper than the other? What difficulty in the doctrine of election is
removed by the supposition? Why is it not as right to choose an
individual as a nation? Why not as proper to reject an individual as a
whole people? If this means that the church at Thessalonica had shown
that it was a true church of Christ, chosen by God, then we may learn:

\(1\) that a true church owes what it has to the "election of God." It
is because God has chosen it; has called it out from the world; and has
endowed it in such a manner as to he a true church.

\(2\) a church may give evidence that it is chosen of God, and is a true
church. There are things which it may do, which will show that it is
undoubtedly such a church as God has chosen, and such as he approves.
There are just principles on which a church should be organized, and
there is a spirit which may be manifested by a church which will
distinguish it from any other association of people.

\(3\) it is not improper to speak with strong confidence of such a
church as undoubtedly chosen of God. There are churches which, by their
zeal, self-denial, and deadness to the world, show beyond question their
"election of God," and the world may see that they are founded on other
principles and manifest a different spirit from other organizations of
people.

\(4\) every church should evince such a spirit that there may be no
doubt of its "election of God." It should be so dead to the world; so
pure in doctrine and in practice, and so much engaged in spreading the
knowledge of salvation, that the world will see that it is governed by
higher principles than any worldly association, and that nothing could
produce this but the influence of the Holy Spirit of God.

[1 Thessalonians 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">th1 1:5</span></span>

For our gospel came not unto you - When first preached; [Act
17:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#001). Paul speaks of it as "our
gospel," because it was the gospel preached by him and Silas and
Timothy; comp [Th2 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#014); [Ti2
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008). He did not mean to say that the
gospel had been originated by him, but only that he had delivered the
good news of salvation to them. He is here stating the evidence which
had been given that they were a church "chosen by God." He refers,
first, to the manner in which the gospel was received by them [Th1
1:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#005), and, secondly, to the spirit
which they themselves manifested in sending it abroad; yet.[Th1
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#008).

In word only - Was not merely spoken; or was not merely heard. It
produced a powerful effect on the heart and life. It was not a mere
empty sound that produced no other effect than to entertain or amuse;
compare [Eze 33:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#032).

But also in power - That is, in such power as to convert the soul. The
apostle evidently refers not to any miracles that were performed there,
but to the effect of the gospel on those who heard it. It is possible
that there were miracles performed there, as there were in other places,
but there is no mention of such a fact, and it is not necessary to
suppose it, in order to see the full meaning of this language. There was
great power manifested in the gospel in its leading them to break off
from their sins, to abandon their idols, and to give their hearts to
God; see this more fully explained in the notes on [Co1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#004).

And in the Holy Ghost - Compare the notes on [Co1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#004). It is there called the
"demonstration of the Spirit."

And in much assurance - That is, with firm conviction, or full
persuasion of its truth. It was not embraced as a doubtful thing, and it
did not produce the effect on the mind which is caused by anything that
is uncertain in its character. Many seem to embrace the gospel as if
they only half believed it, or as if it were a matter of very doubtful
truth and importance; but this was not the case with the Thessalonians.
There was the firmest conviction of its truth, and they embraced it
"heart and soul;" compare [Col 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#002);
[Heb 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#011). From all that is said in
this verse, it is evident that the power of God was remarkably
manifested in the conversion of the Thessalonians, and that they
embraced the gospel with an uncommonly strong conviction of its truth
and value. This fact will account for the subsequent zeal which the
apostle so much commends in them - for it is usually true that the
character of piety in a church, as it is in an individual, is determined
by the views with which the gospel is first embraced, and the purposes
which are formed at the beginning of the Christian life.

As ye know what manner of men, ... - Paul often appeals to those among
whom he had labored as competent witnesses with respect to his own
conduct and character; see [Th1
2:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#009); [Act
20:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#033). He means here that he and
his fellow-laborers had set them an example, or had shown what
Christianity was by their manner of living, and that the Thessalonians
had become convinced that the religion which they taught was real. The
holy life of a preacher goes far to confirm the truth of the religion
which he preaches, and is among the most efficacious means of inducing
them to embrace the gospel.

[1 Thessalonians 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">th1 1:6</span></span>

And ye became followers of us - "You became imitators - μιμηταὶ mimētai
- of us." This does not mean that they became followers of Paul, Silas,
and Timothy, in the sense that they had set themselves up as teachers,
or as the head of a sect, but that they imitated their manner of living;
see the notes on [Co1 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#016); [Co1
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001).

And of the Lord - The Lord Jesus. You also learned to imitate him. From
this it is evident that the manner in which the Saviour lived was a
prominent topic of their preaching, and also that it was one of the
means of the conversion of the Thessalonians. It is probable that
preaching on the pure and holy life of the Lord Jesus might be made a
much more important means of the conversion of sinners than it is.
Nothing is better adapted to show them the evil of their own guilty
lives than the contrast between their lives and his; and nothing can be
conceived better fitted to win them to holy living than the
contemplation of his pure and holy deportment.

Having received the word in much affliction - That is, amidst much
opposition from others; see [Act
17:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#005). It was in the midst of these
trials that they had become converted - and they seem to have been all
the better Christians for them. In this they were imitators of the
Saviour, or shared the same lot with him, and thus became his followers.
Their embracing and holding fast the truths of religion amidst all this
opposition, showed that they were controlled by the same principles that
he was, and that they were truly his friends.

With joy of the Holy Ghost - With happiness produced by the Holy Ghost.
Though they were much afflicted and persecuted, yet there was joy. There
was joy in their conversion - in the evidence of pardoned sin - in the
hope of heaven; see the notes, [Act
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#008). However great may be the trials
and persecutions experienced in receiving the gospel, or however
numerous and long the sufferings of the subsequent life in consequence
of having embraced it, there is a joy in religion that more than
overbalances all, and that makes religion the richest of all blessings.

[1 Thessalonians 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">th1 1:7</span></span>

So that ye were ensamples to all that believe - Examples in reference to
the firmness with which you embraced the gospel, the fidelity with which
you adhered to it in trials, and the zeal which you showed in spreading
it abroad. These things are specified in the previous and subsequent
verses as characterizing their piety. The word here rendered "ensamples"
- τύπον tupon, singular - is that from which the word type is derived.
It properly denotes anything caused or produced by the means of "blows"
(from τύπτω tuptō), and hence a mark, print, or impression, made by a
stamp or die; and then a resemblance, figure, pattern, exemplar - a
model after which anything is made. This is the meaning here. They
became, as it were, a model or pattern after which the piety of others
should be moulded, or showed what the piety of others ought to be.

In Macedonia - Thessalonica was an important city of Macedonia (see the
Intro.; compare notes, [Act 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#009)), and
of course their influence would be felt on the whole of the surrounding
region. This is a striking instance of the effect which a church in a
city may have on the country. The influence of a city church may be
felt, and will usually be felt afar on the other churches of a community
- just as, in all other respects, a city has an important influence on
the country at large.

And Achaia - Achaia proper was the part of Greece of which Corinth was
the capital. The word, however, was sometimes so used as to comprehend
the whole of Greece, and in this sense it seems to be employed here, as
there is no reason to suppose that their influence would be felt
particularly in the province of which Corinth was the center. Koppe
observes that Macedonia and Achaia were the two provinces into which all
Greece was divided when it was brought under the Roman yoke, the former
of which comprehended Macedonia proper, Illyricum, Epirus, and Thessaly,
and the other Greece properly so called. The meaning here is, therefore,
that their influence was felt on all the parts of Greece; that their
piety was spoken of, and the effect of their conversion had been felt in
all those places. Thessalonica was a commercial city, and a sea-port. It
had contact with all the other parts of Macedonia, with Greece, and with
Asia Minor. It was partly owing to the advantages of its situation that
its influence was thus felt.

Its own merchants and mariners who went abroad would carry with them the
spirit of the religion of the church there, and those who visited it
from other ports would see the effect of religion there. This is just an
instance, therefore, of the influence which a commercial town and a
sea-port may have in religion on other parts of the world. A revival of
religion in such a place will extend its influence afar to other places,
and appropriate zeal among the friends of the Redeemer there may have an
important effect on sea-ports, and towns, and lands far remote. It is
impossible to over-estimate the importance of such places in regard to
the spread of the gospel; and Christians who reside there - be they
merchants, mechanics, lawyers, physicians, mariners, or ministers of the
gospel, should feel that on them God has placed the responsibility of
using a vast influence in sending the gospel to other lands. He that
goes forth from a commercial town should be imbued with the spirit of
the gospel, and churches located there should be so under the influence
of religion, that they who come among them from abroad shall bear to
their own lands honorable testimony of the power of religion there.

[1 Thessalonians 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">th1 1:8</span></span>

For from you sounded out the word of the Lord - The truths of religion
were thus spread abroad. The word rendered "sounded out" - ἐξήχηται
exēchētai - refers to the sounding of a trumpet (Bloomfield), and the
idea is, that the gospel was proclaimed like the sonorous voice of a
trumpet echoing from place to place; compare [Isa
58:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001); [Rev
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010). Their influence had an effect in
diffusing the gospel in other places, as if the sound of a trumpet
echoed and reechoed among the hills and along the vales of the classic
land of Greece. This seems to have been done:

\(1\) involuntarily; that is, the necessary result of their conversion,
even without any direct purpose of the kind of their own, would be to
produce this effect. Their central and advantageous commercial position;
the fact that many of them were in the habit of visiting other places;
and the fact that they were visited by strangers from abroad, would
naturally contribute to this result. But.

\(2\) this does not appear to be all that is intended. The apostle
commends them in such a way as to make it certain that they were
voluntary in the spread of the gospel; that they made decided efforts to
take advantage of their position to send the knowledge of the truth
abroad. If so, this is an interesting instance of one of the first
efforts made by a church to diffuse the gospel, and to send it to those
who were destitute of it. There is no improbability in the supposition
that they sent out members of their church - messengers of salvation -
to other parts of Macedonia and Greece that they might communicate the
same gospel to others. See Doddridge.

But also in every place - Thessalonica was connected not only with
Macedonia and Greece proper, in its commercial relations, but also with
the ports of Asia Minor, and not improbably with still more remote
regions. The meaning is, that in all the places with which they
trafficked the effect of their faith was seen and spoken of.

Faith to God-ward - Fidelity toward God. They showed that they had a
true belief in God and in the truth which he had revealed.

So that we need not to speak anything - That is, wherever we go, we need
say nothing of the fact that you have been turned to the Lord, or of the
character of your piety. These things are sufficiently made known by
those who come from you, by those who visit you, and by your zeal in
spreading the true religion.

[1 Thessalonians 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">th1 1:9</span></span>

For they themselves - They who have visited you, and they whom you have
sent out; all persons testify of your piety. The apostle seems to refer
to all whom he had met or had heard of "in all places," who said
anything about the Thessalonians They were unanimous in bearing
testimony to their fidelity and piety.

Show of us what manner of entering in we had unto you - The testimony
which they bear of you is, in fact, testimony of the manner in which we
preached the gospel, and demeaned ourselves when we were with you. It
shows that we were intent on our Master's work, and that we were not
actuated by selfish or sinister motives The argument is, that such
effects could not have been produced among them if Paul, Silas, and
their fellow laborers had been impostors. Their sound conversion to God;
their change from idolatry to the true religion, and the zeal which had
been the result of their conversion, was an argument to which Paul and
his fellow-laborers might appeal in proof of their sincerity and their
being sent from God. Paul often makes a similar appeal; compare notes on
[Co2 3:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#002). It is certain that many of
the Jews in Thessalonica, when Paul and his fellow-laborers were there,
regarded them as impostors [Act 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#006),
[Act 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#008), and there is every reason
to suppose that after they left the city, they would endeavor to keep up
this impression among the people. To meet this, Paul now says that their
own undoubted conversion to a life of holiness and zeal under their
ministry, was an unanswerable argument that this was not so. How could
impostors and deceivers have been the means of producing such effects?

And how ye turned to God from idols - That is, under our preaching. This
proves that the church was to a considerable extent composed of those
who were converted from idolatry under the preaching of Paul; compare
Intro. 4. The meaning here is, that they who came from them, or they who
had visited them, bore abundant testimony to the fact that they had
turned from idols to the worship of the true God; compare notes [Co1
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#002); [Gal
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008).

To serve the living and true God - He is called the "living God" in
opposition to idols - who are represented as dead, dumb, deaf, and
blind; compare [Psa 135:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#015); notes,
[Isa 44:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#010); [Mat
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016); [Joh
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026); [Act
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#015).

[1 Thessalonians 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">th1 1:10</span></span>

And to wait for his Son from heaven - It is clear from this and from
other parts of these two Epistles, that the return of the Lord Jesus to
this world was a prominent subject of the preaching of Paul at
Thessalonica. No small part of these Epistles is occupied with stating
the true doctrine on this point (1 Th 4:v.), and in correcting the
errors which prevailed in regard to it after the departure of Paul.
Perhaps we are not to infer, however, that this doctrine was made more
prominent there than others, or that it had been inculcated there more
frequently than it had been elsewhere, but the apostle adverts to it
here particularly because it was a doctrine so well fitted to impart
comfort to them in their trials [Th1
4:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#013), and because, in that
connection, it was so well calculated to rouse them to vigilance and
zeal; [Th1 5:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#001). He makes it
prominent in the second Epistle, because material errors prevailed there
in reference to it which needed to be corrected.

In the passage before us, he says that the return of the Son of God from
heaven was an important point which had been insisted on when he was
there, and that their conduct, as borne witness to by all, had shown
with what power it had seized upon them, and what a practical influence
it had exerted in their lives. They lived as if they were" waiting" for
his return. They fully believed in it; they expected it. They were
looking out for it, not knowing when it might occur, and as if it might
occur at any moment. They were, therefore, dead to the world, and were
animated with an earnest desire to do good. This is one of the instances
which demonstrate that the doctrine that the Lord Jesus will return to
our world, is fitted, when understood in the true sense revealed in the
Scriptures, to exert a powerful influence on the souls of people. It is
eminently adapted to comfort the hearts of true Christians in the
sorrows, bereavements, and sicknesses of life [Joh
14:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001); [Act
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011); [Th1
4:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#013); [Pe2
3:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#008); to lead us to watchfulness and
to an earnest inquiry into the question whether we are prepared to meet
him [Mat 24:37-44](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#037); [Mat
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#013); to make us dead to the world,
and to lead us to act as becomes the children of light ([Th1
5:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#005); to awaken and arouse impenitent
and carless sinners [Th1 5:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#002); [Pe2
3:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#003), and to excite Christians to
self-denying efforts to spread the gospel in distant lands, as was the
case at Thessalonica. Every doctrine of the gospel is adapted to produce
some happy practical effects on mankind, but there are few that are more
full of elevated and holy influences than that which teaches that the
Lord Jesus will return to the earth, and which leads the soul to wait
for his appearing; compare notes, [Co1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#007); [Phi
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020).

Whom he raised from the dead - See the [Act
2:24-32](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024) notes; [Co1
15:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#004) notes. Paul probably means to
intimate here, that this was one of the great truths which they had
received, that the Lord Jesus had been raised from the dead. We know it
was a prominent doctrine wherever the gospel was preached.

Which delivered us from the wrath to come - Another of the prominent
doctrines of Christianity, which was undoubtedly always inculcated by
the first preachers of religion. The "wrath to come" is the divine
indignation which will come upon the guilty; [Mat
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007). From that Christ delivers us by
taking our place, and dying in our stead. It was the great purpose of
his coming to save us from this approaching wrath. It follows from this:

\(1\) that there was wrath which man had to dread - since Jesus came to
deliver us from something that was real, and not from what was
imaginary; and,

\(2\) that the same wrath is to be dreaded now by all who are not united
to Christ, since in this respect they are now just as all were before he
died; that is, they are exposed to fearful punishment, from which He
alone can deliver. It may be added, that the existence of this wrath is
real, whether people believe it or not, for the fact of its existence is
not affected by our belief or unbelief.

Remarks On 1 Thessalonians 1

This chapter teaches:

\(1\) That it is right to commend these who do well; [Th1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#003). Paul was never afraid of injuring
any one by commending him when he deserved it: nor was he ever afraid to
rebuke when censure was due.

\(2\) Christians are chosen to salvation; [Th1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#004). Their hope of heaven depends on
the "election of God."

\(3\) it is possible for a people to know that they are chosen of God,
and to give such evidence of it that others shall know it also; [Th1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#004). It is possible for a church to
evince such a spirit of piety, self-denial, love, and holiness, and such
a desire to spread the gospel, as to show that they are "chosen of God,"
or that they are a true church. This question is not to be determined by
their adherence to certain rites and forms; by their holding to the
sentiments of an orthodox creed: or by their zeal in defense of the
"apostolic succession," but by their bringing forth "the fruits of good
living." In determining that the church at Thessalonica was "chosen of
God," Paul does not refer to its external organization, or to the fact
that it was founded by apostolic hands, or that it had a true ministry
and valid ordinances, but to the fact that it evinced the true spirit of
Christian piety; and particularly that they had been zealous in sending
the gospel to others. There were three things to which he referred:

1\. that the gospel had power over themselves, inducing them to abandon
their sins;

2\. that it had such influence on their lives that others recognized in
them the evidence of true religion; and,

3\. that it made them benevolent, and excited them to make efforts to
diffuse its blessings abroad.

\(4\) if a church may know that it is chosen or elected of God, it is
true of an individual also that he may know it. It is not by any direct
revelation from heaven; not by an infallible communication of the Holy
Spirit; not by any voice or vision; but it is in the same way in which
this may be evinced by a church. The conversion of an individual, or his
"election of God," may be certainly known by himself, if,

1\. the gospel is received as "the word of God," and induces him to
abandon his sins;

2\. if it leads him to pursue such a life that others shall see that he
is actuated by Christian principles; and,

3\. if he makes it his great aim in life to do good, and to diffuse
abroad, as far as he can, that religion which he professes to love. He
who finds in his own heart and life evidence of these things, need not
doubt that he is among the "chosen of God."

\(5\) the character of piety in the life of an individual Christian, and
in a church, is often determined by the manner in which the gospel is
embraced at first, and by the spirit with which the Christian life is
entered on; see the notes on [Th1
1:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#005). If so, then this fact is of
immense importance in the question about organizing a church, and about
making a profession of religion. If a church is so organized as to have
it understood that it shall be to a considerable extent the patron of
worldly amusements - a "halfway house" between the world and religion,
that purpose will determine all its subsequent character - unless it
shall be counteracted by the grace of God. If it is organized so as to
look with a benignant and tolerant eye on gaiety, vanity,
self-indulgence, ease, and what are called the amusements and pleasures
of life, it is not difficult to see what will be its character and
influence. How can such a church diffuse far and near the conviction
that it is "chosen of God," as the church at Thessalonica did And so of
an individual. Commonly, the whole character of the religious life will
be determined by the views with which the profession of religion is
made. If there is a purpose to enjoy religion and the world too; to be
the patron of fashion as well as a professed follower of Christ; to seek
the flattery or the plaudits of man as well as the approbation of God,
that purpose will render the whole religious life useless, vacillating,
inconsistent, miserable. The individual will live without the enjoyment
of religion, and will die leaving little evidence to his friends that he
has gone to be with God. If, on the other hand, there be singleness of
purpose, and entire dedication to God at the commencement of the
Christian life, the religious career will be one of usefulness,
respectability, and peace. The most important period in a man's life,
then, is that when he is pondering the question whether he shall make a
profession of religion.

\(6\) a church in a city should cause its influence to be felt afar;
[Th1 1:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#007). This is true, indeed, of
all other churches, but it is especially so of a church in a large town.
Cities will be centers of influence in fashion, science, literature,
religion, and morals. A thousand ties of interest bind them to other
parts of a land, and though in fact there may be, as there often is,
much more intelligence in a country neighborhood than among the same
number of inhabitants taken promiscuously from a city; and though there
may be, as there often is, far more good sense and capability to
appreciate religious truth in a country congregation than in a
congregation in a city, yet it is true that the city will be the
radiating point of influence. This, of course, increases the
responsibility of Christians in a city, and makes it important that,
like those of Thessalonica, they should be models of self-denial and of
efforts to spread the gospel.

\(7\) a church in a commercial town should make use of its special
influence to spread the gospel abroad; [Th1
1:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#007). Such a place is connected with
remote lands, and those who, for commercial purposes, visit distant
ports from that place, should bear with them the spirit of the gospel.
Such, too, should be the character of piety in the churches in such a
city, that all who visit it for any purpose, should see the reality of
religion, and be led to bear the honorable report of it again to their
own land,

\(8\) such, too, should be the piety of any church. The church at
Thessalonica evinced the true spirit of religion; [Th1
1:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#007). Its light shone afar. It sent
out those who went to spread the gospel. Its members, when they went
abroad, showed that they were influenced by higher and purer principles
than those which actuated them before conversion, and than were evinced
by the pagan world. Those who visited them, also, saw that there was a
reality in religion, and bore an honorable report of it again to their
own lands. Let any church evince this spirit, and it will show that it
is "chosen of God," or a true church; and wherever there is a church
formed after the primitive model, these traits will always be seen.

\(9\) it is our duty and privilege to "wait for the Son of God to return
from heaven." We know not when his appearing, either to remove us by
death, or to judge the world, will be - and we should therefore watch
and be ready. The hope of his return to our world to raise the dead, and
to convey his ransomed to heaven, is the brightest and most cheering
prospect that dawns on man, and we should be ready, whenever it occurs,
to hail him as our returning Lord, and to rush to his arms as our
glorious Redeemer. It should be always the characteristic of our piety,
as it was that of John to say, "Even so, come, Lord Jesus;" [Rev
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#020).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians Chapter 2](th1002)

</div>
