<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Thessalonians Index](th2)  
  [Previous](th2002)  [Next](ti1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Thessalonians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001)

[2 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th2 3:0</span></span>

Analysis Of The Chapter

2 Thes. 3 is made up of exhortations and directions in regard to the
performance of various Christian duties.

\(1\) the apostle asks for their prayers; [Th2
3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001). He desires them to pray
particularly that the true religion might be prospered, and that, in
preaching the gospel, he might be delivered from the opposition of
unreasonable and wicked men.

\(2\) he expresses confidence that God would incline them to do what was
right, and prays that he would keep their hearts in his love, and in
patient waiting for the Saviour; [Th2
3:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#003).

\(3\) he commands them to remove from their number those who were
disorderly, and especially those who were idle, and addresses an earnest
exhortation to this class, that they would be diligently engaged in the
prosecution of the business of their appropriate callings; [Th2
3:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006).

\(4\) he exhorts them not to be weary in doing well; [Th2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#013).

\(5\) he directs that if any one should not obey the commands given in
this Epistle, he should be noted, and they were to separate themselves
from him. Yet they were not to regard him as an enemy, but to admonish
him as a brother; [Th2 3:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#014).

\(6\) the Epistle closes with the usual salutations; [Th2
3:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#016).

[2 Thessalonians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th2 3:1</span></span>

Finally, brethren, pray for us - That is, for Paul, Silas, and Timothy,
then engaged in arduous labors at Corinth. This request for the prayers
of Christians is one which Paul often makes; see the notes, [Th1
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#025).

That the word of the Lord may have free course - That is, the gospel.
The margin is "run." So also the Greek. The idea is, that it might meet
with no obstruction, but that it might be carried abroad with the
rapidity of a racer out of whose way every hindrance was removed. The
gospel would spread rapidly in the earth if all the obstructions which
men have put in its way were removed; and that they may be removed
should be one of the constant subjects of prayer.

And be glorified - Be honored; or appear to be glorious.

As it is with you - It is evident from this that Paul met with some
obstructions in preaching the gospel where he was then laboring. What
they were, he mentions in the next verse. He was then at Corinth (see
the introduction), and the history in the Acts of the Apostles informs
us of the difficulties which he had to encounter there; see Acts 18.

[2 Thessalonians 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">th2 3:2</span></span>

And that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men - That is,
from opposition in their endeavors to spread the gospel. Paul
encountered such men everywhere, as all do who labor to diffuse the
knowledge of the truth, but it is probable that there is particular
reference here to the opposition which he encountered when in Corinth.
This opposition arose mainly from the Jews; see [Act
18:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#005), [Act
18:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#012). The word "unreasonable" is
rendered in the margin as "absurd." The Greek word (ἀτόπος atopos)
means, properly, "out of place;" then "absurd, unusual, strange; then
improper, unreasonable, wicked." It is rendered in [Luk
23:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#041) as "amiss;" in [Act
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#006) as "harm." It does not occur
elsewhere in the New Testament. It refers here to people who acted amiss
or improperly; people who were not found in the right place, or who did
not have the right views of things; and probably does not refer so much
to their being positively wicked or malicious, as "to their putting
things out of their proper place."

They gave an undue prominence to certain things, and less importance to
others than they deserved. They had a distorted vision of the value of
objects, and in tenacious adherence to their own views, and prosecuting
their own objects to the exclusion of all others, they presented a
constant obstruction to the true gospel. This word would apply, and
probably was designed to be applied, to Jewish teachers (see [Act
18:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#005)), who gave an undue prominence
to the laws of Moses; but it will apply well to all who entertain
distorted views of the relative importance of objects, and who put
things out of their place. People often have a hobby. They give more
importance to some object than it deserves. They, therefore, undervalue
other objects; press their own with improper zeal; denounce others who
do not feel the same interest in them which they do; withdraw from those
who will not go with them in their views; form separate parties, and
thus throw themselves in the way of all who are endeavoring to do good
in some other method. It was from people who thus put themselves out of
place, that the apostle prayed to be delivered.

And wicked men - Men with bad aims and purposes. It is not always true
that those who would come under the appellation of what the apostle here
calls "unreasonable," are wicked. They are sometimes well-meaning, but
misguided people. But in this case, it seems, they were men of bad
character, who were at heart opposed to what was good, as well as
inclined to put things out of their place.

For all men have not faith - Of the truth of this, no one can doubt. The
only question is, as to its bearing on the case before us. Some suppose
it means, "there are few men whom we can safely trust;" others, that it
means that they have not that "upright and candid disposition which
would engage men to receive the testimony of the apostles" (Doddridge);
others, that "all men do not embrace the Christian faith, but many
oppose it" (Benson); and others, that "all men do not believe, but the
worthy only" - Bloomfield. The connection seems to require us to
understand it as meaning that all people are not prepared to embrace the
gospel. Hence, they set themselves against it, and from such people Paul
prayed that he might be delivered; compare [Ti2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008). The state of mind in which the
apostle was when he wrote this, seems to have been this: He recollected
the readiness with which the Thessalonians had embraced the gospel, and
the firmness with which they held it, and seems to suppose that they
would imagine the same thing must be found true everywhere. But he says
all people have not the same faith; all were not prepared cordially and
fully to embrace the gospel. There were unreasonable and wicked people
whom he had encountered, from whom he prayed that he might be delivered.

[2 Thessalonians 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">th2 3:3</span></span>

But the Lord is faithful - - Though human beings cannot be trusted, God
is faithful to his promises and his purposes. He may always be confided
in; and when people are unbelieving, perverse, unkind, and disposed to
do us wrong, we may go to him, and we shall always find in him one in
whom we may confide. This is an exceedingly interesting declaration, and
is a beautiful illustration of the resource which a truly pious mind
will feel that it has. We often have occasion to know, to our sorrow,
that "all men have not faith." We witness their infidelity. We see how
they turn away from the truth. We see many who once gave some evidence
that they had "faith," abandon it all; and we see many in the church who
seem to have no true faith, and who refuse to lend their aid in
promoting the cause of religion. In such circumstances, the heart is
disposed to despond, and to ask whether religion can be advanced in the
midst of so much indifference and opposition? At such times, how
consoling is it to be able to turn, as Paul did, to one who is faithful;
who never fails us; and who will certainly accomplish his benevolent
purposes. Men may be faithless and false, but God never is. They may
refuse to embrace the gospel, and set themselves against it, but God
will not abandon His great purposes. Many who are in the church may
forget their solemn and sacred vows, and may show no fidelity to the
cause of their Saviour, but God himself will never abandon that cause.
To a pious mind it affords unspeakably more consolation to reflect that
a faithful God is the friend of the cause which we love, than it would
were all men, in and out of the church, its friends.

Who shall stablish you, and keep you from evil - see the notes on [Joh
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005); compare the notes on [Eph
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016). The allusion is to the Evil One,
or Satan, and the meaning is, that God would keep them from his wiles.

[2 Thessalonians 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">th2 3:4</span></span>

And we have confidence in the Lord - Not primarily in you, for you have
hearts like others, but in the Lord. It is remarkable that when Paul
expresses the utmost confidence in Christians that they will live and
act as becomes their profession, his reliance is not on anything in
themselves, but wholly on the faithfulness of God. He must be a stranger
to the human heart who puts much confidence in it even in its best
state; see [Phi 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#006); [Phi
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007); [Ti2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012); compare [Jde
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#024); [Rev
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#010); [Pro
28:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#026).

[2 Thessalonians 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">th2 3:5</span></span>

And the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God - So direct your
hearts that you may love God. "And into the patient waiting for Christ."
Margin, "patience of Christ." The marginal reading is in accordance with
the Greek, and seems best to express the apostle's meaning. The prayer
of the apostle was, that they might have the love of God in their
hearts, and "the patience of Christ;" that is, the same patience which
Christ evinced in his trials. They were then suffering affliction and
persecution. They needed patience, that they might endure their trials
in a proper manner. It was natural for the apostle to refer them to the
Saviour, the great example of patience, and to pray that they might have
the same which he had. That it does not mean that they were to wait
patiently for the appearing of Christ, as our translation seems to
imply, is quite clear, because the apostle had just been showing them
that he would not appear until after a long series of events had
occurred.

[2 Thessalonians 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">th2 3:6</span></span>

Now we command you, brethren - The apostle now [Th2
3:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006) turns to an important subject -
the proper method of treating those who were idle and disorderly in the
church. In the previous Epistle he had adverted to this subject, but in
the mild language of exhortation. When he wrote that Epistle he was
aware that there were some among them who were disposed to be idle, and
he had tenderly exhorted them "to be quiet, and to mind their own
business, and to work with their own hands;" [Th1
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#011). But it seems the exhortation,
and the example of Paul himself when there [Th1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#009), had not been effectual in
inducing them to be industrious. It became, therefore, necessary to use
the strong language of command, as he does here, and to require that if
they would not work, the church should withdraw from them. What was the
original cause of their idleness, is not known. There seems no reason,
however, to doubt that it was much increased by their expectation that
the Saviour would soon appear, and that the world would soon come to an
end. If this was to be so, of what use would it be to labor? Why strive
to accumulate property with reference to the wants of a family, or to a
day of sickness, or old age? Why should a man build a house that was
soon to be burnt up, or why buy a farm which he was soon to leave? The
effect of the expectation of the speedy appearing of the Lord Jesus has
always been to induce men to neglect their worldly affairs, and to lead
idle lives. Man, naturally disposed to be idle, wants the stimulus of
hope that he is laboring for the future welfare of himself, for his
family, or for society, nor will he labor if he believes that the
Saviour is about to appear.

In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ - see the notes on [Co1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#004). "That ye withdraw yourselves;"
see the notes on [Ti1 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#005). This is the
true notion of Christian discipline. It is not primarily that of cutting
a man off, or denouncing him, or excommunicating him; it is that of
withdrawing from him. We cease to have fellowship with him. We do not
regard him any longer as a Christian brother. We separate from him. We
do not seek to affect him in any other respect; we do not injure his
name or standing as a man, or hold him up to reprobation; we do not
follow him with denunciation or a spirit of revenge; we simply cease to
recognise him as a Christian brother, when he shows that he is no longer
worthy to be regarded as such. We do not deliver him over to the civil
arm; we do not inflict any positive punishment on him; we leave him
unmolested in all his rights as a citizen, a man, a neighbor, a husband,
a father, and simply say that he is no longer one of us as a Christian.
How different is this from excommunication, as it has been commonly
understood! How different from the anathemas fulminated by the papacy,
and the delivering of the heretic over to the civil power!

From every brother that walketh disorderly - compare the notes, [Co1
5:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#011). A "disorderly walk" denotes
conduct that is in any way contrary to the rules of Christ. The proper
idea of the word used here (ἀτάκτως ataktōs), is that of soldiers who do
not keep the ranks; who are regardless of order; and then who are
irregular in any way. The word would include any violation of the rules
of Christ on any subject.

And not after the tradition which ye received of us - According to the
doctrine which we delivered to you; see the notes on [Th2
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#015). This shows that by the word
"tradition" the apostle did not mean unwritten doctrines handed down
from one to another, for he evidently alludes to what he had himself
taught them, and his direction is not that that should be handed down by
them, but that they should obey it.

[2 Thessalonians 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">th2 3:7</span></span>

For yourselves know how ye ought to follow us - You know what you should
do in order to imitate us.

For we behaved not ourselves disorderly among you - See the notes on
[Th1 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#010).

[2 Thessalonians 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">th2 3:8</span></span>

Neither did we eat any man's bread for nought - We were not supported in
idleness at the expense of others. We gave a fair equivalent for all
that we received, and, in fact, labored for our own support; see the
notes on [Th1 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#009).

[2 Thessalonians 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">th2 3:9</span></span>

Not because we have not power ... - See the notes on [Co1
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#006), [Co1
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#012), [Co1
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#014).

[2 Thessalonians 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">th2 3:10</span></span>

For even when we were with you, this we commanded you - It would seem
from this that the evil of which the apostle here complains had begun to
operate even when he was with them. There were those who were disposed
to be idle, and who needed the solemn command of an apostle to induce
them to labor.

That if any would not work, neither should he eat - That is, at the
public expense. They should not be supported by the church. This was a
maxim among the Jews (see Wetstein, in loc.), and the same sentiment may
be found in Homer, Demosthenes, and Pythagoras; see Grotius, in loc. The
maxim is founded in obvious justice, and is in accordance with the great
law under which our Creator has placed us; [Gen
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019). That law, in the circumstances,
was benevolent, and it should be our aim to carry it out in reference to
ourselves and to others. The law here laid down by the apostle extends
to all who are able to work for a living, and who will not do it, and
binds us not to contribute to their support if they will not labor for
it. It should be regarded as extending:

\(1\) to the members of a church - who, though poor, should not be
supported by their brethren, unless they are willing to work in any way
they can for their own maintenance.

\(2\) to those who beg from door to door, who should never be assisted
unless they are willing to do all they can do for their own support. No
one can be justified in assisting a lazy man. In no possible
circumstances are we to contribute to foster indolence. A man might as
properly help to maintain open vice.

[2 Thessalonians 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">th2 3:11</span></span>

For we hear - It is not known in what way this was made known to Paul,
whether by Timothy, or by some other one. He had no doubt of its truth,
and he seems to have been prepared to believe it the more readily from
what he saw when he was among them.

Which walk disorderly - See the notes, [Th2
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006).

But are busy-bodies - Compare the [Ti1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#013) note; [Pe1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#015) note. That is, they meddled with
the affairs of others - a thing which they who have nothing of their own
to busy themselves about will be very likely to do. The apostle had seen
that there was a tendency to his when he was in Thessalonica, and hence
he had commanded them to "do their own business;" [Th1
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#011). The injunction, it seems, had
availed little, for there is no class of persons who will heed good
counsel so little as those who have a propensity to intermeddle with the
affairs of others. One of the indispensable things to check this is,
that each one should have enough to do himself; and one of the most
pestiferous of all persons is he who has nothing to do but to look after
the affairs of his neighbors. In times of affliction and want, we should
be ready to lend our aid. At other times, we should feel that he can
manage his own affairs as well as we can do it for him; or if he cannot,
it is his business, not ours. The Greek word used occurs only here, and
in [Ti1 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#013); compare the notes on
[Phi 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#004).

[2 Thessalonians 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">th2 3:12</span></span>

Now them that are such we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus ... - A
more solemn command and appeal to do what he had before enjoined on all
of them; [Th1 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#011); see the notes on
that verse.

[2 Thessalonians 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">th2 3:13</span></span>

But ye, brethren, be not weary in well-doing - Margin, "faint not." The
Greek means, properly, to turn out a coward; then to be faint-hearted,
to despond. The idea is, that they were not to be discouraged from doing
good to the truly worthy and deserving by the idleness and improper
conduct of some who asked their assistance. They were, indeed, shiftless
and worthless. They would not labor; they spent their time in
intermeddling with the concerns of their neighbors, and they depended
for their support on the charity of others. The tendency of this, as all
persons feel who have ever been applied to by such persons for aid, is,
to indispose us to do good to any. We almost insensibly feel that all
who ask for aid are of the same character; or, not being able to
discriminate, we close our hands alike against all. Against this the
apostle would guard us, and he says that though there may be many such
persons, and though we may find it difficult to distinguish the worthy
from the unworthy, we should not become so disheartened as not to give
at all. Nor should we be weary though the applications for assistance
are frequent. They are indeed frequent. God designs that they should be.
But the effect should not be to dishearten us, or to make us weary in
well-doing, but to fill us with gratitude - for it is a privilege to be
permitted to do good. It is the great distinguishing characteristic of
God that he always does good. It was that which marked the character of
the Redeemer, that he "went about doing good;" and whenever God gives us
the opportunity and the means of doing good, it should be to us an
occasion of special thanksgiving. A man ought to become "weary" of
everything else sooner than of evincing benevolence; compare the notes
on [Gal 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010).

[2 Thessalonians 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">th2 3:14</span></span>

And if any man obey not our word by this epistle - Margin, "or signify
that man by an epistle." According to the marginal reading this would
mean "signify, mark out, or designate that man to me by an epistle." The
difference is merely whether we unite the words "by the epistle" with
what goes before, or what follows. The Greek would admit of either
construction (Winer, p. 93), but it seems to me that the construction in
the text is the correct one, because:

\(1\) the requirement was to proceed to discipline such a man by
withdrawing from him;

\(2\) in order to do this it was not necessary that the case should be
made known to Paul, for there was no supposable difficulty in it, and
the effect would be only needless delay;

\(3\) Paul regarded the right of discipline as residing in the church
itself, and did not require that cases should be referred to him to
determine; see the notes on [Co1
5:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#002).

\(4\) though the Greek will admit of either construction, yet it rather
favors this; see Oldhhausen, in loc. Note that man. The word here used,
means to mark; to sign; to note with marks; and the idea is, set such a
mark upon him that he shall be shunned; that is, withdraw all Christian
fellowship from him.

And have no company with him - The Greek word here means, to mix up
together; then to mingle together with; to have contact with. The idea
is that they were not to mingle with him as a Christian brother, or as
one of their own number. They were not to show that they regarded him as
a worthy member of the church, or as having a claim to its privileges.
The extent of their discipline was, that they were to withdraw from him;
see the [Th2 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006) note, and [Mat
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#017) note; compare [Jo2
1:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#010).

[2 Thessalonians 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">th2 3:15</span></span>

Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother - This
shows the true spirit in which discipline is to be administered in the
Christian church. We are not to deal with a man as an adversary over
whom we are to seek to gain a victory, but as an erring brother - a
brother still, though he errs. There was necessity for this caution.
There is great danger that when we undertake the work of discipline we
shall forget that he who is the subject of it is a brother, and that we
shall regard and treat him as an enemy. Such is human nature. We set
ourselves in array against him. We cut him off as one who is unworthy to
walk with us. We triumph over him, and consider him at once as an enemy
of the church, and as having lost all claim to its sympathies. We
abandon him to the tender mercies of a cold and unfeeling world, and let
him take his course. Perhaps we follow him with anathemas, and hold him
up as unworthy the confidence of mankind. Now all this is entirely
unlike the method and aim of discipline as the New Testament requires.
There all is kind, and gentle, though firm; the offender is a man and a
brother still; he is to be followed with tender sympathy and prayer, and
the hearts and the arms of the Christian brotherhood are to be open to
receive him again when he gives any evidence of repenting.

[2 Thessalonians 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">th2 3:16</span></span>

Now the Lord of peace - The Lord who alone can impart peace; see the
[Rom 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#033) note; [Co1
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033) note; [Heb
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#020) note; [Joh
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027) note.

[2 Thessalonians 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">th2 3:17</span></span>

The salutation of Paul with mine own hand; - See the notes, [Co1
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#021). "Which is the token in every
epistle." Greek: "sign." That is, this signature is a sign or proof of
the genuineness of the epistle; compare the notes on [Gal
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#011).

So I write - Referring, probably, to some mark or method which Paul had
of signing his name, which was well known, and which would easily be
recognized by them.

[2 Thessalonians 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">th2 3:18</span></span>

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all; - See the notes,
[Rom 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020).

From the subscription to this Epistle, it purports to have been "written
from Athens." This is probably incorrect, as there is reason to think
that it was written from Corinth. See the introduction. At all events,
this subscription is of no authority. See the notes at the end of the
Epistles to the Romans and 1 Corinthians.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Introduction](ti1000)

</div>
