<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Thessalonians Index](th2)  
  [Previous](th1005)  [Next](th2001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Thessalonians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001)

[2 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th2 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to 2 Thessalonians

For a general view of Thessalonica: of the establishment of the church
there; of the character of the church, and of the design for which the
apostle addressed these letters to it, see the introduction to the First
Epistle.

This Epistle appears to have been written soon after the First Epistle,
and from the same place - Corinth. See the introduction to the First
Epistle, 3. The proof of this indeed is not certain, because there are
no marks of time or place in the Epistle by which these points can be
determined. The probability rests upon these grounds:

\(1\) That the same persons - Paul, Silas, and Timothy - are associated
in both Epistles, and are mentioned as being together at the time when
they were written [Th1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001); [Th2
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001). However, since there is reason to
believe that they did not continue long together, it is to be presumed
that one Epistle was written soon after the other.

\(2\) Paul refers to an error which had grown up, apparently in
consequence of a misunderstanding of his First Epistle [Th2
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001), an error which he regarded as
of great magnitude, and which was producing very unhappy results [Th2
3:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#011), and it was natural that he
should hasten to correct that error as soon as possible.

\(3\) there is some probability, as Benson has remarked, that the
Epistle was written before the troubles came upon him at Corinth under
the administration of Gallio [Act
18:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#012), and yet that he saw that the
storm was approaching, and hints at it in [Th2
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#002), "And that we may be delivered
from unreasonable and wicked men." If so, this Epistle was written only
a few months at the most after the First Epistle. We may regard the
evidence, therefore, as sufficiently clear, that this Epistle was
written at Corinth sense time during the latter part of a.d. 53, or the
beginning of a.d. 54.

There is little doubt as to the design for which it was written. Either
by a false interpretation of his former Epistle, or by an epistle forged
in his name and sent to them, the opinion had become prevalent in the
church at Thessalonica that the Saviour was about to appear, and that
the end of the world was at hand; see [Th2
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#002), compare Hug's Introduction,
section 94, and Stuart's Notes on the same passage, pp. 741ff. Correct
this impression was the leading purpose of this Epistle. Some people had
become alarmed, and were suffering from unnecessary apprehension [Th2
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#002); and some, under the natural
belief that labor then was useless, and that property was of no value,
had given up all attention to their worldly concerns [Th2
3:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#010); and it was of the utmost
importance that the error should be corrected. This was done in this
Second Epistle, and in doing it. As usual, Paul intermingled several
other topics of importance, adapted to the condition of those to whom he
wrote.

This Epistle, though short, has great permanent value, and is
indispensable to a proper understanding of the great doctrine of the
Second Advent of the Redeemer. It was written, indeed, to correct an
error in a single church, and at a particular time, but history has
shown there is a tendency toward that same error in all ages, and that
there was need of some permanent inspired statement to check it. It was
inferred from the First Epistle of Paul to the Thessalonians, that he
meant to teach that the day of judgment was not far off. If this Second
Epistle had not been written to correct that false interpretation, and
to show what Paul's true belief was, it would have been charged to Paul
that he was mistaken, and then the inference would have been naturally
made that all the prophecies respecting that event were false! The
distance between this and absolute infidelity, it is easy to see, is
very small. Paul, by his prompt explanation, arrested that danger, and
showed that he intended to teach no such doctrine as had been drawn from
his first letter to them. There this Epistle is of importance to show:

\(1\) that the apostle did not believe, or mean to teach, that the end
of the world was very near. There are many expressions, indeed, which,
like those in First Thessalonians, would seeM to imply that the apostle
held that belief, but the explanation of an inspired apostle of his own
sentiments at the time, settled that matter. No one now has a right to
charge that belief on him, or on others who then used the same language.
No one can pretend that they held the opinion that the end of the world
was very near. There is no stronger language on that subject in any of
their writings than occurs in the First Epistle to the Thessalonians,
and Paul in the Second Epistle expressly says that he held no such
opinion, and meant to teach no such thing.

\(2\) this Epistle is a standing rebuke of the kind of interpretation
which attempts to determine the time when the Saviour will come, and of
all those theories which represent "the day of Christ as at hand." The
declarations in the Scriptures are positive and abundant that the time
of his appearing is not made known to mortals (Notes on [Act
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007)), and it is not possible now to
make out a stronger argument to prove that that time is near, than could
have been made out from the First Epistle to the Thessalonians; and yet
Paul deemed it necessary to write them a second letter, expressly to
show them that the interpretation which they put upon his language was
unauthorized. The truth is, that it was not the design of God to make
known to human beings the exact time when the Lord Jesus will return for
judgment; and all attempts since the time of Paul to settle that have
failed, and all will doubtless continue to fall, as they always have
done.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians Chapter 1](th2001)

</div>
