<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1.md)  
  [Previous](ti1005)  [Next](ti2000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#001.md)

[1 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti1 6:0</span></span>

Analysis Of The Chapter

This chapter 1 Tim. 6 embraces the following subjects of counsel and
exhortation:

\(1\) The kind of instruction which was to be given to servants; [Ti1
6:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#001.md). They were to treat their
masters with all proper respect, [Ti1
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#001.md); if their masters were Christians,
they were, on that account, to serve them with the more fidelity, [Ti1
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#002.md); and any opposite kind of teaching
would tend only to stir up strife and produce dissatisfaction and
contention, and could proceed only from a proud and self-confident
heart.

\(2\) the advantage of piety and of a contented mind; [Ti1
6:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#006.md). The argument for this is, that
we brought nothing into the world, and can carry nothing out; that our
essential needs here are food and raiment, and that, having enough to
make us comfortable, we should be content.

\(3\) the evils of a desire to be rich [Ti1
6:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#009.md) - evils seen in the temptations
to which it leads; the passions which it fosters, and the danger to
religion itself.

\(4\) an exhortation to Timothy, as a minister of religion, to pursue
higher and nobler objects; [Ti1
6:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#011.md). He was:

\(a\) to avoid these worldly things; he was.

\(b\) to pursue nobler objects. He was to follow after righteousness,
and to fight the good fight of faith. To do this, he was to be
encouraged by the assurance that the Great and only Potentate would, in
due time, place the crown on his head.

\(5\) the duty of those who were rich - for it is supposed that some
Christians will be rich - either by inheritance, or by prosperous
business; [Ti1 6:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017.md). They are:

\(a\) not to be proud;

\(b\) nor to trust in their riches so as to forget their dependence on
God;

\(c\) to do good with their property; and,

\(d\) to make their wealth the means of securing eternal life.

\(6\) a solemn charge to Timothy to observe these things, and not to be
turned from them by any of the arguments and objections of pretended
science; [Ti1 6:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020.md).

[1 Timothy 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 6:1</span></span>

Let as many servants - On the word here rendered "servants" - δοῦλοι
douloi - see the notes on [Eph 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005.md).
The word is that which was commonly applied to a slave, but it is so
extensive in its signification as to be applicable to any species of
servitude, whether voluntary or involuntary. If slavery existed in
Ephesus at the time when this Epistle was written, it would be
applicable to slaves; if any other kind of servitude existed, the word
would be equally applicable to that. There is nothing in the word itself
which essentially limits it to slavery; examine [Mat
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#027.md); [Mat
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#027.md); [Mar
10:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#044.md); [Luk
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#029.md); [Joh
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015.md); [Act
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#018.md); [Act
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#029.md); [Act
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#017.md); [Rom
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001.md); [Co2
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#005.md); [Jde
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#001.md); [Rev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md); [Rev
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#020.md); [Rev
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003.md). The addition of the phrase "under
the yoke," however, shows undoubtedly that it is to be understood here
of slavery.

As are under the yoke - On the word yoke, see the notes on [Mat
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029.md). The phrase here properly
denotes slavery, as it would not be applied to any other species of
servitude; see [Lev 26:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#013.md); Dem. 322,
12. ζεῦγος δουλοσύνης zeugos doulosunēs. Robinson's Lexicon. It
sometimes denotes the bondage of the Mosaic law as being a severe and
oppressive burden; [Act 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#010.md); [Gal
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001.md). It may be remarked here that the
apostle did not regard slavery as a light or desirable thing. He would
not have applied this term to the condition of a wife or of a child.

Count their own masters worthy of all honour - Treat them with all
proper respect. They were to manifest the right spirit themselves,
whatever their masters did; they were not to do anything that would
dishonor religion. The injunction here would seem to have particular
reference to those whose masters were not Christians. In the following
verse, the apostle gives particular instructions to those who had pious
masters. The meaning here is, that the slave ought to show the Christian
spirit toward his master who was not a Christian; he ought to conduct
himself so that religion would not be dishonored; he ought not to give
his master occasion to say that the only effect of the Christian
religion on the mind of a servant was to make him restless,
discontented, dissatisfied, and disobedient. In the humble and trying
situation in which he confessedly was - under the yoke of bondage - he
ought to evince patience, kindness, and respect for his master, and as
long as the relation continued he was to be obedient. This command,
however, was by no means inconsistent with his desiring his freedom, and
securing it, if the opportunity presented itself; see the notes on [Co1
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#021.md); compare, on the passage before
us, the [Eph 6:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005.md) notes, and [Pe1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#018.md) note.

That the name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed - That religion
be not dishonored and reproached, and that there may be no occasion to
say that Christianity tends to produce discontent and to lead to
insurrection. If the effect of religion had been to teach all who were
servants that they should no longer obey their masters, or that they
should rise upon them and assert their freedom by violence, or that
their masters were to be treated with indignity on account of their
usurped rights over others, the effect would have been obvious. There
would have been a loud and united outcry against the new religion, and
it could have made no progress in the world. Instead of this,
Christianity taught the necessity of patience, and meekness, and
forbearance in the endurance of all wrong - whether from private
individuals [Mat 5:39-41](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039.md); [Co1
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#007.md), or under the oppressions and
exactions of Nero [Rom 13:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001.md), or
amidst the hardships and cruelties of slavery. These peaceful
injunctions, however, did not demonstrate that Christ approved the act
of him "that smote on the one cheek," or that Paul regarded the
government of Nero as a good government, - and as little do they prove
that Paul or the Saviour approved of slavery.

[1 Timothy 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti1 6:2</span></span>

And they that have believing masters - Masters who are Christians. It is
clear from this, that Paul supposed that, at that time, and under those
circumstances, a man might become a Christian who had slaves under him.
How long he might continue to hold his fellow-men in bondage, and yet be
a Christian, is, however, quite a different question. It is quite clear,
from the New Testament, as well as from facts now, that God may convert
people when pursuing any kind of wickedness. The effect of religion,
however, in all cases, will be to lead them to cease to do wrong. It is
by no means improbable that many of those who had owned slaves, in
accordance with the prevailing custom in the Roman empire, may have been
converted - for the fact that a man has been living a life of sin does
not prevent the possibility of his conversion. There is no evidence that
Paul refers here to any who had bought slaves after they were converted;
nor is there any intimation of any such transaction among Christians in
the New Testament. Nor is there any intimation that he regarded it as
right and best that they should continue to hold slaves; nor that he
would approve their making arrangements to persevere in this as a
permanent institution.

Nor is it to be fairly inferred from this passage that he meant to teach
that they might continue this, and yet be entitled to all the respect
and confidence due to the Christian name, or be regarded as maintaining
a good standing in the church. Whatever may be true on these points, the
passage before us only proves that Paul considered that a man who was a
slaveholder might be converted, and be spoken of as a "believer," or a
Christian. Many have been converted in similar circumstances, as many
have in the practice of all other kinds of iniquity. What was their duty
after their conversion, was another question and what was the duty of
their "servants" or slaves, was another question still. It is only this
latter question which the apostle is here considering.

Not despise them, because they are brethren - Not treat them with any
want of the respect which is due to their station. The word here used
sometimes denotes "to neglect," or, "not to care for;" [Mat
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024.md); [Luk
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#013.md). Here it is not necessary to
suppose that it denotes actual contempt, but only that want of respect
which might possibly spring up in the mind if not well instructed, or
not on its guard, among those who were servants or slaves. It was to be
apprehended that the effect of the master and the slave having both
embraced religion, would be to produce in the mind of the servant a want
of respect and deference for his master. This danger was to be
apprehended from the following causes:

\(1\) Christianity taught that all people were made of "one blood," and
were by nature equal; [Act 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026.md). It
was natural, therefore for the slave to infer that by nature he was
equal to his master, and it would be easy to pervert this truth to make
him disrespectful and insubordinate.

\(2\) they were equal to them as Christians. Christianity taught them
that they were all "brethren" in the Lord, and that there was no
distinction before God. It might be natural to infer from this, that all
distinctions in society were to be abolished, and that, in all respects,
the slave was to regard himself as on a level with his master.

\(3\) some, who did not well understand the nature of Christianity, or
who might have been disposed to cause trouble, may have taken advantage
of the undeniable truths about the equality of people by nature and by
redemption, to produce discontent on the part of the slave. They may
have endeavored to embitter the feelings of the slaves toward their
masters who held them in bondage. The effect, it is easy to see, may
have been to lead those who were in a state of servitude to manifest
open and marked disrespect. In opposition to this, the apostle would
have Timothy teach that Christianity did not rudely assail the existing
institutions of society, and especially did not teach those who were in
subordinate ranks to be disrespectful to these above them.

But rather do them service - That is, serve them with more cheerfulness
and alacrity than they did before the master was converted; or serve
them with the more cheerfulness because they were Christians. The
reasons for this were, because the master was now more worthy of
affectionate regard, and because the servant might look for better
treatment at his hands; compare notes on [Eph
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#006.md).

Because they are faithful - That is, "because" they are "believers," or
are Christians - πιστοί pistoi; the same word which in the beginning of
the verse is rendered "believing." It does not here mean that they were
"faithful" to their servants or their God, but merely that they were
Christians.

And beloved - Probably, "beloved of God;" for so the word is often used.
As they are the friends of God, they who are servants should show them
the more respect. The idea is, simply, that one whom God loves should be
treated with more respect than if he were not thus beloved; or, a good
man deserves more respect than a wicked man. In all the relations of
life, we should respect those above us the more in proportion to the
excellency of their character.

Partakers of the benefit - That is, the benefit which the gospel imparts
- for so the connection requires us to understand it. It cannot mean, as
many have supposed, that they were "partakers of the benefit of the
labors of the servant," or enjoyed the fruits of their labors - for how
could this be a reason for their treating them with the more respect? It
would be rather a reason for treating them with less respect, because
they were living on the avails of unrequited toil. But the true reason
assigned is that the master had been, by the grace of God, permitted to
participate in the same benefits of salvation as the servant; he had
received, like him, the pardon of sin, and he was to be regarded as a
fellow-heir of the grace of life. The expression here might be rendered,
"they are partakers of, or are devoted to, the good cause." Robinson's
Lexicon. The argument is, that they were not infidels, or strangers to
religion, or those who would try to hinder the progress of that which
was dear to the heart of the servant, but were united with them in that
same good work; they participated in the blessings of the same
salvation, and they were really endeavoring to further the interests of
religion. There ought, therefore, to be the more respect shown to them,
and the more cheerful service rendered them.

[1 Timothy 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti1 6:3</span></span>

If any man teach otherwise - Any otherwise than that respect should be
shown to masters; and that a more cheerful and ready service should be
rendered because they were Christians. It is evidently implied here that
some might be disposed to inculcate such views of religion as would
produce discontent and a spirit of insubordination among those who were
held to servitude. Who they were is not known, nor is it known what
arguments they would employ to do it. It would seem probable that the
arguments which would be employed would be such as these: that God made
all people equal; that all had been redeemed by the same blood; that all
true Christians were fellow-heirs of heaven; and that it was wrong to
hold a Christian brother in bondage, etc. From undeniable principles it
would seem that they drew the inference that slaves ought at once to
assert their freedom; that they should refuse obedience to their
masters; and that the tendency of their teaching was, instead of
removing the evil by the gradual and silent influence of Christian
principles, to produce discontent and insurrection. From some of the
expressions here used by the apostle, as characteristic of these
teachers, it would seem to be probable that these persons were Jews.
They were people given to subtle disputations, and those who doted about
questions and verbal disputes, and who were intent on gain, supposing
that that which conduced to mere worldly prosperity was of course
religion. These characteristics apply well to Jewish teachers.

And consent not to wholesome words - Words conducing to a healthful
state of the church; that is, doctrines tending to produce order and a
due observance of the proprieties of life; doctrines leading to
contentment, and sober industry, and the patient endurance of evils.

Even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ - The doctrines of the Saviour -
all of which tended to a quiet life, and to a patient endurance of
wrongs.

And to the doctrine which is according to godliness - Which tends to
produce piety or religion; that is, the doctrine which would be most
favorable to an easy and rapid propagation of the gospel. The idea seems
to be, that such a state of insubordination and discontent as they would
produce, would be unfavorable to the promotion of religion. Who can
doubt it?

[1 Timothy 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti1 6:4</span></span>

He is proud - That is, he is lifted up with his fancied superior
acquaintance with the nature of religion. The Greek verb means,
properly, "to smoke, to fume;" and then to be inflated, to "be
conceited, etc." The idea is, that he has no proper knowledge of the
nature of the gospel, and yet he values himself on a fancied superior
acquaintance with its principles.

Knowing nothing - Margin, "a fool." That is, that he does not understand
the nature of religion as he supposes he does. His views in regard to
the relation of masters and servants, and to the bearing of religion on
that relation, show that he does not understand the genius of
Christianity. The apostle expresses this in strong language; by saying
that he knows nothing; see the notes on [Co1
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#002.md).

But doting - Margin, "sick." The Greek word - νοσέω noseō - means
properly to be sick; then to languish, to pine after. The meaning here
is, that such persons had a sickly or morbid desire for debates of this
kind. They had not a sound and healthy state of mind on the subject of
religion. They were like a sickly man, who has no desire for solid and
healthful food, but for that which will gratify a diseased appetite.
They desired not sound doctrine, but controversies about unimportant and
unsubstantial matters - things that bore the same relation to important
doctrines which the things that a sick man pines after do to substantial
food.

Questions and strifes of words - The Jews abounded much in disputes of
this sort, and it would seem probable that the persons here referred to
were Jewish teachers; compare [Ti1
1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#006.md) notes, and [Act
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#015.md) note.

Whereof cometh envy - The only fruit of which is to produce envy. That
is, the appearance of superior knowledge; the boast of being profoundly
acquainted with religion, and the show of an ability for subtle
argumentation, would produce in a certain class envy. Envy is
uneasiness, pain, mortification, or discontent, excited by another's
prosperity, or by his superior knowledge or possessions; see the notes
on [Rom 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#029.md).

Strife - Or contentions with those who will not readily yield to their
opinions.

Railings - Harsh and abusive language toward those who will not concede
a point - a common effect of disputes, and more commonly of disputes
about small and unimportant matters, than of these which are of
magnitude. Such railings often attend disputes that arise out of nice
and subtle distinctions.

Evil surmisings - Suspicions that they are led to hold their views, not
by the love of the truth, but from sordid or worldly motives. Such
suspicions are very apt to attend an angry debate of any kind. It might
be expected especially to exist on such a question as the apostle refers
to here - the relation of a master and a slave. It is always very hard
to do justice to the motives of one who seems to us to be living in sin,
or to believe it to be possible that he acts from right motives.

[1 Timothy 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti1 6:5</span></span>

Perverse disputings - Margin, "gallings one of another." In regard to
the correct reading of this passage, see Bib. Repository, vol. iii. pp.
61, 62. The word which is here used in the Received Text - παραδιατρίβη
paradiatribē - occurs nowhere else in the New Testament. It properly
means "mis-employment;" then "idle occupation." (Robinson's Lexicon) The
verb from which this is derived means to "rub in pieces, to wear away;"
and hence the word here used refers to what was a mere "wearing away" of
time. The idea is that of employments that merely consumed time without
any advantage. The notion of contention or dispute is not necessarily
implied in this passage, but the allusion is to inquiries or discussions
that were of no practical value, but; were a mere consumption of time;
compare Koppe on the passage. The reading in the margin is derived from
the common usage of the verb "to rub," and hence our translators
attached the idea of "rubbing against" each other, or of "galling" each
other, as by rubbing. This is not, however, the idea in the Greek word.
The phrase "idle employments" would better suit the meaning of the Greek
than either of the phrases which our translators have employed.

Of men of corrupt minds - That is, of wicked hearts.

And destitute of the truth - Not knowing the truth; or not having just
views of truth. They show that they have no correct acquaintance with
the Christian system.

Supposing that gain is godliness - That that which contributes to an
increase of property is of course true religion; or that it is proper to
infer that any course which contributes to worldly prosperity must be
sanctioned by religion. They judge of the consistency of any course with
religion by its tendency to promote outward prosperity. This they have
exalted into a maxim, and this they make the essential thing in
religion. But how could any man do this? And what connection would this
have with the subject under consideration - the kind of instruction that
was to be given to servants? The meaning of the maxim seems to be, that
religion must necessarily promote prosperity by its promoting
temperance, and industry, and length of days; and that since this was
the case, it was fair to infer that anything which would not do this
could not be consistent with religion. They adopted it, therefore, as a
general rule of judging, and one in entire accordance with the wishes of
their own hearts, that any course of life that would not do this must be
contrary to the true spirit of religion. This maxim, it would seem, they
applied to the relation of the slave and his master, and as the tendency
of the system was always to keep the servant poor and in an humble
condition, they seem to have inferred that the relation was contrary to
Christianity, and hence to have excited the servant to disaffection. In
their reasoning they were not far out of the way, for it is fair to
infer that a system that tends to produce uniform poverty, and to
perpetuate a degraded condition in society, is contrary to the genius of
Christianity. They were wrong:

\(1\) in making this a general maxim by which to judge of everything in
religion; and,

\(2\) in so applying it as to produce insubordination and discontent in
the minds of servants toward their masters; and,

\(3\) in supposing that everything which produced gain was consistent
with religion, or that they could infallibly judge of the moral quality
of any course of life by its contributing to outward prosperity.
Religion will uniformly lead to that which conduces to prosperity, but
it does not follow that every way of making money is therefore a part of
piety. It is possible, also, that in some way they hoped for "gain" to
themselves by inculcating those principles. It may be remarked here,
that this is not an uncommon maxim practically among people - that "gain
is godliness." The whole object of life with them is to make money; the
rule by which they judge of everything is by its tendency to produce
gain; and their whole religion may be summed up in this, that they live
for gain. Wealth is the real object of pursuit; but it is often with
them cloaked under the pretence of piety. They have no more religion
than they suppose will contribute to this object; they judge of the
nature and value of every maxim by its tendency to make people
prosperous in their worldly business; they have as much as they suppose
will promote their pecuniary interest, and they sacrifice every
principle of religion which they suppose would conflict with their
earthly advancement.

From such withdraw thyself - That is, have no communion or fellowship
with them. Do not recognize them as religious teachers; do not
countenance their views. Timothy was, in no way, to show that he
regarded them as inculcating truth, or to patronize their doctrines.
From such people, as having any claim to the character of Christians,
every man should withdraw with feelings of unutterable pity and
loathing. This passage [Ti1 6:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#001.md) is
often appealed to by the advocates and apologists for slavery, to prove
that Christianity countenances that institution, and that no direct
attempt should be made by the ministers of the gospel, or other
Christians, to show the evil of the institution, and to promote its
abolition, and to prove that we have no right to interfere in any way
with what pertains to these "domestic relations." It is of importance,
therefore, in view of the exposition which has been given of the words
and phrases in the passage, to sum up the truths which it inculcates.
From it, therefore, the following lessons may be derived:

\(1\) That those who are slaves, and who have been converted to
Christianity, should not be indolent or disorderly. If their masters are
Christians, they should treat them with respect, and all the more
because they are fellow-heirs of the grace of life. If they are not
Christians, they should yet show the nature of religion on themselves,
and bear the evils of their condition with patience - showing how
religion teaches them to endure wrong. In either case, they are to be
quiet, industrious, kind, meek, respectful. This Christianity everywhere
enjoins while the relation continues, At the same time, however, it does
not forbid the slave earnestly to desire his freedom, or to use all
proper measures to obtain it; see [Co1
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#021.md).

\(2\) that the ministers of religion should not labor to produce a
spirit of discontent among slaves, or excite them to rise upon their
masters. This passage would undoubtedly forbid all such interference,
and all agencies or embassies sent among slaves themselves to inflame
their minds against their masters, in view of their wrongs; to put arms
into their hands; or to induce them to form combinations for purposes of
insurrection. It is not so much in the true spirit of Christianity to go
to those who are wronged, as to those who do the wrong. The primary
message in such cases is to the latter; and when it does go to the
former, it is to teach them to be patient under their wrongs, to evince
the Christian spirit there, and to make use only of those means which
are consistent with the gospel to free themselves from the evils under
which they suffer. At the same time, nothing in this passage, or in any
other part of the New Testament, forbids us to go to the master himself,
and to show him the evil of the system, and to enjoin upon him to let
the oppressed go free.

Nothing in this passage can be reasonably construed as teaching that an
appeal of the most earnest and urgent kind may not be made to him; or
that the wrongs of the system may not be fully set before him, or that
any man or set of men may not lawfully lift up in his hearing a loud and
earnest voice in favor of the freedom of all. And in like manner there
is nothing which makes it improper that the slave himself should be put
fully in possession of that gospel which will apprize him of his rights
as a man, and as redeemed by the blood of Jesus. Every human being,
whether held in bondage or not, has a right to be made acquainted with
all the provisions and truths of that gospel, nor has any man or class
of men a right to withhold such knowledge from him. No system of things
can be right which contemplates that that gospel shall be withheld, or
under which it is necessary to withhold it in order to the perpetuity of
the system.

\(3\) the passage teaches that it is possible that a man who is a
slaveholder may become a Christian. But it does not teach that, though
he may become a Christian while he is a slaveholder, that it is proper
for him to continue this relation after he becomes such. It does not
teach that a man can be a Christian and yet go into the business of
buying and selling slaves. It does not teach that a man can be a
Christian and continue to hold others in bondage, whatever may be true
on that point. It does not teach that he ought to be considered as
maintaining a "good standing" in the church, if he continues to be a
slaveholder; and whatever may be the truth on these points, this passage
should not be adduced as demonstrating them. It settles one point only
in regard to these questions - that a case was supposable in which a
slave had a Christian master. It settles the duty of the slave in such a
case; it says nothing about the duty of the master.

\(4\) this passage does not teach that slavery is either a good thing,
or a just thing, a desirable relation in life, or an institution that
God wishes to be perpetuated on the earth. The injunctions to slaves to
be patient, meek, industrious, and respectful, no more demonstrate this,
than the command to subjects to be obedient to the laws proves that God
regarded the government of Nero as such an administration as he wished
to be perpetuated on the earth. To exhort a slave to manifest a
Christian spirit under his oppressions and wrongs, is not to justify the
system that does him wrong, nor does it prohibit us from showing to
masters that the system is contrary to the gospel, and that it ought to
be abandoned.

\(5\) this passage, therefore, furnishes no real support for slavery. It
can no more be adduced in favor of it than any exhortation to those who
are oppressed, or in any degrading situation in life, to be patient,
proves that the system which oppresses and degrades them, is a good one.
Nor does the fact that a man might be converted who was a slaveholder,
and might be spoken of as a πιστός pistos, or believer, prove that it
would be right and desirable that he should continue that relation,
anymore than the fact that Saul of Tarsus became a Christian when
engaged in persecution, proves that it would have been right for him to
continue in that business, or than the conversion of the Ephesians who
"used curious arts" [Act 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#019.md), proved
that it would have been proper for them to continue in that employment.
People who are doing wrong are converted in order to turn them from that
course of life, not to justify them in it.

[1 Timothy 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti1 6:6</span></span>

But godliness - Piety; religion. The meaning is, that real religion
should be regarded as the greatest and most valuable acquisition. "With
contentment." This word, as now used, refers to a state of mind; a calm
and satisfied feeling; a freedom from murmuring and complaining. The
idea is, that "piety, connected with a contented mind - or a mind
acquiescing in the allotments of life - is to be regarded as the real
gain." Tyndale gives substantially the same interpretation: "Godliness
is great riches, if a man be content with that he hath" Coverdale:
"Howbeit, it is of great advantage, who is so godly, and holdeth him
content with that he hath." The word which is used here - αὐτάρκεια
autarkeia - means, properly, "self-sufficency," and is used here, in a
good sense, to denote a mind satisfied with its lot. If there be true
religion, united with its proper accompaniment, peace of mind, it is to
be regarded as the true riches. The object of the apostle seems to be,
to rebuke those who supposed that property constituted everything that
was worth living for. He tells them, therefore, that the true gain, the
real riches which we ought to seek, is religion, with a contented mind.
This does more to promote happiness than wealth can ever do, and this is
what should be regarded as the great object of life.

[1 Timothy 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti1 6:7</span></span>

For we brought nothing into this world ... - A sentiment very similar to
this occurs in [Job 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021.md) - and it
would seem probable that the apostle had that passage in his eye; see
the notes on that passage. Numerous expressions of this kind occur in
the classic writers; see Wetstein, in loc., and Pricaeus, in loc. in the
Critici Sacri. Of the truth of what is here said, there can be nothing
more obvious. It is apparent to all. We bring no property with us into
the world - no clothing, no jewels, no gold - and it is equally clear
that we can take nothing with us when we leave the earth. Our coming
into the world introduces no additional property to that which the race
before possessed, and our going from the world removes none that we may
have helped the race to accumulate. This is said by the apostle as an
obvious reason why we should be contented if our actual needs are
supplied - for this is really all that we need, and all that the world
is toiling for.

We can carry nothing out - compare [Psa
49:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#017.md). "For when he - the rich man -
dieth, he shall carry nothing away; his glory shall not descend after
him."

[1 Timothy 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti1 6:8</span></span>

And having food and raiment - Food and raiment, here, seem to be used to
denote supplies for our needs in general. It is not uncommon to denote
the whole by a part, and, as these are the principal things which we
really need, and without which life could not be sustained, the apostle
uses the phrase to denote all that is really necessary for us. We cannot
suppose that he would forbid a desire of a comfortable habitation, or of
the means of knowledge, or of conveniences for worshipping God, etc. The
idea is, that having those flyings which meet the actual necessities of
our nature, and save us from distress, we should not strive after
"uncertain riches," or make wealth the object of our anxious pursuit;
compare notes on [Phi 4:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#011.md).

[1 Timothy 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti1 6:9</span></span>

But they that will be rich - Further to enforce the duty of contentment,
the apostle refers to some of the evils which necessarily attend a
desire to be rich. Those evils have been so great and uniform in all
ages, and are so necessary accompaniments of that desire, that, even
amidst many inconveniences which may attend the opposite condition, we
should he contented with our lot. Indeed, if we could see all, it would
only be necessary to see the evils which the desire of wealth produces
in the world, to make us contented with a most lowly condition of life.
Perhaps nothing more would be necessary to make a poor man satisfied
with his lot, and grateful for it, than to be acquainted with the
perplexities and cares of a rich man. There is more emphasis to be
placed on the word will, here, in the phrase, "will be rich," than might
be supposed from our translation. It is not the sign of the future
tense, but implies an actual "purpose" or "design" to become rich - οἱ
βουλόμενοι hoi boulomenoi. The reference is to those in whom this
becomes the object of earnest desire, and who lay their plans for it.

Fall into temptation - That is, they are tempted to do wicked things in
order to accomplish their purposes. It is extremely difficult to cherish
the desire to be rich, as the leading purpose of the soul, and to he an
honest man.

And a snare - Birds are taken in a snare, and wild beasts were formerly;
see the notes on [Job 18:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#008.md). The net
was sprung suddenly upon them, and they could not escape. The idea here
is, that they who have this desire become so entangled, that they cannot
easily escape. They become involved in the meshes of worldliness and
sin; their movements are so fettered by cares, and inordinate desires,
and by artificial needs, that they are no longer freemen. They become so
involved in these things, that they cannot well break away from them if
they would; compare [Pro 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#020.md).

And into many foolish and hurtful lusts - Desires, such as the love of
wealth creates. They are foolish - as being not such as an intelligent
and immortal being should pursue; and they are hurtful - as being
injurious to morals, to health, and to the soul. Among those desires,
are the fondness for display; for a magnificent dwelling, a train of
menials, and a splendid equipage; for sumptuous living, feasting, the
social glass, company, and riotous dissipation.

Which drown men in destruction and perdition - The word which is here
rendered, "drown" - βυθίζω buthizō - means, to "sink in the" deep, or,
"to cause to sink;" and the meaning here is, that they become submerged
as a ship that sinks. The idea of drowning is not properly that of the
apostle, but the image is that of a wreck, where a ship and all that is
in it go down together. The destruction is complete. There is a total
ruin of happiness, of virtue, of reputation, and of the soul. The ruling
desire to be rich leads on a train of follies which ruins everything
here, and hereafter. How many of the human family have thus been
destroyed!

[1 Timothy 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti1 6:10</span></span>

For the love of money is the root of all evil - That is, of all kinds of
evil. This is evidently not to be understood as literally true, for
there are evils which cannot, be traced to the love of money - the evils
growing out of ambition, and intemperance, and debasing lusts, and of
the hatred of God and of goodness. The expression here is evidently a
popular saying - "all sorts of evils grow out of the love of money."
Similar expressions often occur in the classic writers; see Wetstein, in
loc, and numerous examples quoted by Priceaus. Of the truth of this, no
one can doubt. No small part of the crimes of the world can be traced to
the love of gold. But it deserves to be remarked here, that the apostle
does not say that "money is the root of all evil," or that it is an evil
at all. It is the "love" of it which is the source of evil.

Which while some coveted after - That is, some who were professing
Christians. The apostle is doubtless referring to persons whose history
was known to Timothy, and warning him, and teaching him to warn others,
by their example.

They have erred from the faith - Margin, "been seduced." The Greek is,
they have been led astray from; that is, they have been so deceived as
to depart from the faith. The notion of deception or delusion is in the
word, and the sense is, that, deceived by the promises held out by the
prospect of wealth, they have apostatized from the faith. It is not
implied of necessity that they were ever real Christians. They have been
led off from truth and duty, and from all the hopes and joys which
religion would have imparted.

And pierced themselves through with many sorrows - With such sorrows as
remorse, and painful reflections on their folly, and the apprehension of
future wrath. Too late they see that they have thrown away the hopes of
religion for that which is at best unworthy the pursuit of an immortal
mind; which leads them on to a life of wickedness; which fails of
imparting what it promised when its pursuit is successful, and which, in
the great majority of instances, disappoints its votaries in respect to
its attainment. The word rendered "pierced themselves through" -
περιέπειραν periepeiran - occurs nowhere else in the New Testament, and
is a word whose force and emphasis cannot be well expressed in a
translation. It is from πείρω peirō, and is made more emphatic by the
addition of the preposition περι peri. The word πείρω peirō, means,
properly, "to pierce through from one end to another," and is applied to
meat that is "pierced through" by the spit when it is to be roasted
(Passow); then it means to pierce through and through. The addition of
the preposition περι peri to the word, conveys the idea of doing this
"all round;" of piercing everywhere. It was not a single thrust which
was made, but they are gashed all round with penetrating wounds. Such is
the effect on those who cast off religion for the sake of gold. None can
avoid these consequences who do this. Every man is in the hands of a
holy and just God, and sooner or later he must feel the effects of his
sin and folly.

[1 Timothy 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti1 6:11</span></span>

But thou, O man of God, flee these things - These allurements of wealth,
and these sad consequences which the love of gold produces.

And follow after righteousness, ... - Make these the grand object of
your pursuit. On the virtues here enumerated, see the notes on [Gal
5:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022.md).

[1 Timothy 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti1 6:12</span></span>

Fight the good fight of faith - The noble conflict in the cause of
religion; see the notes on [Eph
6:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010.md); compare notes on [Co1
9:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#026.md). The allusion is to the
contests at the Grecian games.

Lay hold on eternal life - As the crown of victory that is held out to
you. Seize this as eagerly as the competitors at the Grecian games laid
hold on the prize; see the notes on [Co1
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#025.md).

Whereunto thou art also called - That is, by the Spirit of God, and by
the very nature of your profession. God does not "call" his people that
they may become rich; he does not convert them in order that they may
devote themselves to the business of gain. They are "called" to a higher
and nobler work. Yet how many professing Christians there are who seem
to live as if God had "called" them to the special business of making
money, and who devote themselves to it with a zeal and assiduity that
would do honor to such a calling, if this had been the grand object
which God had in view in converting them!

And hast professed a good profession before many witnesses - That is,
either when he embraced the Christian religion, and made a public
profession of it in the presence of the church and of the world; or when
he was solemnly set apart to the ministry; or as he in his Christian
life had been enabled publicly to evince his attachment to the Saviour.
I see no reason to doubt that the apostle may have referred to the
former, and that in early times a profession of religion may have been
openly made before the church and the world. Such a method of admitting
members to the church would have been natural, and would have been
fitted to make a deep impression on others. It is a good thing often to
remind professors of religion of the feelings which they had when they
made a profession of religion; of the fact that the transaction was
witnessed by the world; and of the promises which they then made to lead
holy lives. One of the best ways of stimulating ourselves or others to
the faithful performance of duty, is the remembrance of the vows then
made; and one of the most effectual methods of reclaiming a backslider
is to bring to his remembrance that solemn hour when he publicly gave
himself to God.

[1 Timothy 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti1 6:13</span></span>

I give thee charge in the sight God - see the notes on [Ti1
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#021.md).

Who quickeneth all things - Who gives life to all; notes on [Eph
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001.md). It is not quite clear why the
apostle refers to this attribute of God as enforcing the charge which he
here makes. Perhaps he means to say that God is the source of life, and
that as he had given life to Timothy - natural and spiritual - he had a
right to require that it should be employed in his service; and that,
if, in obedience to this charge and in the performance of his duties, he
should be required to lay down his life, he should bear in remembrance
that God had power to raise him up again. This is more distinctly urged
in [Ti2 2:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008.md).

And before Christ Jesus - As in the presence of Christ, and stimulated
by his example.

Who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession - Margin,
"profession." The same Greek word is used which in [Ti1
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#012.md) is translated "profession." The
reference is to the fact that the Lord Jesus, when standing at the bar
of Pilate who claimed to have power over his life, did not shrink from
an open avowal of the truth; [Joh
18:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#036.md). Nothing can be better fitted
to preserve our minds steadfast in the faith, and to enable us to
maintain our sacred vows in this world when allured by temptation, or
when ridiculed for our religion, than to remember the example of the
Lord Jesus; Let us place him before us as he stood at the bar of Pilate
- threatened with death in its most appalling form, and ridiculed for
the principles which he maintained; let us look on him, friendless and
alone, and see with what seriousness, and sincerity, and boldness he
stated the simple truth about himself, and we shall have one of the best
securities that we can have, that we shall not dishonor our profession.
A clear view of the example of Christ our Saviour, in those
circumstances, and a deep conviction that his eye is upon us to discern
whether we are steadfast as he was, will do more than all abstract
precepts to make us faithful to our christian calling.

[1 Timothy 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti1 6:14</span></span>

That thou keep this commandment - Referring particularly to the solemn
injunction which he had just given him, to "fight the good fight of
faith," but perhaps also including all that he had enjoined on him.

Without spot - It seems harsh, and is unusual, to apply the epithet,
"without spot" - ἄσπιλος aspilos - to a command or doctrine, and the
passage may be so construed that this may be understood as referring to
Timothy himself - "That thou keep the commandment so that thou mayest be
without spot and unrebukable." See Bloomfield, Crit. Dig., in loc. The
word here rendered "without spot," occurs in the New Testament only here
and in [Jam 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#027.md); [Pe1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019.md); [Pe2
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#014.md). It means without any "stain" or
"blemish; pure." If applied here to Timothy, it means that he should so
keep the command that there would be no stain on his moral character; if
to the doctrine, that that should be kept pure.

Unrebukable - So that there be no occasion for reproach or reproof; see
notes on [Phi 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015.md).

Until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ - see notes on [Th1
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#019.md); [Th1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016.md); [Th1
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023.md).

[1 Timothy 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti1 6:15</span></span>

Which in his times he shall show - Which God will reveal at such times
as he shall deem best. It is implied here that the time is unknown to
people; see the notes on [Act 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007.md).

Who is the blessed and only Potentate - God, who is the ruler over all.
The word used here - δυνάστης dunastēs - means one who is "mighty" [Luk
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#022.md), then a prince or ruler; compare
[Act 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#027.md). It is applied here to God
as the mighty ruler over the universe.

The King of kings - Who claims dominion over all the kings of the earth.
In [Rev 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#014.md), the same appellation is
applied to the Lord Jesus, ascribing to him universal dominion.

Lord of lords - The idea here is, that all the sovereigns of the earth
are under his sway; that none of them can prevent the accomplishment of
his purposes; and that he can direct the winding up of human affairs
when he pleases.

[1 Timothy 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ti1 6:16</span></span>

Who only hath immortality - The word here - ἀθανασία athanasia -
properly means "exemption from death," and seems to mean that God, in
his own nature, enjoys a perfect and certain exemption from death.
Creatures have immortality only as they derive it from him, and of
course are dependent on him for it. He has it by his very nature, and it
is in his case underived, and he cannot be deprived of it. It is one of
the essential attributes of his being, that he will always exist, and
that death cannot reach him; compare the expression in [Joh
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026.md), "The Father hath life in
himself," and the notes on that passage.

Dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto - Greek,
"Inhabiting inapproachable light." The light where he dwells is so
brilliant and dazzling that mortal eyes could not endure it. This is a
very common representation of the dwelling place of God. See examples
quoted in Pricaeus, in loc. Heaven is constantly represented as a place
of the most pure and brilliant light, needing not the light of the sun,
or the moon, or the stars [Rev
21:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023.md); [Rev
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#005.md), and God is represented as
dwelling in that light, surrounded by amazing and inapproachable glory
compare [Rev 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006.md); [Eze
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004.md); [Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003.md).

Whom no man hath seen nor can see - notes on [Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018.md).

To whom be honour and power everlasting. Amen - see the notes on [Rom
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036.md).

[1 Timothy 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ti1 6:17</span></span>

Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded -
One of the evils to which they are particularly exposed. The idea is,
that they should not value themselves on account of their wealth, or
look down with pride and arrogance on their inferiors. They should not
suppose that they are any better people or any nearer heaven, because
they are wealthy. Property really makes no distinction in the great
things that pertain to character and salvation, It does not necessarily
make one wise, or learned, or great, or good. In all these things, the
man who has not wealth may be vastly the superior of him who has; and
for so slight and unimportant a distinction as gold can confer, no man
should be proud. Besides, let such a man reflect that his property is
the gift of God; that he is made rich because God has chosen to arrange
things so that he should be; that it is not primarily owing to any skill
or wisdom which he has; that his property only increases his
responsibility, and that it must all soon be left, and he be as poor as
the "beggar that lies at his gate;" and he will see ample reason why he
should not be proud.

Nor trust in uncertain riches - Margin, "The uncertainty of." The margin
expresses the meaning of the Greek more accurately than the text, but
the sense is not materially varied. Riches are uncertain because they
may soon be taken away. No dependence can be placed on them in the
emergencies of life. He who is rich today, has no security that he will
be tomorrow; and if he shall be rich tomorrow, he has no certainty that
his riches will meet his necessities then. A man whose house is in
flames, or who is shipwrecked, or whose child lies dying, or who is
himself in the agonizes of death, can derive no advantage from the fact
that he is richer than other people; see notes on [Luk
12:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#016.md). That against which Paul here
directs Timothy to caution the rich, is that to which they are most
exposed. A man who is rich, is very liable to "trust" in His riches, and
to suppose that he needs nothing more; compare [Luk
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#019.md). He feels that he is not
dependent on his fellow-men, and he is very likely to feel that he is
not dependent on God. It is for this cause that God has recorded so many
solemn declarations in his word respecting the instability of riches
(compare [Pro 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#005).md), and that he is
furnishing so many instructive lessons in his providence, showing how
easily riches may suddenly vanish away.

But in the living God -

\(1\) He is able to supply all our needs, and to do for us what riches
cannot do; and,

\(2\) he never changes, or leaves those who put their trust in him. He
is able to meet our needs if in the flames, or in a storm at sea, or
when a friend dies, or when we lie down on a bed of death, or wherever
we may be in the eternal world.

Who giveth us richly all things to enjoy - The meaning of this seems to
be, that God permits us to enjoy everything. Everything in the works of
creation and redemption he has given to man for his happiness, and he
should therefore trust in him. He has not merely given wealth for the
comfort of people, but he has given everything, and he on whom so many
and so great blessings have been bestowed for his comfort, should trust
in the great Benefactor himself, and not rely merely on one of his
gifts; compare notes on [Co1 3:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#021.md).

[1 Timothy 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ti1 6:18</span></span>

That they do good - On the duty enjoined in this verse, see [Gal
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010.md) note; [Heb
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#010.md) note.

That they be rich in good works - "That their good works may be as
abundant as their riches."

Ready to distribute - To divide with others; compare [Act
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#034.md). The meaning is, that they should
be liberal, or bountiful.

Willing to communicate - Margin, or "sociable." The translation in the
text is a more correct rendering of the Greek. The idea is, that they
should be willing to share their blessings with others, so as to make
others comfortable; see the notes on [Heb
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#016.md); compare the argument of Paul in
[Co2 8:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#013.md), and the notes on that
passage.

[1 Timothy 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ti1 6:19</span></span>

Laying up in store for themselves ... - The meaning of this verse is,
that they were to make such a use of their property that it would
contribute to their eternal welfare. It might be the means of exalted
happiness and honor in heaven, if they would so use it as not to
interfere with religion in the soul, and so as to do the most good
possible. See the sentiment in this verse explained at length in the
notes on [Luk 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009.md).

[1 Timothy 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ti1 6:20</span></span>

Keep that which is committed to thy trust - All that is entrusted to
you, and to which reference has been particularly made in this Epistle.
The honor of the gospel, and the interests of religion, had been
specially committed to him; and he was sacredly to guard this holy
trust, and not suffer it to be wrested from him.

Avoiding profane and vain babblings - Greek, "Profane, empty words." The
reference is to such controversies and doctrines as tended only to
produce strife, and were not adapted to promote the edification of the
church; see the notes on [Ti1 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#004.md);
[Ti1 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#007.md).

And oppositions of science falsely so called - Religion has nothing to
fear from true science, and the minister of the gospel is not exhorted
to dread that. Real science, in all its advances, contributes to the
support of religion; and just in proportion as that is promoted will it
be found to sustain the Bible, and to confirm the claims of religion to
the faith of mankind. See this illustrated at length in Wiseman's
Lectures on the connection between science and religion. It is only
false or pretended science that religion has to dread, and which the
friend of Christianity is to avoid. The meaning here is, that Timothy
was to avoid everything which falsely laid claim to being "knowledge" or
"science." There was much of this in the world at the time the apostle
wrote; and this, more perhaps than anything else, has tended to corrupt
true religion since.

[1 Timothy 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ti1 6:21</span></span>

Which some professing - Evidently some who professed to be true
Christians. They were attracted by false philosophy, and soon, as a
consequence, were led to deny the doctrines of Christianity. This result
has not been uncommon in the world.

Have erred concerning the faith - see notes on [Ti1
1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#006.md); [Ti1
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010.md).

Grace be with thee - see the notes, [Rom
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007.md).

On the subscription at the close of this Epistle, see Intro., Section 2.
It is, like the other subscriptions at the close of the epistles, of no
authority.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy Introduction](ti2000.md)

</div>
