<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1)  
  [Previous](ti1001)  [Next](ti1003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001)

[1 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti1 2:0</span></span>

Analysis Of The Chapter

This chapter [Ti1 2:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001) is occupied
mainly in directions about the mode of conducting public worship.
Timothy had been left at Ephesus to complete the plans which the apostle
had commenced in reference to the church there, but from completing
which he had been unexpectedly prevented (see the Intro.), and it was
important to state the views which he entertained on this subject to
Timothy. It was important also that general directions on these subjects
should be given, which would be useful to the church at large. The
directions in this chapter relate to the following subjects:

I. Public prayer; [Ti1 2:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001).

\(1\) It was to be offered for all classes of people, without
distinction of rank, sect, party, country, or name, especially for all
that were in authority; [Ti1 2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001).
The reasons for this were:

\(a\) That God desired all people to be saved, and it was acceptable to
him that prayer should be offered for all; [Ti1
2:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#003).

\(b\) There is but one God over all the human race, and all are alike
his children; [Ti1 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005).

\(c\) There is one and the same Mediator between God and all people;
[Ti1 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005).

\(d\) The same atonement has been made for all; [Ti1
2:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#006).

\(2\) the way in which prayer should be offered. It should be with holy
hands, and without the intermingling of any bad passion; [Ti1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008).

II\. The duties of women; [Ti1 2:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009).

\(1\) Modesty in their demeanor and apparel; [Ti1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009).

\(2\) good works - the chief ornament of women professing piety; [Ti1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#010).

\(3\) the duty of learning from others with a gentle and quiet spirit;
[Ti1 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#011).

\(4\) the duty of a proper subordination and submission to man; [Ti1
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#012).

\(5\) the reasons for this subordination and submission are then stated.
They are:

\(a\) That Adam was first formed; [Ti1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#013).

\(b\) That the woman had been deceived, and should be willing to occupy
a subordinate place, as she was first in the transgression and was the
means of leading him into sin; [Ti1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#014).

\(6\) yet, as if to make a kind remark in favor of woman - to show that
he did not intend to teach that she was degraded and abandoned of God -
the apostle says that she would be under the divine protection, and that
in the special sorrow and peril which had been brought upon her for her
transgression, God would sustain her if she continued in faith, and
evinced the spirit of a Christian in her life; [Ti1
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#015).

[1 Timothy 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 2:1</span></span>

I exhort, therefore - Margin, "desire." The word exhort, however, better
expresses the sense of the original. The exhortation here is not
addressed particularly to Timothy, but relates to all who were called to
lead in public prayer; [Ti1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008). This
exhortation, it may be observed, is inconsistent with the supposition
that a liturgy was then in use, or with the supposition that there ever
would be a liturgy - since, in that case, the objects to be prayed for
would be prescribed. How singular would it be now for an Episcopal
bishop to "exhort" his presbyters to pray "for the President of the
United States and for all who are in authority." When the prayer is
prescribed, do they not do this as a matter of course?

First of all - That is, as the first duty to be enjoined; the thing that
is to be regarded with primary concern; compare [Luk
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#001); [Pe2
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#020). It does not mean that this was
to be the first thing in public worship in the order of time, but that
it was to be regarded as a duty of primary importance. The duty of
praying for the salvation of the whole world was not to be regarded as a
subordinate and secondary thing.

Supplications - It is not entirely easy to mark the difference in the
meaning of the words used here, and it is not essential. They all relate
to prayer, and refer only to the different parts of prayer, or to
distinct classes of thought and desire which come before the mind in
pleading for others. On the difference between the words supplications
and prayers, see notes on [Heb 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007).

Intercessions - The noun used occurs only in this place and in [Ti1
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#005), of this Epistle. The verb,
however ἐντυγχάνω entungchanō, occurs in [Act
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#004); [Rom
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#027), [Rom
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034); [Rom
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#002); [Heb
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025). See the meaning explained in the
[Rom 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026) note; [Heb
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025) note. There is one great
Intercessor between God and man, who pleads for our salvation on the
ground of what he himself has done, but we are permitted to intercede
for others, not on the ground of any merit which they or we possess, but
on the ground of the merit of the great Advocate and Intercessor. It is
an inestimable privilege to be permitted to plead for the salvation of
our fellow-men.

Giving of thanks - That is, in behalf of others. We ought to give thanks
for the mercy of God to ourselves; it is right and proper also that we
should give thanks for the goodness of God to others. We should render
praise that there is a way of salvation provided; that no one is
excluded from the offer of mercy; and that God is using so many means to
call lost sinners to himself.

For all men - Prayers should be made for all people - for all need the
grace and mercy of God; thanks should be rendered for all, for all may
be saved. Does not this direction imply that Christ died for all
mankind? How could we give thanks in their behalf if there were no mercy
for them, and no way had been provided by which they could be saved? It
may be observed here, that the direction to pray and to give thanks for
all people, showed the large and catholic nature of Christianity. It was
opposed entirely to the narrow and bigoted feelings of the Jews, who
regarded the whole Gentile world as excluded from covenant mercies, and
as having no offer of life. Christianity threw down all these barriers,
and all people are on a level; and since Christ has died for all, there
is ample ground for thanksgiving and praise in behalf of the whole human
race.

See Supplementary note, [Co2 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#014).

[1 Timothy 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti1 2:2</span></span>

For kings - On the respect due to rulers, see the notes on [Rom
13:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001). The meaning here is, that
while all people should be the subjects of prayer, those should be
particularly remembered before the throne of grace who are in authority.
The reason is, that so much depends on their character and plans; that
the security of life, liberty, and property, depends so much on them.
God has power to influence their hearts, and to incline them to what is
just and equal; and hence we should pray that a divine influence may
descend upon them. The salvation of a king is of itself of no more
importance than that of a peasant or a slave; but the welfare of
thousands may depend on him, and hence he should be made the special
subject of prayer.

All that are in authority - Margin, or, "eminent place." This does not
necessarily mean those who hold office, but refers to any of elevated
rank. The happiness of all who are under their control depends greatly
on them, and hence we should pray for them that they may be converted
people, and inclined to do that which is right.

That we may lead a quiet and peaceable life - That their hearts may be
so inclined to what is right that they may protect us in the enjoyment
of religion, and that we may not be opposed or harassed by persecution.
This does not mean that their protection would dispose us to lead quiet
and peaceful lives, but that under their protection we may be saved from
oppression on account of our religion. Christians are disposed of
themselves to be peaceful and orderly; they ask of their rulers only
that they may not be harassed in the enjoyment of their rights.

In all godliness and honesty - In the practice of all our duties toward
God, and of all the duties which we owe to people. The word godliness
here denotes piety - or the duty which we owe to God; the word honesty
refers to our duties to our fellow-men. The Christian asks from civil
rulers such protection that; he maybe enabled quietly to perform both
these classes of duties.

[1 Timothy 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti1 2:3</span></span>

For this is good and acceptable - That is, it is good and acceptable to
God that we should pray for all people. The reason is, that he desires
their salvation, and hence it is agreeable to him that we should pray
for it. If there were no provision made for their salvation, or if he
was unwilling that they should be saved, it could not be agreeable to
him that we should offer prayer for them.

[1 Timothy 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti1 2:4</span></span>

Who will have all men to be saved - That is, it is in accordance with
his nature, his feelings, his desires. The word "will" cannot be taken
here in the absolute sense, denoting a decree like that by which he
willed the creation of the world, for then it would certainly be done.
But the word is often used to denote a desire, wish, or what is in
accordance with the nature of anyone. Thus it may be said of God that he
"wills" that his creatures may be happy - because it is in accordance
with his nature, and because he has made abundant provision for their
happiness - though it is not true that he wills it in the sense that he
exerts his absolute power to make them happy. God wills that sickness
should be relieved, and sorrow mitigated, and that the oppressed should
go free, because it is agreeable to his nature; though it is not true
that he wills it in the sense that he exerts his absolute power to
produce it. A parent wills the welfare of his child. It is in accordance
with his nature, his feelings, his desires; and he makes every needful
arrangement for it. If the child is not virtuous and happy, it is his
own fault. So God wills that all people should be saved. It would be in
accordance with his benevolent nature. He has made ample provision for
it. He uses all proper means to secure their salvation. He uses no
positive means to prevent it, and if they are not saved it will be their
own fault. For places in the New Testament where the word here
translated "will" (θέλω thelō), means to desire or wish, see [Luk
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#020); [Luk
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#008); [Joh
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#019); [Gal
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#020); [Mar
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#024); [Co1
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#007); [Co1
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003); [Co1
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#005); [Mat
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#028). This passage cannot mean, as
many have supposed, that God wills that all kinds of people should be
saved, or that some sinners of every rank and class may be saved,
because:

\(1\) the natural and obvious interpretation of the language is opposed
to such a sense. The language expresses the desire that "all men" should
be saved, and we should not depart from the obvious sense of a passage
unless necessity requires it.

\(2\) prayer and thanksgiving [Ti1 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001)
are directed to be offered, not for some of all ranks and conditions,
but for all mankind. No exception is made, and no direction is given
that we should exclude any of the race from the expressions of our
sympathy, and from an interest in our supplications. The reason given
here for that prayer is, that God desires that all people should be
saved. But how could this be a reason for praying for all, if it means
that God desired only the salvation of some of all ranks?

\(3\) in [Ti1 2:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005) the apostle gives
reasons showing that God wished the salvation of all people, and those
reasons are such as to prove that the language here is to be taken in
the most unlimited sense. Those reasons are:

\(a\) that there is one God over all, and one Mediator between God and
people - showing that God is the Father of all, and has the same
interest in all; and,

\(b\) that Christ gave himself a ransom for all - showing that God
desired their salvation.

This verse proves:

\(1\) that salvation is provided for all - for if God wished all people
to be saved, he would undoubtedly make provision for their salvation;
and if he had not made such provision, it could not be said that he
desired their salvation, since no one can doubt that he has power to
provide for the salvation of all;

\(2\) that salvation should be offered to all people - for if God
desires it, it is right for his ministers to announce that desire, and
if he desires it, it is not proper for them to announce anything
contrary to this;

\(3\) that people are to blame if they are not saved.

If God did not wish their salvation, and if he had made no provision for
it, they could not be to blame if they rejected the gospel. If God
wishes it, and has made provision for it, and they are not saved, the
sin must be their own - and it is a great sin, for there is no greater
crime which a man can commit than to destroy his own soul, and to make
himself the eternal enemy of his Maker.

And to come unto the knowledge of the truth - The truth which God has
revealed; the "truth as it is in Jesus." notes, [Eph
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#021).

[1 Timothy 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti1 2:5</span></span>

For there is one God - This is a reason for offering prayer for all
people, and for the declaration [Ti1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#004) that God desires that all people
should be saved. The reason is founded in the fact that he is the common
Father of all the race, and that he must have the same desire for the
welfare of all his children, He has made them of one blood [Act
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026), and he must have the same
interest in the happiness of all; compare [Eph
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#006) note; [Rom
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#030) note.

And one Mediator between God and men - see [Gal
3:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019) notes; [Heb
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015) note. This also is given as a
reason why prayer should be offered for all, and a proof that God
desires their salvation. The argument is, that there is the same
Mediator between God and all people. He is not the Mediator between God
and a part of the human race, but between "God and men," implying that
He desired the salvation of the race. Whatever love there was in giving
the Mediator at all, was love for all the race; whatever can be argued
from that about the interest which God has in man, is proof of his
interest in the race at large. It is proper, therefore, to pray for all.
It may be remarked here that there is but one Mediator. There is not one
for kings and another for their subjects; one for the rich and another
for the poor; one for the master and another for the slave. All are on
the same level, and the servant may feel that, in the gift of a
Mediator, God regarded him with the same interest that he did his
master. It may be added also that the doctrine of the Papists that the
saints or the Virgin Mary may act as mediators to procure blessings for
us, is false. There is but "one Mediator;" and but one is necessary.
Prayer offered to the "saints," or to the "Virgin," is idolatry, and at
the same time removes the one great Mediator from the office which he
alone holds, of making intercession with God.

The man Christ Jesus - Jesus was truly and properly a man, having a
perfect human body and soul, and is often called a man in the New
Testament. But this does not prove that he was not also divine - anymore
than his being called God ([Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001);
[Joh 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028); [Rom
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005); [Jo1
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020); [Heb
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008)), proves that he was not also a
man. The use of the word man here was probably designed to intimate that
though he was divine, it was in his human nature that we are to consider
him as discharging the office. Doddridge.

[1 Timothy 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti1 2:6</span></span>

Who gave himself a ransom for all - This also is stated as a reason why
prayer should be offered for all, and a proof that God desires the
salvation of all. The argument is, that as Christ died for all, it is
proper to pray for all, and that the fact that he died for all is proof
that God desired the salvation of all. Whatever proof of his desire for
their salvation can be derived from this in relation to any of the race,
is proof in relation to all. On the meaning of the phrase "he gave
himself a ransom," see the [Mat 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028)
note; [Rom 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025) note; on the fact that
it was for "all," see the notes on [Co2
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#014).

See also the Supp. note on the same passage.

To be testified in due time - Margin, "a testimony." The Greek is, "the
testimony in its own times," or in proper times - τὸ μαρτύριον καιροῖς
ἰδίοις to marturion kairois idiois. There have been very different
explanations of this phrase. The common interpretation, and that which
seems to me to be correct, is, that "the testimony of this will be
furnished in the proper time; that is, in the proper time it shall be
made known through all the world;" see Rosenmuller. Paul affirms it as a
great and important truth that Christ gave himself a ransom for all
mankind - for Jews and Gentiles; for all classes and conditions of
people alike. This truth had not always been understood. The Jews had
supposed that salvation was designed exclusively for their nation, and
denied that it could be extended to others, unless they became Jews.
According to them, salvation was not provided for, or offered to pagans
as such, but only on condition that they became Jews. In opposition to
this, Paul says that it was a doctrine of revelation that redemption was
to be provided for all people, and that it was intended that the
testimony to this should be afforded at the proper time. It was not
fully made known under the ancient dispensation, but now the period had
come when it should be communicated to all; compare [Rom
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#006) note, and [Gal
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004) note.

[1 Timothy 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti1 2:7</span></span>

Whereunto - Greek, "Unto which;" that is, to the bearing of which
testimony I am appointed.

I am ordained - Greek, "I am placed or constituted" - ἐτέθην etethēn.
The word "ordain" has now acquired a technical signification, meaning to
set apart solemnly to a sacred office by the imposition of hands; but it
has not that meaning here. It does not refer to the manner in which he
was set apart, or to any act of others in consecrating him to this work,
but merely to the fact that he had been placed in this office, or
appointed to it. He refers doubtless to the fact that the Lord Jesus had
designated him to this work.

A preacher and an apostle - see the [Co1
9:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001) notes; [Gal
1:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#011) notes.

I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not - That is, by Christ; or I
solemnly appeal to Christ - a form of an oath; notes, [Rom
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001). Paul makes a solemn declaration
similar to this in regard to his call to the apostleship, in [Gal
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#020). For the reasons why he did it,
see the notes on that verse. It is probable that there were those in
Ephesus who denied that he could be an apostle, and hence his solemn
declaration affirming it.

A teacher of the Gentiles - Specially appointed to carry the gospel to
the Gentiles or the pagan; see the [Rom
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#013) note; [Gal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#007) note.

In faith and verity - These words mean that he was appointed to instruct
the Gentiles in faith and the knowledge of the truth.

[1 Timothy 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti1 2:8</span></span>

I will therefore - The Greek word here (βοὺλομαι boulomai) is different
from the word rendered "will" - θέλω thelō - in [Ti1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#004). The distinction is, that the word
there used - θέλω thelō - denotes an active volition or purpose; the
word here used - βοὺλομαι boulomai - a mere passive desire, propensity,
willingness. Robinson's Lexicon The meaning here is, "it is my will" -
expressing his wish in the case, or giving direction - though using a
milder word than that which is commonly employed to denote an act of
will.

That men pray everywhere - Not merely in the temple, or in other sacred
places, but in all places. The Jews supposed that there was special
efficacy in prayers offered at the temple in Jerusalem; the pagan also
had the same view in regard to their temples - for both seemed to
suppose that they came nearer to God by approaching his sacred abode.
Christianity teaches that God may be worshipped in any place, and that
we are at all times equally near him; see the [Joh
4:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#020) notes; [Act
17:25](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#025) note. The direction here given
that men should pray, in contradistinction from the duties of women,
specified in the next verse, may be intended to imply that men should
conduct the exercises of public worship. The duties of women pertain to
a different sphere; compare [Ti1
2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#011).

Lifting up holy hands - To lift up the hands denotes supplication, as it
was a common attitude of prayer to spread abroad the hands toward
heaven; compare [Psa 68:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#031); [Exo
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#029), [Exo
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#033); [Kg1
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#022); [Ch2
6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#012); [Isa
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015); see also Horace Odes, iii. 23.
1; Ovid, M. 9:701; Livy, v. 21; Seneca, Eph. 21. "Holy hands" here, mean
hands that are not defiled by sin, and that have not been employed for
any purpose of iniquity. The idea is, that when men approach God they
should do it in a pure and holy manner.

Without wrath - That is, without the intermingling of any evil passion;
with a calm, peaceful, benevolent mind. There should be nothing of the
spirit of contention; there should be no anger toward others; the
suppliant should be at peace with all people. It is impossible for a man
to pray with comfort, or to suppose that his prayers will be heard, if
he cherishes anger. The following exquisite and oft-quoted passage from
Jeremy Taylor, is a more beautiful and striking illustration of the
effect of anger in causing our prayers to return unanswered than was
probably ever penned by anyone else. Nothing could be more true,
beautiful, and graphic. "Anger sets the house on fire, and all the
spirits are busy upon trouble, and intend propulsion, defense,
displeasure, or revenge. It is a short madness, and an eternal enemy to
discourse and a fair conversation; it intends its own object with all
the earnestness of perception or activity of design, and a quicker
motion of a too warm and distempered blood; it is a fever in the heart,
and a calenture in the head, and a fire in the face, and a sword in the
band, and a fury all over; and therefore can never suffer a man to be in
a disposition to pray. For prayer is the peace of our spirit, the
stillness of our thoughts, the evenness of recollection, the seat of
meditation, the rest of our cares, and the calm of our tempest; prayer
is the issue of a quiet mind, of untroubled thoughts; it is the daughter
of charity and the sister of meekness; and he that prays to God with an
angry, that is, with a troubled and discomposed spirit, is like him that
retires into a battle to meditate, and sets up his closet in the
out-quarters of an army, and chooses a frontier garrison to be wise in.

Anger is a perfect alienation of the mind from prayer, and therefore is
contrary to that attention which presents our prayers in a right line to
God. For so have I seen a lark rising from his bed of grass, and soaring
upward, and singing as he rises, and hopes to get to heaven, and rise
above the clouds; but the poor bird was beaten back with the loud
sighings of an eastern wind, and his motion made irregular and
inconsistent, descending more at every breath of the tempest than it
could recover by the libration and frequent weighing of his wings, until
the little creature was forced to sit down and pant, and stay till the
storm was over; and then it made a prosperous flight, and did rise and
sing, as if it had learned music and motion from an angel." "The Return
of Prayers," Works, vol. i. 638. Ed. Lond. 1835.

And doubting - This word, as used here, does not mean, as our
translation would seem to imply, that we are to come before God without
any doubts of our own piety, or in the exercise of perfect faith. The
word used (διαλογισμός dialogismos) means, properly, computation,
adjustment of accounts; then reflection, thought; then reasoning,
opinion; then debate, contention, strife; [Luk
9:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#046); [Mar
9:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#033); [Phi
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#014). This is the sense evidently in
this place. They were not to approach God in prayer in the midst of
clamorous disputings and angry contentions. They were not to come when
the mind was heated with debate, and irritated by strife for victory.
Prayer was to be offered in a calm, serious, sober state of mind, and
they who engaged in polemical strife, or in warm contention of any kind,
are little fitted to unite in the solemn act of addressing God. How
often are theologians, when assembled together, so heated by debate, and
so anxious for party victory, that they are in no suitable state of mind
to pray! How often do even good people, holding different views on the
disputed points of religious doctrine, suffer their minds to become so
excited, and their temper so ruffled, that they are conscious they are
in an unfit state of mind to approach the throne of grace together! That
theological debate has gone too far; that strife for victory has become
too warm, when the disputants are in such a state of mind that they
cannot unite in prayer; when they could not cease their contentions, and
with a calm and proper spirit, bow together before the throne of grace.

[1 Timothy 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti1 2:9</span></span>

In like manner also - That is, with the same propriety; with the same
regard to what religion demands. The apostle had stated particularly the
duty of men in public worship [Ti1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008), and he now proceeds to state the
duty of women. All the directions here evidently refer to the proper
manner of conducting public worship, and not to private duties; and the
object here is to state the way in which he would have the different
sexes appear. He had said that he would have prayers offered for all
people ([Ti1 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001) ff), and that in
offering such petitions he would have the men on whom devolved the duty
of conducting public devotion, do it with holy hands, and without any
intermingling of passion, and with entire freedom from the spirit of
contention. In reference to the duty of females in attendance on public
worship, he says that he would have them appear in apparel suitable to
the place and the occasion - adorned not after the manner of the world,
but with the zeal and love in the cause of the Redeemer which became
Christians. He would not have a woman become a public teacher [Ti1
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#012), but would wish her ever to
occupy the place in society for which she was designed [Ti1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#011), and to which she had shown that
she was adapted; [Ti1 2:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#013). The
direction in [Ti1 2:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009), therefore,
is to be understood particularly of the proper deportment of females in
the duties of public worship. At the same time, the principles laid down
are doubtless such as were intended to apply to them in the other
situations in life, for if modest apparel is appropriate in the
sanctuary, it is appropriate everywhere. If what is here prohibited in
dress is wrong there, it would be difficult to show that it is right
elsewhere.

That women adorn themselves - The words "I will" are to be understood
here as repeated from [Ti1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008). The
apostle by the use of the word "adorn" (κοσμεῖν kosmein), shows that he
is not opposed to ornament or adorning, provided it be of the right
kind. The world, as God has made it, is full of beauty, and he has shown
in each flower that he is not opposed to true ornament. There are
multitudes of things which, so far as we can see, appear to be designed
for mere ornament, or are made merely because they are beautiful.
Religion does not forbid true adorning. It differs from the world only
on the question what "is" true ornament, or what it becomes us, all
things considered, to do in the situation in which we are placed, the
character which we sustain, the duties which we have to perform, and the
profession which we make. It may be that there are ornaments in heaven
which would be anything but appropriate for the condition of a poor,
lost, dying sinner on earth.

In modest apparel - The word here rendered "modest" (κόσμιος kosmios),
properly relates to ornament, or decoration, and means that which is
"well-ordered, decorous, becoming." It does not, properly, mean modest
in the sense of being opposed to that which is immodest, or which tends
to excite improper passions and desires, but that which is becoming or
appropriate. The apostle does not positively specify what this would be,
but he mentions somethings which are to be excluded from it, and which,
in his view, are inconsistent with the true adorning of Christian
females - "broidered hair, gold, pearls, costly array." The sense here
is, that the apparel of females should be such as becomes them, or is
appropriate to them. The word here used (κόσμιος kosmios), shows that
there should be due attention that it may be truly neat, fit, decorous.
There is no religion in a negligent mode of apparel, or in inattention
to personal appearance - anymore than there is in wearing gold and
pearls; and a female may as truly violate the precepts of her religion
by neglecting her personal appearance as by excessive attention to it.
The true idea here is, that her attention to her appearance should be
such that she will be offensive to no class of persons; such as to show
that her mind is supremely fixed on higher and more important things,
and such as to interfere with no duty which she owes, and no good which
she can do, either by spending her time needlessly in personal adorning,
or by lavishing that money for dress which might do good to others, or
by neglecting the proprieties of her station, and making herself
offensive to others.

With shamefacedness - With modesty of appearance and manner - an eminent
female virtue, whether in the sanctuary or at home.

And sobriety - The word here used means, properly, "sanity;" then
sober-mindedness, moderation of the desires and passions. It is opposed
to all that is frivolous, and to all undue excitement of the passions.
The idea is, that in their apparel and deportment they should not
entrench on the strictest decorum. Doddridge.

Not with broidered hair - Margin, "plaited." Females in the East pay
much more attention to the hair than is commonly done with us. It is
plaited with great care, and arranged in various forms, according to the
prevailing fashion, and often ornamented with spangles or with silver
wire or tissue interwoven; see the notes on [Isa
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#024). The sense here is, that
Christian females are not to imitate those of the world in their careful
attention to the ornaments of the head. It cannot be supposed that the
mere braiding of the hair is forbidden, but only that careful attention
to the manner of doing it, and to the ornaments usually worn in it,
which characterized worldly females.

Or gold, or pearls - It is not to be supposed that all use of gold or
pearls as articles of dress is here forbidden; but the idea is, that the
Christian female is not to seek these as the adorning which she desires,
or is not to imitate the world in these personal decorations. It may be
a difficult question to settle how much ornament is allowable, and when
the true line is passed. But though this cannot be settled by any exact
rules, since much must depend on age, and on the relative rank in life,
and the means which one may possess, yet there is one general rule which
is applicable to all, and which might regulate all. It is, that the true
line is passed when more is thought of this external adorning, than of
the ornament of the heart. Any external decoration which occupies the
mind more than the virtues of the heart, and which engrosses the time
and attention more, we may be certain is wrong. The apparel should be
such as not to attract attention; such as becomes our situation; such as
will not be particularly singular; such as shall leave the impression
that the heart is not fixed on it. It is a poor ambition to decorate a
dying body with gold and pearls. It should not be forgotten that the
body thus adorned will soon need other habiliments, and will occupy a
position where gold and pearls would be a mockery. When the heart is
right; when there is true and supreme love for religion, it is usually
not difficult to regulate the subject of dress.

Costly array - Expensive dress. This is forbidden - for it is foolish,
and the money thus employed may be much more profitably used in doing
good. "Costly array" includes that which can be ill afforded, and that
which is inconsistent with the feeling that the principle ornament is
that of the heart.

[1 Timothy 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti1 2:10</span></span>

with good works}}But (which becometh women professing godliness) with
good works - That is, it is not appropriate for women who profess to be
the followers of the Saviour, to seek to be distinguished for personal,
external decorations. If they are Christians, they have seen the vanity
of these things, and have fixed the heart on more substantial realities.
They are professed followers of Him "who went about doing good," and the
performance of good works especially becomes them. They profess to have
fixed the affections on God their Saviour, and to be living for heaven;
and it is not becoming in them to seek such ornaments as would indicate
that the heart is supremely attached to worldly things. There is great
beauty in this direction. Good works, or deeds of benevolence, eminently
become a Christian female. The nature of woman seems to be adapted to
the performance of all deeds demanding kindness, tenderness, and
gentleness of feeling; of all that proceeds from pity, sympathy, and
affection; and we feel instinctively that while acts of hardy enterprise
and daring in a good cause especially become a Christian man, there is
something exquisitely appropriate to the female character in deeds of
humble and unobtrusive sympathy and benevolence. God seems to have
formed her mind for just such things, and in such things it occupies its
appropriate sphere rather than in seeking external adorning.

[1 Timothy 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti1 2:11</span></span>

Let the woman learn in silence - Listen attentively to instruction,
without attempting to teach in public; see the notes on [Co1
14:35](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#035).

With all subjection - With due subjection to those who are in authority,
and who are appointed to minister in holy things; notes, [Co1
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034).

[1 Timothy 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti1 2:12</span></span>

But I suffer not a woman to teach - see the notes on [Co1
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034).

Nor to usurp authority over the man - notes, [Co1
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003).

[1 Timothy 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti1 2:13</span></span>

For Adam was first formed, then Eve - The apostle, in this verse, and
the following, gives reasons why a woman should occupy a subordinate
situation, and not usurp authority. The first is, that she was second in
the act of creation, or was made subsequent to man. The reason here
assigned cannot be understood to be merely that of priority of existence
- for then it would give every old person authority over a younger one;
but it must refer to the circumstances of the case as detailed in the
history of the creation; Gen. 1-2. Man was made as the lord of this
lower creation and placed in the garden, and then the woman was made of
a rib taken from his side, and given to him, not as a lord, but as a
companion. All the circumstances combine to show the subordinate nature
of her rank, and to prove that she was not designed to exert authority
over the man; compare notes on [Co1
11:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#008).

[1 Timothy 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti1 2:14</span></span>

And Adam was not deceived - This is the second reason why the woman
should occupy a subordinate rank in all things. It is, that in the most
important situation in which she was ever placed she had shown that she
was not qualified to take the lead. She had evinced a readiness to yield
to temptation; a feebleness of resistance; a pliancy of character, which
showed that she was not adapted to the situation of headship, and which
made it proper that she should ever afterward occupy a subordinate
situation. It is not meant here that Adam did not sin, nor even that he
was not deceived by the tempter, but that the woman opposed a feebler
resistance to the temptation than he would have done, and that the
temptation as actually applied to her would have been ineffectual on
him. To tempt and seduce him to fall, there were needed all the soft
persuasions, the entreaties, and example of his wife.

Satan understood this, and approached man not with the specious argument
of the serpent, but through the allurements of his wife. It is
undoubtedly implied here that man in general has a power of resisting
certain kinds of temptation superior to that possessed by woman, and
hence that the headship properly belongs to him. This is, undoubtedly,
the general truth, though there may be many exceptions, and many noble
cases to the honor of the female sex, in which they evince a power of
resistance to temptation superior to man. In many traits of character,
and among them those which are most lovely, woman is superior to man;
yet it is undoubtedly true that, as a general thing, temptation will
make a stronger impression on her than on him. When it is said that
"Adam was not deceived," it is not meant that when he partook actually
of the fruit he was under no deception, but that he was not deceived by
the serpent; he was not first deceived, or first in the transgression.
The woman should remember that sin began with her, and she should
therefore be willing to occupy an humble and subordinate situation.

But the woman being deceived - She was made to suppose that the fruit
would not injure her, but would make her wise, and that God would not
fulfil his threatening of death. Sin, from the beginning, has been a
process of delusion. Every man or woman who violates the law of God is
deceived as to the happiness which is expected from the violation, and
as to the consequences which will follow it.

[1 Timothy 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti1 2:15</span></span>

Notwithstanding she shall be saved - The promise in this verse is
designed to alleviate the apparent severity of the remarks just made
about the condition of woman, and of the allusion to the painful facts
of her early history. What the apostle had just said would carry the
mind back to the period in which woman introduced sin into the world,
and by an obvious and easy association, to the sentence which had been
passed on her in consequence of her transgression, and to the burden of
sorrows which she was doomed to bear. By the remark in this verse,
however, Paul shows that it was not his intention to overwhelm her with
anguish. He did not design to harrow up her feelings by an unkind
allusion to a melancholy fact in her history. It was necessary for him
to state, and for her to know, that her place was secondary and
subordinate, and he wished this truth ever to be kept in memory among
Christians. It was not unkind or improper also to state the reasons for
this opinion, and to show that her own history had demonstrated that she
was not designed for headship.

But she was not to be regarded as degraded and abandoned. She was not to
be overwhelmed by the recollection of what "the mother of all living"
had done. There were consolations in her case. There was a special
divine interposition which she might look for, evincing tender care on
the part of God in those deep sorrows which had come upon her in
consequence of her transgression; and instead of being crushed and
broken-hearted on account of her condition, she should remember that the
everlasting arms of God would sustain her in her condition of sorrow and
pain. Paul, then, would speak to her the language of consolation, and
while he would have her occupy her proper place, he would have her feel
that "God was her Friend." In regard to the nature of the consolation
referred to here, there has been a considerable variety of opinion. Some
have held, that by the expression "she shall be saved in child-bearing,"
the apostle designs to include all the duties of the maternal relation,
meaning that she should be saved through the faithful performance of her
duties as a mother.

Robinson, Lexicon. Rosenmuller regards the words rendered
"child-bearing" (τεκνογονία teknogonia), as synonymous with education,
and supposes that the meaning is, that a woman, by the proper training
of her children, can obtain salvation as well as her husband, and that
her appropriate duty is not public teaching, but the training of her
family. Wetstein supposes that it means "she shall be saved from the
arts of impostors, and from the luxury and vice of the age, if, instead
of wandering about, she remains at home, cultivates modesty, is subject
to her husband, and engages carefully in the training of her children."
This sense agrees well with the connection. Calvin supposes that the
apostle designs to console the woman by the assurance that, if she bears
the trials of her condition of sorrow with a proper spirit, abiding in
faith and holiness, she will be saved. She is not to regard herself as
cut off from the hope of heaven. Doddridge, Macknight, Clarke, and
others suppose that it refers to the promise in [Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015), and means that the woman shall
be saved through, or by means of bearing a child, to wit, the Messiah;
and that the apostle means to sustain the woman in her sorrows, and in
her state of subordination and inferiority, by referring to the honor
which has been put upon her by the fact that a woman gave birth to the
Messiah. It is supposed also that he means to say that special honor is
thus conferred on her over the man, inasmuch as the Messiah had no human
father. Doddridge. The objections to this interpretation, however,
though it is sustained by most respectable names, seem to me to be
insuperable. They are such as these:

\(1\) The interpretation is too refined and abstruse. It is not that
which is obvious. It depends for its point on the fact that the Messiah
had no human father, and in the apostle had intended to refer to that,
and to build an argument on it it may be doubted whether he would have
done it in so obscure a manner. But it may reasonably be questioned
whether he would have made that fact a point on which his argument would
turn. There would be a species of refinement about such an argument,
such as we should not look for in the writings of Paul.

\(2\) it is not the obvious meaning of the word "child-bearing." There
is nothing in the word which requires that it should have any reference
to the birth of the Messiah. The word is of a general character, and
properly refers to child-hearing in general.

\(3\) it is not true that woman would be "saved" merely by having given
birth to the Messiah. She will be saved, as man will be, as a
consequence of his having been born; but there is no evidence that the
mere fact that woman gave birth to him, and that he had no human father,
did anything to save Mary herself, or any one else of her sex. If,
therefore, the word refers to the "bearing" of the Messiah, or to the
fact that he was born, it would be no more proper to say that this was
connected with the salvation of woman than that of man. The true
meaning, it seems to me, has been suggested by Calvin, and may be seen
by the following remarks:

\(1\) The apostle designed to comfort woman, or to alleviate the sadness
of the picture which he had drawn respecting her condition.

\(2\) he had referred, incidentally, as a proof of the subordinate
character of her station, to the first apostasy. This naturally
suggested the sentence which was passed on her, and the condition of
sorrow to which she was doomed, particularly in child-birth. That was
the standing demonstration of her guilt; that the condition in which she
suffered most; that the situation in which she was in greatest peril.

\(3\) Paul assures her, therefore, that though she must thus suffer, yet
that she ought not to regard herself in her deep sorrows and dangers,
though on account of sin, as necessarily under the divine displeasure,
or as excluded from the hope of heaven. The way of salvation was open to
her as well as to men, and was to be entered in the same manner. If she
had faith and holiness, even in her condition of sorrow brought on by
guilt, she might as well hope for eternal life as man. The object of the
apostle seems to be to guard against a possible construction which might
be put on his words, that he did not regard the woman as in
circumstances as favorable for salvation as those of man, or as if he
thought that salvation for her was more difficult, or perhaps that she
could not be saved at all. The general sentiments of the Jews in regard
to the salvation of the female sex, and their exclusion from the
religious privileges which men enjoy; the views of the Muslims in
reference to the inferiority of the sex; and the prevalent feelings in
the pagan world, degrading the sex and making their condition, in regard
to salvation, far inferior to that of man, show the propriety of what
the apostle here says, and the fitness that he should so guard himself
that his language could not possibly be construed so as to give
countenance to such a sentiment.

According to the interpretation of the passage here proposed, the
apostle does not mean to teach that a Christian female would be
certainly saved from death in child-birth - for this would not be true,
and the proper construction of the passage does not require us to
understand him as affirming this. Religion is not designed to make any
immediate and direct change in the laws of our physical being. It does
not of itself guard us from the pestilence; it does not arrest the
progress of disease; it does not save us from death; and, as a matter of
fact, woman, by the highest degree of piety, is not necessarily saved
from the perils of that condition to which she has been subjected in
consequence of the apostasy. The apostle means to show this - that in
all her pain and sorrow; amidst all the evidence of apostasy, and all
that reminds her that she was "first" in the transgression, she may look
up to God as her Friend and strength, and may hope for acceptance and
salvation.

If they continue - If woman continues - it being not uncommon to change
the singular form to the plural, especially if the subject spoken of
have the character of a noun of multitude. Many have understood this of
children, as teaching that if the mother were faithful, so that her
children continued in faith, she would be saved. But this is not a
necessary or probable interpretation. The apostle says nothing of
children, and it is not reasonable to suppose that he would make the
prospect of her salvation depend on their being pious. This would be to
add a hard condition of salvation, and one nowhere else suggested in the
New Testament. The object of the apostle evidently is, to show that
woman must continue in the faithful service of God if she would be saved
- a doctrine everywhere insisted on in the New Testament in reference to
all persons. She must not imitate the example of the mother of mankind,
but she must faithfully yield obedience to the laws of God until death.

Faith - Faith in the Redeemer and in divine truth, or a life of fidelity
in the service of God.

Charity - Love to all; compare notes on 1 Cor. 13.

Holiness - She must be truly righteous.

With sobriety - All these things must he united with a becoming
soberness or seriousness of deportment; notes, [Ti1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009). In such a life, woman may look to
a world where she will be forever free from all the sadnesses and
sorrows of her condition here; where, by unequalled pain, she will be no
more reminded of the time when.

\- "Her rash hand in evil hour.

Forth reaching to the fruit, she pluck'd, she.

Ate;"

And when before the throne she shall be admitted to full equality with
all the redeemed of the Lord. Religion meets all the sadnesses of her
condition here; pours consolation into the cup of her many woes; speaks
kindly to her in her distresses; utters the language of forgiveness to
her heart when crushed with the remembrance of sin - for "she loves
much" [Luk 7:37-48](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#037); and conducts her
to immortal glory in that world where all sorrow shall be unknown.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 3](ti1003)

</div>
