<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1.md)  
  [Previous](ti1003)  [Next](ti1005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001.md)

[1 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti1 4:0</span></span>

Analysis Of The Chapter

There is, in many respects, a strong resemblance between the first part
of this chapter, 1 Tim. 4, and 2 Thes. 2; compare notes on that chapter.
The leading object of this chapter is to state to Timothy certain things
of which he was constantly to remind the church; and having done this,
the apostle gives him some directions about his personal deportment. The
chapter may be conveniently divided into three parts:

I. Timothy was to put the church constantly in remembrance of the great
apostasy which was to occur, and to guard them against the doctrines
which would be inculcated under that apostasy; [Ti1
4:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001.md).

\(a\) There was to be, in the latter days, a great departing from the
faith; [Ti1 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001.md).

\(b\) Some of the characteristics of that apostasy were these; there
would be a giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils; [Ti1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001.md). Those who taught would
hypocritically speak what they knew to be falsehood, having their own
consciences seared; [Ti1 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#002.md). They
would forbid to marry, and forbid the use of certain articles of food
which God had appointed for man; [Ti1
4:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#003.md).

II\. Timothy was to warn the churches against trifling and superstitious
views, such as the apostle calls "old wives'" fables; [Ti1
4:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#007.md).

\(a\) He was not to allow himself to be influenced by such fables, but
at once to reject them; [Ti1 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#007.md).

\(b\) The bodily exercise which the friends of such "fables" recommended
was of no advantage to the soul, and no stress ought to be laid on it,
as if it were important; [Ti1 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008.md).

\(c\) That which was truly profitable, and which ought to be regarded as
important was godliness; for "that" had promise of the present life, and
of the life to come; [Ti1 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008.md).

\(d\) Timothy must expect, in giving these instructions, to endure labor
and to suffer reproach; nevertheless, he was faithfully to inculcate
these important truths; [Ti1 4:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#010.md).

III\. Various admonitions respecting his personal deportment; [Ti1
4:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012.md).

\(a\) He was so to live that no one would despise him or his ministry
because he was young; [Ti1 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012.md).

\(b\) He was to give a constant attention to his duties until the
apostle should himself return to him; [Ti1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#013.md).

\(c\) He was carefully to cultivate the gift which has been conferred by
his education, and by his ordination to the work of the ministry; [Ti1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014.md).

\(d\) He was to meditate on these things, and to give himself wholly to
the work, so that his profiting might appear to all; [Ti1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#015.md).

\(e\) He was to take good heed to himself, and to the manner and matter
of his teaching, that he might save himself and those who heard him;
[Ti1 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#016.md).

[1 Timothy 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 4:1</span></span>

Now the Spirit - Evidently the Holy Spirit; the Spirit of inspiration.
It is not quite certain, from this passage, whether the apostle means to
say that this was a revelation "then" made to him, or whether it was a
well-understood thing as taught by the Holy Spirit. He himself elsewhere
refers to this same prophecy, and John also more than once mentions it;
compare 2 Thes. 2; [Jo1 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018.md); [Rev
20:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001.md). From [Th2
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#005.md), it would seem that this was a
truth which had before been communicated to the apostle Paul, and that
he had dwelt on it when he preached the gospel in Thessalonica. There is
no improbability, however, in the supposition that so important a
subject was communicated directly by the Holy Spirit to others of the
apostles.

Speaketh expressly - In express words, ῥητῶς rētōs. It was not by mere
hints, and symbols, and shadowy images of the future; it was in an open
and plain manner - in so many words. The object of this statement seems
to be to call the attention of Timothy to it in an emphatic manner, and
to show the importance of attending to it.

That in the latter times - Under the last dispensation, during which the
affairs of the world would close; see the notes on [Heb
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002.md). It does not mean that this would
occur "just before" the end of the world, but that it would take place
during "that last dispensation," and that the end of the world would not
happen until this should take place; see the notes on [Th2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003.md).

Some shall depart from the faith - The Greek word here - ἀποστήσονται
apostēsontai - is that from which we have derived the word "apostatize,"
and would be properly so rendered here. The meaning is, that they would
"apostatize" from the belief of the truths of the gospel. It does not
mean that, as individuals, they would have been true Christians; but
that there would be a departure from the great doctrines which
constitute the Christian faith. The ways in which they would do this are
immediately specified, showing what the apostle meant here by departing
from the faith. They would give heed to seducing spirits, to the
doctrines of devils, etc. The use of the word "some," here τινες tines -
does not imply that the number would be small. The meaning is, that
"certain persons" would thus depart, or that "there would be" an
apostasy of the kind here mentioned, in the last days. From the parallel
passage in [Th2 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003.md), it would seem
that this was to be an extensive apostasy.

Giving heed to seducing spirits - Rather than to the Spirit of God. It
would be a part of their system to yield to those spirits that led
astray. The spirits here referred to are any that cause to err, and the
most obvious and natural construction is to refer it to the agency of
fallen spirits. Though it "may" apply to false teachers, yet, if so, it
is rather to them as under the influence of evil spirits. This may be
applied, so far as the phraseology is concerned, to "any" false
teaching; but it is evident that the apostle had a specific apostasy in
view - some great "system" that would greatly corrupt the Christian
faith; and the words here should be interpreted with reference to that.
It is true that people in all ages are prone to give heed to seducing
spirits; but the thing referred to here is some grand apostasy, in which
the characteristics would be manifested, and the doctrines held, which
the apostle proceeds immediately to specify; compare [Jo1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001.md).

And doctrines of devils - Greek, "Teachings of demons - διδασκαλίαις
δαιμωνίων didaskaliais daimōniōn. This may either mean teachings
"respecting" demons, or teachings "by" demons. The particular sense must
be determined by the connection. Ambiguity of this kind in the
construction of words, where one is in the genitive case, is not
uncommon; compare [Joh 15:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#009.md); [Joh
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015.md). Instances of the construction
where the genitive denotes the "object," and should be translated
"concerning," occur in [Mat 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#025.md); "The
gospel of the kingdom," i. e., concerning the kingdom; [Mat
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001.md); "Power of unclean spirits," i.
e., over or concerning unclean spirits; so, also, [Act
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#009.md); [Rom
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#015.md); [Co2
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#005.md); [Eph
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#001.md); [Rev
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#013.md). Instances of construction where
the genitive denotes the "agent," occur in the following places: [Luk
1:69](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#069.md), "A horn of salvation," i. e., a
horn which produces or causes salvation; [Joh
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#028.md); [Rom
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022.md); [Co2
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010.md); [Eph
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#018.md); [Col
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011.md). Whether the phrase here means
that, in the apostasy, they would give heed to doctrines "respecting"
demons, or to doctrines which demons "taught," cannot, it seems to me,
be determined with certainty. If the previous phrase, however, means
that they would embrace doctrines taught by evil spirits, it can hardly
be supposed that the apostle would immediately repeat the same idea in
another form; and then the sense would be, that one characteristic of
the time referred to would be the prevalent teaching "respecting"
demons. They would "give heed to," or embrace, some special views
respecting demons. The word here rendered "devils" is δαιμονία daimonia
- "demons." This word, among the Greeks, denoted the following things:

\(1\) A god or goddess, spoken of the pagan gods; compare in New
Testament, [Act 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018.md).

\(2\) a divine being, where no particular one was specified, the agent
or author of good or evil fortune; of death, fate, etc. In this sense it
is often used in Homer.

\(3\) the souls of people of the golden age, which dwelt unobserved upon
the earth to regard the actions of men, and to defend them - tutelary
divinities, or geniuses - like that which Socrates regarded as his
constant attendant. Xen. Mem. 4. 8. 1. 5; Apol. Soc. 4. See "Passow."

\(4\) to this may be added the common use in the New Testament, where
the word denotes a demon in the Jewish sense - a bad spirit, subject to
Satan, and under his control; one of the host of fallen angels -
commonly, but not very properly rendered "devil" or "devils." These
spirits were supposed to wander in desolate places, [Mat
12:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#043.md); compare [Isa
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#021.md); [Isa
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#014.md); or they dwell in the air, [Eph
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002.md). They were regarded as hostile to
mankind, [Joh 8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044.md); as able to utter
pagan oracles, [Act 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#017.md); as lurking
in the idols of the pagan, [Co1 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020.md);
[Rev 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020.md). They are spoken of as the
authors of evil, [Jam 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#019.md); compare
[Eph 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012.md), and as having the power of
taking "possession" of a person, of producing diseases, or of causing
mania, as in the case of the demoniacs, [Luk
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#033.md); [Luk
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#027.md); [Mat
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#018.md); [Mar
7:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#029.md); and often elsewhere. The
doctrine, therefore, which the apostle predicted would prevail, might,
"so far as the word used is concerned," be either of the following:

\(1\) Accordance with the prevalent notions of the pagan respecting
false gods; or a falling into idolatry similar to that taught in the
Grecian mythology. It can hardly be supposed, however, that he designed
to say that the common notions of the pagan would prevail in the
Christian church, or that the worship of the pagan gods "as such" would
be set up there.

\(2\) an accordance with the Jewish views respecting demoniacal
possessions and the power of exorcising them. If this view should
extensively prevail in the Christian church, it would be in accordance
with the language of the prediction.

\(3\) accordance with the prevalent pagan notions respecting the
departed spirits of the good and the great, who were exalted to the rank
of demi-gods, and who, though invisible, were supposed still to exert an
important influence in favor of mankind. To these beings, the pagan
rendered extraordinary homage. They regarded them as demi-gods. They
supposed that they took a deep interest in human affairs. They invoked
their aid. They set apart days in honor of them. They offered
sacrifices, and performed rites and ceremonies to propitiate their
favor. They were regarded as a sort of mediators or intercessors between
man and the superior divinities. If these things are found anywhere in
the Christian church, they may be regarded as a fulfillment of this
prediction, for they were not of a nature to be foreseen by any human
sagacity. Now it so happens, that they are in fact found in the Papal
communion, and in a way that corresponds fairly to the meaning of the
phrase, as it would have been understood in the time of the apostle.

There is, "first," the worship of the virgin and of the saints, or the
extraordinary honors rendered to them - corresponding almost entirely
with the reverence paid by the pagan to the spirits of heroes or to
demi-gods. The saints are supposed to have extraordinary power with God,
and their aid is implored as intercessors. The virgin Mary is invoked as
"the mother of God," and as having power still to command her Son. The
Papists do not, indeed, offer the same homage to the saints which they
do to God, but they ask their aid; they offer prayer to them. The
following extracts from the catechism of Dr. James Butler, approved and
recommended by Dr. Kenrick, "Bishop of Philadelphia," expresses the
general views of Roman Catholics on this subject. "Question: How do
Catholics distinguish between the honor they give to God, and the honor
they give to the saints, when they pray to God and the saints?

Answer: Of God alone they beg grace and mercy; and of the saints they
only ask the assistance of their prayers? Question Is it lawful to
recommend ourselves to the saints, and ask their prayers. Answer: Yes;
as it is lawful and a very pious practice to ask the prayers of our
fellow-creatures on earth, and to pray for them." In the "Prayer to be
said before mass," the following language occurs: "In union with the
holy church and its minister, and invoking the blessed virgin Mary,
Mother of God, and all the angels and saints, we now offer the adorable
sacrifice of the mass," etc. In the General Confession, it is said - "I
confess to Almighty God, to the blessed Mary, ever Virgin, to blessed
Michael the archangel, to blessed John the Baptist, to the holy apostles
Peter and Paul, and to all the saints, that I have sinned exceedingly."
So also, the council of Trent declared, Sess. 25, "Concerning the
invocation of the saints," "that it is good and useful to supplicate
them, and to fly to their prayers, power, and aid; but that they who
deny that the saints are to be invoked, or who assert that they do not
pray for people, or that their invocation of them is idolatry, hold an
impious opinion. See also Peter Den's Moral Theology, translated by the
Rev. John F. Berg, pp. 342-356. "Secondly," in the Papal communion the
doctrine of "exorcism" is still held - implying a belief that evil
spirits or demons have power over the human frame - a doctrine which
comes fairly under the meaning of the phrase here - "the doctrine
respecting demons."

Thus, in Dr. Butler's Catechism: "Question: What do you mean by
exorcism? Answer: The rites and prayers instituted by the church for the
casting out devils, or restraining them from hurting persons,
disquieting places, or abusing any of God's creatures to our harm.
Question: Has Christ given his church any such power over devils? Anser:
Yes, he has; see [Mat 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001.md); [Mar
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#015.md); [Luk
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#001.md). And that this power was not to
die with the apostles, nor to cease after the apostolic age, we learn
from the perpetual practice of the church, and the experience of all
ages." The characteristic here referred to by the apostle, therefore, is
one that applies precisely to the Roman Catholic communion, and cannot
be applied with the same fitness to any other association calling itself
Christian on earth. There can be no doubt, therefore, that the Holy
Spirit designed to designate that apostate church.

[1 Timothy 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti1 4:2</span></span>

Speaking lies in hypocrisy - ἐν ὑποκρισει ψευδολόγων en hupokrisei
pseudologōn. Or rather, "by, or through the hypocrisy of those speaking
lies. So it is rendered by Whitby, Benson, Macknight, and others. Our
translators have rendered it as if the word translated "speaking lies" -
ψευδολόγων pseudologōn - referred to "demons," or, "devils," δαιμονίων
daimoniōn - in the previous verse. But there are two objections to this.
One is, that then, as Koppe observes, the words would have been inverted
- ψευδολόγων ἐν ὑποκρίσει pseudologōn en hupokrisei. The other is, that
if that construction is adopted, it must be carried through the
sentence, and then all the phrases "speaking lies," "having their
conscience seared," "forbidding to marry," etc., must be referred to
demons. The preposition ἐν en, "in" may denote "by" or "through," and is
often so used.

If this be the true construction, then it will mean that those who
departed from the faith did it "by" or "through" the hypocritical
teachings of those who spoke lies, or who knew that they were
inculcating falsehoods; of those whose conscience was seared; of those
who forbade to marry, etc. The meaning then will be, "In the last days
certain persons will depart from the faith of the gospel. This apostasy
will essentially consist in their giving heed to spirits that lead to
error, and in embracing corrupt and erroneous views on demonology, or in
reference to invisible beings between us and God. This they will do
through the hypocritical teaching of those who inculcate falsehood;
whose consciences are seared," etc. The series of characteristics,
therefore, which follow, are those of the "teachers," not of "the
taught;" of the ministers of the church, not of the great body of the
people.

The apostle meant to say that this grand apostasy would occur under the
influence of a hypocritical, hardened, and arbitrary ministry, teaching
their own doctrines instead of the divine commands, and forbidding that
which God had declared to be lawful. In the clause before us - "speaking
lies in hypocrisy" - two things are implied, "first," that the
characteristic of those referred to would be that they would "speak
lies;" "second," that this would be done "hypocritically." In regard to
the first, there can be no doubt among Protestants of its applicability
to the papal communion. The entire series of doctrines respecting the
authority of the Pope, purgatory, the mass, the invocation of the
saints, the veneration of relics, the seven sacraments, the authority of
tradition, the doctrine of merit, etc., is regarded as false. Indeed,
the system could not be better characterized than by saying that it is a
system "speaking lies." The entire scheme attempts to palm falsehood
upon the world, in the place of the simple teaching of the New
Testament. The only question is, whether this is done "in hypocrisy," or
hypocritically. In regard to this, it is not necessary to maintain that
there is "no" sincerity among the ministers of that communion, or that
"all" are hypocritical in their belief and their teaching. The sense is,
that this is the general characteristic, or that this is understood by
the leaders or prime movers in that apostasy. In regard to the
applicability of this to the ministers of the Papal communion, and the
question whether they teach what they know to be false, we may observe:

\(1\) that many of them are men of eminent learning, and there can he no
reason to doubt that they Know that many of the Catholic legends are
false, and many of the doctrines of their faith contrary to the Bible.

\(2\) not a few of the things in that communion must be known by them to
be false, though not known to be so by the people. Such are all the
pretended miracles performed by the relics of the saints; the liquefying
of the blood of Januarius, etc.; see the notes on [Th2
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009.md). As the working of these tricks
depends wholly on the priesthood, they must know that they are "speaking
lies in hypocrisy."

\(3\) the matter of fact seems to be, that when young men who have been
trained in the Catholic Church, first turn their attention to the
ministry, they are sincere. They have not yet been made acquainted with
the "mysteries of iniquity" in the communion in which they have been
trained, and they do not suspect the deceptions that are practiced
there. When they pass through their course of study, however, and become
acquainted with the arts and devices on which the fabric rests, and with
the scandalous lives of many of the clergy, they are shocked to find how
corrupt and false the whole system is. But they are now committed. They
have devoted their lives to this profession. They are trained now to
this system of imposture, and they must continue to practice and
perpetuate the fraud, or abandon the church, and subject themselves to
all the civil and ecclesiastical disabilities which would now follow if
they were to leave and reveal all its frauds and impostures. A gentleman
of high authority, and who has had as good an opportunity as any man
living to make accurate and extensive observations, stated to me, that
this was a common thing in regard to the Catholic clergy in France and
Italy. No one can reasonably doubt that the great body of that clergy
"must" be apprized that much that is relied on for the support of the
system is mere legend, and that the miracles which are pretended to be
performed are mere trick and imposture.

Having their conscience seared with a hot iron - The allusion here is
doubtless to the effect of applying a hot iron to the skin. The
cauterized part becomes rigid and hard, and is dead to sensibility. So
with the conscience of those referred to. It has the same relation to a
conscience that is sensitive and quick in its decisions, that a
cauterized part of the body has to a thin, delicate, and sensitive skin.
Such a conscience exists in a mind that will practice delusion without
concern; that will carry on a vast system of fraud without wincing; that
will incarcerate, scourge, or burn the innocent without compassion; and
that will practice gross enormities, and indulge in sensual
gratifications under the mask of piety. While there are many eminent
exceptions to an application of this to the Papal communion, yet this
description will apply better to the Roman priesthood in the time of
Luther - and in many other periods of the world - than to any other
"body of men" that ever lived.

[1 Timothy 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti1 4:3</span></span>

Forbidding to marry - That is, "They will depart from the faith through
the hypocritical teaching - of those who forbid to marry;" see notes on
[Ti1 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#002.md). This does not necessarily
mean that they would prohibit marriage altogether, but that it would be
a characteristic of their teaching that marriage would "be forbidden,"
whether of one class of persons or many. They would "commend" and
"enjoin" celibacy and virginity. They would regard such a state, for
certain persons, as more holy than the married condition, and would
consider it as "so" holy that they would absolutely prohibit those who
wished to be most holy from entering into the relation. It is needless
to say how accurately this applies to the views of the papacy in regard
to the comparative purity and advantages of a state of celibacy, and to
their absolute prohibition of the marriage of the clergy. The tenth
article of the decree of the Council of Trent, in relation to marriage,
will show the general view of the papacy on that subject. "Whosoever
shall say that the married state is to be preferred to a state of
virginity, or celibacy, and that it is not better and more blessed to
remain in virginity, or celibacy, than to be joined in marriage; let him
be accursed!" Compare Peter Dens' Moral Theology, pp. 497-500.

And commanding to abstain from meats, ... - The word "meat" in the
Scriptures, commonly denotes "food" of all kinds; [Mat
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#004.md); [Mat
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#025.md); [Mat
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010.md); [Mat
15:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#037.md). This was the meaning of the
word when the translation of the Bible was made. It is now used by us,
almost exclusively, to denote animal food. The word here used - βρῶμα
brōma - means, properly, whatever is eaten, and may refer to animal
flesh, fish, fruit, or vegetables. It is often, however, in the New
Testament, employed particularly to denote the flesh of animals; Heb,
[Mat 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#010.md); [Mat
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#009.md); [Rom
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#015.md), [Rom
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#020.md); [Co1
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#008.md), [Co1
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#013.md). As it was animal food
particularly which was forbidden under the Jewish code, and as the
questions on this subject among Christians would relate to the same
kinds of prohibition, it is probable that the word has the same limited
signification here, and should be taken as meaning the same thing that
the word "meat" does with us.

To forbid the use of certain meats, is here described as one of the
characteristics of those who would instruct the church in the time of
the great apostasy. It is not necessary to suppose that there would be
an "entire" prohibition, but only a prohibition of certain kinds, and at
certain seasons. That "this" characteristic is found in the papacy more
than anywhere else in the Christian world, it is needless to prove. The
following questions and answers from Dr. Butler's Catechism, will show
what is the sentiment of Roman Catholics on this subject. "Question: Are
there any other commandments besides the Ten Commandments of God?
Answer: There are the commandments or precepts of the church, which are
chiefly six. Question: What are we obliged to do by the second
commandment of the church? Answer: To give part of the year to fast and
abstinence. Question: What do you mean by fast-days? Answer: Certain
days on which we are allowed but one meal, and "forbidden flesh meat."

Question: What do you mean by days of abstinence? Answer: Certain days
on which we are forbidden to eat flesh meat; but are allowed the usual
number of meals. Question: Is it strictly forbidden by the church to eat
flesh meat on days of abstinence? Answer: Yes; and to eat flesh meat on
any day on which it is forbidden, without necessity and leave of the
church, is very sinful." Could there be a more impressive and striking
commentary on what the apostle says here, that "in the latter days some
would depart from the faith, under the hypocritical teaching of those
who commanded to abstain from meats?" The authority claimed by the
papacy to issue "commands" on this subject, may be seen still further by
the following extract from the same catechism, showing the gracious
permission of the church to the "faithful." "The abstinence on Saturday
is dispensed with, for the faithful throughout the United States, for
the space of ten years (from 1833), except when a fast falls on a
Saturday. The use of flesh meat is allowed at present by dispensation in
the diocess of Philadelphia, on all the Sundays of Lent, except Palm
Sunday, and once a day on Monday, Tuesday, and Thursday in each week,
except the Thursday after Ash Wednesday, and also excepting Holy-week."
Such is the Roman Catholic religion! See also Peter Dens' Moral
Theology, pp. 321-330. It is true that what is said here "might" apply
to the Essenes, as Koppe supposes, or to the Judaizing teachers, but it
applies more appropriately and fully to the Papal communion than to any
other body of men professing Christianity, and taken in connection with
the other characteristics of the apostasy, there can be no doubt that
the reference is to that.

Which God hath created - The articles of food which he has made, and
which he has designed for the nourishment of man. The fact that God had
"created" them was proof that they were not to be regarded as evil, and
that it was not to be considered as a religious duty to abstain from
them. All that "God" has made is good in its place, and what is adapted
to be food for man is not to be refused or forbidden; compare [Ecc
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#018.md). There can be no doubt that in
the apostasy here referred to, those things would be forbidden, not
because they were injurious or hurtful in their nature, but because it
might be made a part of a system of religion of self-righteousness and
because there might be connected with such a prohibition the belief of
special merit.

[1 Timothy 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti1 4:4</span></span>

For every creature of God is good - Greek, "all the creatures, or all
that God has created" - πᾶν κτίσμα pan ktisma: that is, as he made it;
compare [Gen 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#010.md), [Gen
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#012.md), [Gen
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#018.md), [Gen
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#031.md). It does not mean that every
moral agent remains good as long as he is "a creature of God," but moral
agents, human beings and angels, were good as they were made at first;
[Gen 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#031.md). Nor does it mean that all
that God has made is good "for every object to which it can be applied."
It is good in its place; good for the purpose for which he made it. But
it should not be inferred that a thing which is poisonous in its nature
is good for food, "because" it is a creation of God. It is good only in
its place, and for the ends for which he intended it. Nor should it be
inferred that what God has made is necessarily good "after" it has been
perverted by man. As God made it originally, it might have been used
without injury.

Apples and peaches were made good, and are still useful and proper as
articles of food; rye and Indian-corn are good, and are admirably
adapted to the support of man and beast, but it does not follow that all
that "man" can make of them is necessarily good. He extracts from them a
poisonous liquid, and then says that "every creature of God is good, and
nothing to be refused." But is this a fair use of this passage of
Scripture? True, they "are" good - they "are" to be received with
gratitude as he made them, and as applied to the uses for which he
designed them; but why apply this passage to prove that a deleterious
beverage, which "man" has extracted from what God has made, is good
also, and good for all the purposes to which it can be applied? As "God"
made these things, they are good. As man perverts them, it is no longer
proper to call them the "creation of God," and they may be injurious in
the highest degree. This passage, therefore, should not be adduced to
vindicate the use of intoxicating drinks. As employed by the apostle, it
had no such reference, nor does it contain any "principle" which can
properly receive any such application.

And nothing to be refused - Nothing that God has made, for the purposes
for which he designed it. The necessity of the case the "exigency of the
passage" - requires this interpretation. It "cannot" mean that we are
not to refuse poison if offered in our food, or that we are never to
refuse food that is to us injurious or offensive; nor can it anymore
mean that we are to receive "all" that may be offered to us as a
beverage. The sense is, that as God made it, and for the purposes for
which he designed it, it is not to be held to be evil; or, which is the
same thing, it is not to be prohibited as if there were merit in
abstaining from it. It is not to be regarded as a religious duty to
abstain from food which God has appointed for the support of man.

If it be received with thanksgiving - see the [Co1
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#031.md) note; [Eph
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#020.md) note; [Phi
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006.md) note.

[1 Timothy 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti1 4:5</span></span>

For it is sanctified by the word of God - By the authority or permission
of God. It would be profane or unholy if he had forbidden it; it is made
holy or proper for our use by his permission, and no command of "man"
can make it unholy or improper; compare [Gen
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#029.md); [Gen
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#003.md).

And prayer - If it is partaken of with prayer. By prayer we are enabled
to receive it with gratitude, and everything that we eat or drink may
thus be made a means of grace.

[1 Timothy 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti1 4:6</span></span>

If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things - Of the truths
just stated. They are, therefore, proper subjects to preach upon. It is
the duty of the ministry to show to the people of their charge what "is"
error and where it may be apprehended, and to caution them to avoid it.

Nourished up in the words of faith - That is, you will be then "a good
minister of Jesus Christ, as becomes one who has been nourished up in
the words of faith, or trained up in the doctrines of religion." The
apostle evidently designs to remind Timothy of the manner in which he
had been trained, and to show him how he might act in accordance with
that. From one who had been thus educated, it was reasonable to expect
that he would be a faithful and exemplary minister of the gospel.

Whereunto thou hast attained - The word used here means, properly, to
accompany side by side; to follow closely; to follow out, trace, or
examine. It is rendered "shall follow," in [Mat
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017.md); "having had understanding," in
[Luk 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#003.md); and "hast fully known," in
[Ti2 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#010.md). It does not elsewhere occur
in the New Testament. The meaning here seems to be, that Timothy had
followed out the doctrines in which he had been trained to their
legitimate results; he had accurately seen and understood their bearing,
as leading him to embrace the Christian religion. His early training in
the Scriptures of the Old Testament [Ti2
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#005.md); [Ti2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015.md), he had now fully carried out, by
embracing the Lord Jesus as the Messiah, and by evincing the proper
results of the early teaching which he had received in connection with
that religion. If he now followed the directions of the apostle, he
would be a minister of the Lord Jesus, worthy of the attainments in
religious knowledge which he had made, and of the expectations which had
been formed of him. No young man should, by neglect, indolence, or
folly, disappoint the reasonable expectations of his friends. Their
cherished hopes are a proper ground of appeal to him, and it may be
properly demanded of every one that he shall carry out to their
legitimate results all the principles of his early training, and that he
shall be in his profession all that his early advantages make it
reasonable to "expect" that he will be.

[1 Timothy 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti1 4:7</span></span>

But refuse - That is, refuse to pay attention to them, or reject them.
Do not consider them of sufficient importance to occupy your time.

Profane - The word here used does not mean that the fables here referred
to were blasphemous or impious in their character, but that they had not
the character of true religion; [Ti2
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#016.md).And old wives' - Old women's
stories; or such as old women held to be important. The word is used
here, as it is often with us, in the sense of silly.

Fables - Fictions, or stories that were not founded on fact. The pagan
religion abounded with fictions of this kind, and the Jewish teachers
were also remarkable for the number of such fables which they had
introduced into their system. It is probable that the apostle referred
here particularly to the Jewish fables, and the counsel which he gives
to Timothy is, to have nothing to do with them.

And exercise thyself rather unto godliness - Rather than attempt to
understand those fables. Do not occupy your time and attention with
them, but rather cultivate piety, and seek to become more holy.

[1 Timothy 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti1 4:8</span></span>

For bodily exercise profiteth little - Margin, "for a little time." The
Greek will admit of either interpretation, and what is here affirmed is
true in either sense. The bodily exercise to which the apostle refers is
of little advantage compared with that piety which he recommended
Timothy to cultivate, and whatever advantage could be derived from it,
would be but of short duration. "Bodily exercise" here refers,
doubtless, to the mortifications of the body by abstinence and penance
which the ancient devotees, and particularly the Essenes, made so
important as a part of their religion. The apostle does not mean to say
that bodily exercise is in itself improper, or that no advantage can be
derived from it in the preservation of health, but he refers to it
solely as a means of religion; as supposed to promote holiness of heart
and of life. By these bodily austerities it was supposed that the
corrupt passions would be subdued, the wanderings of an unholy fancy
lettered down, and the soul brought into conformity to God. In
opposition to this supposition, the apostle has here stated a great
principle which experience has shown to be universally correct, that
such austerities do little to promote holiness, but much to promote
superstition. There must be a deeper work on the soul than any which can
be accomplished by the mere mortification of the body; see the notes on
[Col 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#023.md), and compare [Co1
9:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#025.md).

But godliness - Piety or religion.

Is profitable unto all things - In every respect. There is not an
interest of man, in reference to this life, or to the life to come,
which it would not promote. It is favorable to health of body, by
promoting temperance, industry, and frugality; to clearness and vigor of
intellect, by giving just views of truth, and of the relative value of
objects; to peace of conscience, by leading to the faithful performance
of duty; to prosperity in business, by making a man sober, honest,
prudent, and industrious; to a good name, by leading a man to pursue
such a course of life as shall deserve it; and to comfort in trial,
calmness in death, and immortal peace beyond the grave. Religion injures
no one. It does not destroy health; it does not enfeeble the intellect;
it does not disturb the conscience; it does not pander to raging and
consuming passions; it does not diminish the honor of a good name; it
furnishes no subject of bitter reflection on a bed of death.

It makes no one the poorer; it prompts to no crime; it engenders no
disease. If a man should do that which would most certainly make him
happy, he would be decidedly and conscientiously religious; and though
piety promises no earthly possessions directly as its reward, and
secures no immunity from sickness, bereavement, and death, yet there is
nothing which so certainly secures a steady growth of prosperity in a
community as the virtues which it engenders and sustains, and there is
nothing else that will certainly meet the ills to which man is subject.
I have no doubt that it is the real conviction of every man, that if he
ever becomes certainly "happy," he will be a Christian; and I presume
that it is the honest belief of every one that the true and consistent
Christian is the most happy of people. And yet, with this conviction,
people seek everything else rather than religion, and in the pursuit of
baubles, which they know cannot confer happiness, they defer religion -
the only certain source of happiness at any time - to the last period of
life, or reject it altogether.

Having promise of the life that now is - That is, it furnishes the
promise of whatever is really necessary for us in this life. The
promises of the Scriptures on this subject are abundant, and there is
probably not a lack of our nature for which there might not be found a
specific promise in the Bible; compare [Psa
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001.md); [Psa
84:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#011.md); [Phi
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#019.md). Religion promises us needful
food and raiment, [Mat 6:25-33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#025.md); [Isa
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#016.md); comfort in affliction, [Deu
33:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#027.md); [Job
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#019.md); [Psa
46:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001.md); [Heb
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#005.md); support in old age and death,
[Isa 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#004.md); [Psa
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004.md); compare [Isa
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#002.md); and a good reputation, an
honored name when we are dead; [Psa
37:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#001.md). There is nothing which man
really "needs" in this life, which is not promised by religion; and if
the inquiry were made, it would be surprising to many, even with our
imperfect religion, how literally these promises are fulfilled. David,
near the close of a long life, was able to bear this remarkable
testimony on this subject: "I have been young, and now am old; yet have
I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread;" [Psa
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#025.md). And now, of the beggars that
come to our doors, to how few of them can we give a cup of cold water,
feeling that we are giving it to a disciple! How rare is it that a true
Christian becomes a beggar! Of the inmates of our alms-houses, how very
few give any evidence that they have religion! They have been brought
there by vice, not by religion. True piety sends none to the alms-house;
it would have saved the great mass of those who are there from ever
needing the charity of their fellow-men.

And of that which is to come - Eternal life. And it is the only thing
that "promises" such a life. Infidelity makes no "promise" of future
happiness. Its business is to take away all the comforts which religion
gives, and to leave people to go to a dark eternity with no promise or
hope of eternal joy. Vice "promises" pleasures in the present life, but
only to disappoint its votaries here; it makes no promise of happiness
in the future world. There is nothing that furnishes any certain
"promises" of happiness hereafter, in this world or the next, but
religion. God makes no promise of such happiness to beauty, birth, or
blood; to the possession of honors or wealth; to great attainments in
science and learning, or to the graces of external accomplishment. All
these, whatever flattering hopes of happiness they may hold out here,
have no assurance of future eternal bliss. It is not by such things that
God graduates the rewards of heaven, and it is only "piety" or "true
religion" that furnishes any assurance of happiness in the world to
come.

[1 Timothy 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti1 4:9</span></span>

This is a faithful saying - see the notes on [Ti1
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015.md).

[1 Timothy 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti1 4:10</span></span>

For therefore we both labour and suffer reproach - In making this truth
known, that all might be saved, or that salvation was offered to all.
The "labor" was chiefly experienced in carrying this intelligence abroad
among the Gentiles; the "reproach" arose chiefly from the Jews for doing
it.

Because we trust in the living God - This does not mean, as our
translation would seem to imply, that he labored and suffered "because"
he confided in God, or that this was the "reason" of his sufferings, but
rather that this trust in the living God was his "support" in these
labors and trials. "We labor and suffer reproach, for we have hope in
God. Through him we look for salvation. We believe that he has made this
known to people, and believing this, we labor earnestly to make it
known, even though it be attended with reproaches." The sentiment is,
that the belief that God has revealed a plan of salvation for all
people, and invites all people to be saved, will make his friends
willing to "labor" to make this known, though it be attended with
reproaches.

Who is the Saviour of all men - This must be understood as denoting that
he is the Saviour of all people in some sense which differs from what is
immediately affirmed - "especially of those that believe." There is
something pertaining to "them" in regard to salvation which does not
pertain to "all men." It cannot mean that he brings all people to
heaven, "especially" those who believe - for this would be nonsense. And
if he brings all people actually to heaven, how can it be "especially"
true that he does this in regard to those who believe? Does it mean that
he saves others "without" believing? But this would be contrary to the
uniform doctrine of the Scriptures; see [Mar
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016.md). When, therefore, it is said
that he "is the Saviour of 'all' people, 'especially' of those who
believe," it must mean that there is a sense in which it is true that he
may be called the Saviour of all people, while, at the same time, it is
"actually" true that those only are saved who believe. This may be true
in two respects:

\(1\) As he is the "Preserver" of people [Job
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#020.md), for in this sense he may be said
to "save" them from famine, and war, and peril - keeping them from day
to day; compare [Psa 107:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#028.md);

\(2\) as he has "provided" salvation for all people. He is thus their
Saviour - and may be called the common Saviour of all; that is, he has
confined the offer of salvation to no one class of people; he has not
limited the atonement to one division of the human race; and he actually
saves all who are willing to be saved by him.

(See supplementary note on [Co2 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021.md).
This passage however is not regarded a proof text now on the extent of
the atonement, as the fair rendering of σωτήρ sōtēr is "Preserver." Dr.
Wardlaw has accordingly excluded it in his recent work.)

Specially of those that believe - This is evidently designed to limit
the previous remark. If it had been left there, it might have been
inferred that he would "actually save" all people. But the apostle held
no such doctrine, and he here teaches that salvation is "actually"
limited to those who believe. This is the speciality or the uniqueness
in the salvation of those who actually reach heaven, that they are
"believers;" see the notes on [Mar
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016.md). All people, therefore, do not
enter heaven, unless all people have faith. But is this so? What
evidence is there that the great mass of mankind die believing on the
Son of God?

[1 Timothy 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti1 4:11</span></span>

These things command and teach - As important doctrines, and as
embracing the sum of the Christian system. It follows from this, that a
minister of the gospel is solemnly bound to teach that there is a sense
in which God is the Saviour of all people. He is just as much bound to
teach this, as he is that only those will be saved who believe. It is a
glorious truth - and it is a thing for which a man should unceasingly
give thanks to God that he may go and proclaim that He has provided
salvation for all, and is willing that all should come and live.

[1 Timothy 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti1 4:12</span></span>

Let no man despise thy youth - That is, do not act in such a manner that
any shall despise you on account of your youth. Act as becomes a
minister of the gospel in all things, and in such a way that people will
respect you as such, though you are young. It is clear from this that
Timothy was then a young man, but his exact age there is no means of
determining. It is implied here:

\(1\) that there was danger that, by the levity and indiscretion to
which youth are so much exposed, the ministry might be regarded with
contempt; and,

\(2\) that it was possible that his deportment should be so grave,
serious, and every way appropriate, that the ministry would not be
blamed, but honored. The "way" in which Timothy was to live so that the
ministry would not be despised on account of his youth, the apostle
proceeds immediately to specify.

But be thou an example of the believers - One of the constant duties of
a minister of the gospel, no matter what his age. A minister should so
live, that if all his people should closely follow his example, their
salvation would be secure, and they would make the highest possible
attainments in piety. On the meaning of the word rendered "example," see
the notes on [Phi 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#017.md); [Th1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#007.md).

In word - In "speech," that is, your manner of conversation. This does
not refer to his "public teaching" - in which he could not probably be
an "example" to them - but to his usual and familiar conversation.

In conversation - In general deportment. See this word explained in the
notes on [Phi 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#027.md).

In charity - Love to the brethren, and to all; see notes on 1 Cor. 13.

In spirit - In the government of your passions, and in a mild, meek,
forgiving disposition.

In faith - At all times, and in all trials show to believers by your
example, how they ought to maintain unshaken confidence in God.

In purity - In chasteness of life; see [Ti1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#002.md). There should be nothing in your
contact with the other sex that would give rise to scandal. The papists,
with great impropriety, understand this as enjoining celibacy - as if
there could be no "purity" in that holy relation which God appointed in
Eden, and which he has declared to "be honorable in all" [Heb
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004.md), and which he has made so
essential to the wellbeing of mankind. If the apostle had wished to
produce the highest possible degree of corruption in the church, he
would have enjoined the celibacy of the clergy and the celibacy of an
indefinite number of nuns and monks. There are no other institutions on
the earth which have done so much to corrupt the chastity of the race,
as those which have grown out of the doctrine that celibacy is more
honorable than marriage.

[1 Timothy 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti1 4:13</span></span>

Till I come; - notes, [Ti1 3:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#014.md).

Give attendance to reading - The word here used may refer either to
public or to private reading; see [Act
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#015.md); [Co2
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014.md); compare Esdr. 9:48. The more
obvious interpretation here is to refer it to private reading, or to a
careful perusal of those books which would qualify him for his public
work. The then written portions of the sacred volume - the Old Testament
- are doubtless specially intended here, but there is no reason to doubt
that there were included also such other books as would be useful, to
which Timothy might have access. Even those were then few in number, but
Paul evidently meant that Timothy should, as far as practicable, become
acquainted with them. The apostle himself, on more than one occasion,
showed that he had some acquaintance with the classic writings of
Greece; [Act 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028.md); [Tit
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#012.md).

To exhortation - see the notes on [Rom
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#008.md).

To doctrine - To teaching - for so the word means; compare notes on [Rom
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#007.md).

[1 Timothy 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti1 4:14</span></span>

Neglect not the gift that is in thee - An important question arises
here, to what the word "gift" refers; whether to natural endowment; to
office; or to some supposed virtue which had been conferred by
ordination - some transmitted influence which made him holy as a
minister of religion, and which was to continue to be transmitted by the
imposition of apostolic hands. The word which is here used, is rendered
"gift" in every place in which it occurs in the New Testament. It is
found in the following places, and with the following significations:
deliverance from peril, [Co2 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#011.md); a
gift or quality of the mind, [Co1 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#007.md);
gifts of Christian knowledge or consolation, [Rom
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011.md); [Co1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#007.md); redemption or salvation through
Christ, [Rom 5:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#015.md); [Rom
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023.md); [Rom
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029.md); the miraculous endowments
conferred by the Holy Spirit, [Rom
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006.md); [Co1
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004.md), [Co1
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#009.md),[Co1
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028.md), [Co1
12:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#030.md), and the special gift or
endowment for the work of the ministry, [Ti1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014.md); [Ti2
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#006.md); [Pe1
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#010.md). The "gift" then referred to here
was that by which Timothy was qualified for the work of the ministry. It
relates to his office and qualifications - to "every thing" that entered
into his fitness for the work. It does not refer "exclusively" to any
influence that came upon him in virtue of his ordination, or to any new
grace that was infused into him by that act, making him either
officially or personally more holy than other people, or than he was
before - or to any efficacy in the mere act of ordination - but it
comprised "the whole train of circumstances" by which he had been
qualified for the sacred office and recognized as a minister of
religion. All this was regarded as a "gift," a "benefit," or a "favor" -
χαρισμα charisma - and he was not to neglect or disregard the
responsibilities and advantages growing out of it. In regard to the
manner in which this gift or favor was bestowed, the following things
are specified:

\(1\) It was the gift of God; [Ti2
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#006.md). He was to be recognized as its
source; and it was not therefore conferred merely by human hands. The
call to the ministry, the qualifications for the office, and the whole
arrangement by which one is endowed for the work, are primarily to be
traced to him as the source.

\(2\) it was given to Timothy in accordance with certain predictions
which had existed in regard to him - the expectations of those who had
observed his qualifications for such an office, and who had expressed
the hope that he would one day be permitted to serve the Lord in it.

\(3\) it was sanctioned by the laying on of the hands of the presbytery.
The call of God to the work thus recognized by the church, and the
approbation of the Presbytery expressed by setting him apart to the
office, should be regarded by Timothy as a part of the "gift" or
"benefit" (charisma) which had been conferred on him, and which he was
not to neglect.

\(4\) an additional circumstance which might serve to impress the mind
of Timothy with the value of this endowment, and the responsibility of
this office, was, that Paul himself had been concerned in his
ordination; [Ti2 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#006.md). He who was so
much more aged ([Plm 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#009.md); compare [Ti2
4:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#006).md); he who had been a father to
him, and who had adopted him and treated him as a son had been concerned
in his ordination; and this fact imposed a higher obligation to perform
aright the functions of an office which had been conferred on him in
this manner. We are not to suppose, therefore, that there was any
mysterious influence - any "virus" - conveyed by the act of ordination,
or that that act imparted any additional degree of holiness. The
endowment for the ministry; the previous anticipations and hopes of
friends; and the manner in which he had been inducted into the sacred
office, should all be regarded as a "benefit" or "favor" of a high
order, and as a reason why the gift thus bestowed should not be
neglected - and the same things now should make a man who is in the
ministry deeply feel the solemn obligations resting on him to cultivate
his powers in the highest degree, and to make the most of his talents.

Which was given thee by prophecy - That is, the prophetic declarations
and the hopes of pious friends in regard to your future usefulness, have
been among the means by which you have been introduced to the ministry,
and should be a reason why you should cultivate your powers, and perform
faithfully the duties of your office; see the notes on [Ti1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#018.md).

With the laying on of the hands of the presbytery - it was common to lay
on the hands in imparting a blessing, or in setting apart to any office;
see [Mat 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#015.md); [Mar
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#005.md); [Luk
4:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#040.md); [Luk
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#013.md); [Lev
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#014.md); [Num
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#023.md); [Act
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#008.md); [Act
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#006.md); [Act
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#017.md); [Act
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#003.md). The reference here is
undoubtedly to the act by which Timothy was set apart to the office of
the ministry. The word rendered "presbytery" - πρεσβυτέριον presbuterion
- occurs only in two other places in the New Testament - [Luk
22:66](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#066.md), where it is rendered "elders;"
and [Act 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#005.md), where it is rendered
"estate of the elders." It properly means an "assembly of aged men;
council of elders." In [Luk 22:66](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#066.md), and
[Act 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#005.md), it refers to the Jewish
"sanhedrin;" see the notes on [Mat
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022.md). In the passage before us, it
cannot refer to that body - for they did not ordain men to the Christian
ministry - but to some association, or council, or body of elders of the
Christian church. It is clear from the passage:

\(1\) that there was more than "one person" engaged in this service, and
taking part in it when Timothy was ordained, and therefore it could not
have been by a "prelate" or "bishop" alone.

\(2\) that the power conferred, whatever it was, was conferred by the
whole body constituting the presbytery - since the apostle says that the
"gift" was imparted, not in virtue of any particular power or eminence
in anyone individual, but by the "laying on of the hands of the
presbytery."

\(3\) the statement here is just such a one as would be made now
respecting a Presbyterian ordination; it is not one which would be made
of an Episcopal ordination. A Presbyterian would choose "these very
words" in giving an account of an ordination to the work of the
ministry; an Episcopalian "would not." The former speaks of an
ordination by a "presbytery;" the latter of ordination by a "bishop."
The former can use the account of the apostle Paul here as applicable to
an ordination, without explanations, comments, new versions or
criticisms; the latter cannot. The passage, therefore, is full proof
that, in one of the most important ordinations mentioned in the New
Testament, it was performed by an association of men, and not by a
prelate, and therefore, that this was the primitive mode of ordination.
Indeed, there is not a single instance of ordination to an office
mentioned in the New Testament which was performed by one man alone. See
this passage examined at greater length in my" Enquiry into the
organization and government of the apostolic church," pp. 208-221.

[1 Timothy 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti1 4:15</span></span>

Meditate upon these things - Upon the train of events by which you have
been led into the ministry, and upon the responsibilites and duties of
the office. Let your mind be deeply impressed with these things; make
them the subject of profound and serious thought.

Give thyself wholly to them - Greek "Be in them" - a phrase similar to
that of Horace - "totus in illis." The meaning is plain. He was to
devote his life wholly to this work. He was to have no other grand aim
of living. His time, attention, talents, were to be absorbed in the
proper duties of the work. He was not to make that subordinate and
tributary to any other purpose, nor was he to allow any other object to
interfere with the appropriate duties of that office. He was not to live
for money, fame, or pleasure; not to devote his time to the pursuits of
literature or science for their own sakes; not to seek the reputation of
an elegant or profound scholar; not to aim to be distinguished merely as
an accomplished gentleman, or as a skillful farmer, teacher, or author.
Whatever was done in any of these departments, was to be wholly
consistent with the direction, ἐν τούτοις ἴσθι en toutois isthi - "be in
these things" - be absorbed in the appropriate duties of the ministerial
office. It may be remarked here that no man will ever make much of
himself, or accomplish much in any profession, who does not make this
the rule of his life. He who has one great purpose of life to which he
patiently and steadily devotes himself, and to which he makes everything
else bend, will uniformly rise to high respectability, if not to
eminence. He who does not do this can expect to accomplish nothing.

That thy profiting - Greek Thy going forward; that is, thy advancement,
or progress. A minister of the gospel ought to make steady improvement
in all that pertains to his office. No man ought to be satisfied with
present attainments.

To all - Margin, "in all things." The margin is the more correct
rendering, but either of them makes good sense. It should be apparent to
all persons who attend on the stated preaching of a minister of the
gospel, that he is making steady advances in knowledge, wisdom, and
piety, and in all things that pertain to the proper performance of the
duties of his office. If a man really makes progress, it will be seen
and appreciated by others; if he does not, that will be as well
understood by his hearers.

[1 Timothy 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ti1 4:16</span></span>

Take heed unto thyself - This may be understood as relating to
everything of a personal nature that would qualify him for his work. It
may be applied to personal piety; to health; to manners; to habits of
living; to temper; to the ruling purposes; to the contact with others.
In relation to personal religion, a minister should take heed:

\(1\) that he has true piety; and,

\(2\) that he is advancing in the knowledge and love of God. In relation
to morals, he should be upright; to his contact with others, and his
personal habits, he should be correct, consistent, and gentlemanly, so
as to give needless offence to none. The person of a minister should be
neat and cleanly; his manners such as will show the fair influence of
religion on his temper and deportment; his style of conversation such as
will be an example to the old and the young, and such as will not offend
against the proper laws of courtesy and urbanity. There is no religion
in a filthy person; in uncouth manners; in an inconvenient and strange
form of apparel; in bad grammar, and in slovenly habits - and to be a
real gentleman should be as much a matter of conscience with a minister
of the gospel as to be a real Christian. Indeed, under the full and fair
influence of the gospel, the one always implies the other. Religion
refines the manners - it does not corrupt them; it makes one courteous,
polite, and kind - it never produces boorish manners, or habits that
give offence to the well-bred and the refined.

And unto the doctrine - The kind of teaching which you give, or to your
public instructions. The meaning is, that he should hold and teach only
the truth. He was to "take heed" to the whole business of public
instruction; that is, both to the matter and the manner. The great
object was to get as much truth as possible before the minds of his
hearers, and in such a way as to produce the deepest impression on them.

Continue in them - That is, in these things which have been specified.
He was ever to be found perseveringly engaged in the performance of
these duties.

For in doing this thou shalt both save thyself - By holding of the
truth, and by the faithful performance of your duties, you will secure
the salvation of the soul. We are not to suppose that the apostle meant
to teach that this would be the meritorious cause of his salvation, but
that these faithful labors would be regarded as an evidence of piety,
and would be accepted as such. It is equivalent to saying, that an
unfaithful minister of the gospel cannot be saved; one who faithfully
performs all the duties of that office with a right spirit, will be.

And them that hear thee - That is, you will be the means of their
salvation. It is not necessary to suppose that the apostle meant to
teach that he would save all that heard him. The declaration is to be
understood in a popular sense, and it is undoubtedly true that a
faithful minister will be the means of saving many sinners. This
assurance furnishes a ground of encouragement for a minister of the
gospel. He may hope for success, and should look for success. He has the
promise of God that if he is faithful he shall see the fruit of his
labors, and this result of his work is a sufficient reward for all the
toils and sacrifices and self-denials of the ministry. If a minister
should be the means of saving but one soul from the horrors of eternal
suffering and eternal sinning, it would be worth the most self-denying
labors of the longest life. Yet what minister of the gospel is there,
who is at all faithful to his trust, who is not made the honored
instrument of the salvation of many more than one? Few are the devoted
ministers of Christ who are not permitted to see evidence even here,
that their labor has not been in vain. Let not, then, the faithful
preacher be discouraged. A single soul rescued from death will be a gem
in his eternal crown brighter by far than ever sparkled on the brow of
royalty.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 5](ti1005.md)

</div>
