<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Timothy Index](ti2.md)  
  [Previous](ti2001)  [Next](ti2003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Timothy Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#001.md)

[2 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti2 2:0</span></span>

This chapter, 2 Tim. 2, is made up of various exhortations and
encouragements to duty. The apostle exhorts Timothy to be strong in the
Christian graces [Ti2 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#001.md); to commit
the great trust which he had received to faithful men [Ti2
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#002.md); to endure hardships like a good
soldier [Ti2 2:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#003.md), and refers him:

\(a\) to the case of one who goes to war, whose great business it is to
please him in whose service he is [Ti2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#004.md);

\(b\) to the case of one who strives for a crown at the games [Ti2
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#005.md), and,

\(c\) to the husbandman who looks onward for the reward of his labor;
[Ti2 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#006.md).

He then, in order to encourage him to be patient in enduring the trials
to which he would be exposed, refers him.

\(a\) to the certainty of the truth of that religion in whose cause he
would suffer [Ti2 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008.md);

\(b\) to his own case, reminding him how much he had endured in that
cause [Ti2 2:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#009.md);

\(c\) to the fact that our sufferings here will be crowned with certain
glory hereafter [Ti2 2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#011.md); and,

\(d\) to the assurance that the Lord Jesus will be faithful to all his
promises to his people; [Ti2 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#013.md).

These things the apostle then exhorts him to press upon the hearts of
others, that they might not waste their time in unprofitable pursuits,
but might engage in the same great and arduous struggle for securing the
reward; [Ti2 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#014.md). He then exhorts
Timothy to study to perform his duties in such a way that he would not
be ashamed and to avoid the unimportant strifes which were then raging;
and to enforce this, he refers to a real case with which Timothy was
acquainted - that of Hymeneus and Philetus, who, by unprofitable
speculations, had been led to deny a fundamental doctrine of religion;
[Ti2 2:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#015.md). Yet, Paul says, he
should not be discouraged because some had been led into dangerous
errors. The foundation of God remained firm. Those that were truly his
were known, and would not apostatize; [Ti2
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019.md). In illustration of this, and to
show that it was to be expected that all would not honor religion, the
apostle refers to a house in which there were all sorts of vessels, some
to honor and some to dishonor, and says that, if any one would endeavor
to free himself from all that was base and impure, he would be a vessel
meet for the use of the Master; [Ti2
2:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#020.md). To accomplish this, he gives
Timothy various directions respecting his conduct. He was to flee from
youthful lusts; he was to follow righteousness, faith, charity, and
peace; he was to avoid foolish questions; he was to be an example of
gentleness and meekness, and he was patiently to instruct those that
were of a different character; [Ti2
2:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#022.md).

[2 Timothy 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti2 2:1</span></span>

Thou therefore - In view of the fact stated in the previous chapter,
that many had turned away from the apostle, and had forsaken the paths
of truth.

Be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus; - compare the notes at
[Eph 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010.md). The meaning is, Be strong,
relying on the grace which the Lord Jesus only can impart.

[2 Timothy 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti2 2:2</span></span>

And the things which thou hast heard of me among many witnesses -
Margin, "by." Before, or in the presence of, many witnesses. Perhaps he
refers to a solemn charge which he gave him, in the presence of the
church, when he was ordained. It is by no means improbable that such a
charge was given then to a newly ordained minister, as it is now. On
such an occasion, the apostle would be likely to state a summary of
Christian doctrine, - (compare the notes at [Ti2
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#013).md), - and to exhort Timothy to a
faithful adherence to it.

The same commit thou to faithful men - In the same way as those things
have been committed to you. The reference is undoubtedly to ordination
to the ministerial office. Timothy was to see that those only were
admitted to the ministry who were qualified to understand the truths of
religion, and to communicate them to others. This is a clear warrant for
ministers to set apart others to the same sacred office. It does not
prove that the people are not at liberty to choose their own pastor, but
only that those in the ministry are to set apart others to the same
office with themselves. There is, doubtless, to be a "succession" of
ministers in the church; but the true line of the "succession" is to be
found in good men who are qualified to teach, and who have the spirit of
Christ, and not merely in those who have been ordained.

Who shall be able to teach others also - On the qualifications of
ministers, see the notes at [Ti1
3:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002.md).

[2 Timothy 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti2 2:3</span></span>

Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ - Such
hardships as a soldier is called to endure. The apostle supposes that a
minister of the gospel might be called to endure hardships, and that it
is reasonable that he should be as ready to do it as a soldier is. On
the hardships which he endured himself, see the notes at [Co2
11:23-29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023.md). Soldiers often endure great
privations. Taken from their homes and friends; exposed to cold, or
heat, or storms, or fatiguing marches; sustained on coarse fare, or
almost destitute of food, they are often compelled to endure as much as
the human frame can bear, and often indeed, sink under their burdens,
and die. If, for reward or their country's sake, they are willing to do
this, the soldier of the cross should be willing to do it for his
Saviour's sake, and for the good of the human race. Hence, let no man
seek the office of the ministry as a place of ease. Let no one come into
it merely to enjoy himself. Let no one enter it who is not prepared to
lead a soldier's life and to welcome hardship and trial as his portion.
He would make a bad soldier, who, at his enlistment, should make it a
condition that he should be permitted to sleep on a bed of down, and
always be well clothed and fed, and never exposed to peril, or compelled
to pursue a wearisome march. Yet do not some men enter the ministry,
making these the conditions? And would they enter the ministry on any
other terms?

[2 Timothy 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti2 2:4</span></span>

No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life -
Having alluded to the soldier, and stated one thing in which the
Christian minister is to resemble him, another point of resemblance is
suggested to the mind of the apostle. Neither the minister nor the
soldier is to be encumbered with the affairs of this life, and the one
should not be more than the other. This is always a condition in
becoming a soldier. He gives up his own business during the time for
which he is enlisted, and devotes himself to the service of his country.
The farmer leaves his plow, and the mechanic his shop, and the merchant
his store, and the student his books, and the lawyer his brief; and
neither of them expect to pursue these things while engaged in the
service of their country. It would be wholly impracticable to carry on
the plans of a campaign, if each one of these classes should undertake
to prosecute his private business. See this fully illustrated from the
Rules of War among the Romans, by Grotius, "in loc." Roman soldiers were
not allowed to marry, or to engage in any husbandry or trade; and they
were forbidden to act as tutors to any person, or curators to any man's
estate, or proctors in the cause of other men. The general principle
was, that they were excluded from those relations, agencies, and
engagements, which it was thought would divert their minds from that
which was to be the sole object of pursuit. So with the ministers of the
gospel. It is equally improper for them to "entangle" themselves with
the business of a farm or plantation; with plans of speculation and
gain, and with any purpose of worldly aggrandizement. The minister of
the gospel accomplishes the design of his appointment only when he can
say in sincerity, that he "is not entangled with the affairs of this
life;" compare the notes at [Co1
9:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#025.md).

That he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier - That is,
him who has enlisted him, or in whose employ he is. His great object is
to approve himself to him. It is not to pursue his own plans, or to have
his own will, or to accumulate property or fame for himself. His will is
absorbed in the will of his commander, and his purpose is accomplished
if he meet with his approbation. Nowhere else is it so true that the
will of one becomes lost in that of another, as in the case of the
soldier. In an army it is contemplated that there shall be but one mind,
one heart, one purpose - that of the commander; and that the whole army
shall be as obedient to that as the members of the human body are to the
one will that controls all. The application of this is obvious. The
grand purpose of the minister of the gospel is to please Christ. He is
to pursue no separate plans, and to have no separate will, of his own;
and it is contemplated that the whole "Corps" of Christian ministers and
members of the churches shall be as entirely subordinate to the will of
Christ, as an army is to the orders of its chief.

[2 Timothy 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti2 2:5</span></span>

And if a man also strive for masteries - As in the Grecian games. See
this favorite illustration of Paul explained in the notes at [Co1
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024.md) ff.

Yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully - In conformity with
the rules of the games. See Grotius, in loc. No one could obtain the
prize unless he had complied with all the laws of the games, and had
thus given to those with whom he contended, a fair opportunity to
succeed. "In those contests, he who transgressed the rules in the least
matter, not only failed of the prize, even though the apparent victor,
but was sometimes disgraced and punished." Pictorial Bible. So the
apostle here represents the Christian minister as engaged in a struggle
or conflict for the crown. He says that he could not hope to win it
unless he should comply with all the laws by which it is conferred;
unless he should subdue every improper propensity, and make an effort
like that evinced by the combatants at the Olympic games; compare the
notes at [Co1 9:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#026.md).

[2 Timothy 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti2 2:6</span></span>

The husbandman that laboureth - The margin is, "labouring first, must be
partaker." The idea, according to the translation in the text, is, that
there is a fitness or propriety (δει dei) that the man who cultivates
the earth, should enjoy the fruits of his labor. See the same image
explained in the notes at [Co1 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#010.md).
But if this be the meaning here, it is not easy to see why the apostle
introduces it. According to the marginal reading, the word "first" is
introduced in connection with the word "labour" - "labouring first, must
be partaker." That is, it is a great law that the husbandman must work
before be receives a harvest. This sense will accord with the purpose of
the apostle. It was to remind Timothy that labor must precede reward;
that if a man would reap, he must sow; that he could hope for no fruits,
unless he toiled for them. The point was not that the husbandman would
be the first one who would partake of the fruits; but that he must first
labor before he obtained the reward. Thus understood, this would be an
encouragement to Timothy to persevere in his toils, looking onward to
the reward. The Greek will bear this construction, though it is not the
most obvious one.

[2 Timothy 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti2 2:7</span></span>

Consider what I say; - see the notes at [Ti1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#015.md). The sense is "Think of the
condition of the soldier, and the principles on which he is enlisted;
think of the aspirant for the crown in the Grecian games; think of the
farmer, patiently toiling in the prospect of the distant harvest; and
then go to your work with a similar spirit." These things are worth
attention. When the minister of the gospel thinks of his hardships, of
his struggles against an evil world, and of his arduous and constant
discouraging toil, let him think of the soldier, of the man who
struggles for this world's honors, and of the patient farmer - AND be
content. How patiently do they bear all, and yet for what inferior
rewards!

And the Lord give thee understanding in all things - Enable you to see
the force of these considerations, and to apply them to your own case.
Such are often the discouragements of the ministry; so prone is the mind
to despondency, that we need the help of the Lord to enable us to apply
the most obvious considerations, and to derive support from the most
plain and simple truths and promises.

[2 Timothy 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti2 2:8</span></span>

Remember that Jesus Christ, of the seed of David, was raised from the
dead - Or rather, perhaps, "Remember Jesus Christ; him who was raised
from the dead." The idea seems not to be, as our translators supposed,
that he was to reflect on the fact that he was raised from the dead; but
rather that he was to think of the Saviour himself. "Think of the
Saviour, now raised up from the dead after all the sorrows of this life,
and let this encourage you to bear your trials." There is nothing better
fitted to enable us to endure the labors and trials of this life, than
to think of the Saviour. On the phrase "seed of David," see the notes at
[Rom 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003.md).

According to my gospel - The gospel which I preach; see the notes at
[Th2 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#014.md).

[2 Timothy 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti2 2:9</span></span>

Wherein I suffer trouble, as an evil-doer - as if I were a violator of
the laws. That is, I am treated as if I were a criminal.

Even unto bonds - As if I were one of the words kind of malefactors; see
the notes at [Eph 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#020.md). During the
apostle's first imprisonment at Rome, he was permitted to "dwell in his
own hired house," though guarded by a soldier, and probably chained to
him; see the notes at [Act 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#016.md), [Act
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#030.md). What was his condition in his
second imprisonment, during which this Epistle was written, we have no
means of knowing with certainty. It is probable, however, that he was
subjected to much more rigid treatment than he had been in the first
instance. The tradition is, that he and Peter were together in the
Mamertine prison at Rome; and the place is still shown in which it is
said that they were confined. The Mamertine prisons are of great
antiquity. According to Livy, they were constructed by Ancus Martius,
and enlarged by Servius Tullius. The lower prison is supposed to have
been once a quarry, and to have been at one time occupied as a granary.
These prisons are on the descent of the Capitoline Mount, toward the
Forum. They consist of two apartments, one over the other, built with
large, uncemented stones. There is no entrance to either, except by a
small aperture in the roof, and by a small hole in the upper floor,
leading to the cell below, without any staircase to either. The upper
prison is twenty-seven feet long, by twenty wide; the lower one is
elliptical, and measures twenty feet by ten. In the lower one is a small
spring, which is said at Rome to have arisen at the command of Peter, to
enable him to baptize his keepers, Processus and Martianus, with 47
companions, whom he converted. No certain reliance can be placed on any
part of this tradition, though in itself there is no improbability in
supposing that these prisons may have been used for confining
Christians, and the apostle Paul among others. Dr. Burton says that a
more horrible place for the confinement of a human being can scarcely be
conceived.

But the word of God is not bound - This is one of Paul's happy turns of
thought; compare the notes at [Act
26:29](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#029.md). The meaning is plain. The
gospel was prospered. that could not be lettered and imprisoned. It
circulated with freedom. even when he who was appointed to preach it was
in chains; see [Phi 1:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#013.md). As this
was the great matter, his own imprisonment was of comparatively little
consequence. What may befall us is of secondary importance. The grand
thing is the triumph of truth on the earth; and well may we bear
privations and sorrows, if the gospel moves on in triumph.

[2 Timothy 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti2 2:10</span></span>

Therefore I endure all things for the elect's sakes; - see the notes at
[Co2 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#006.md). The sense is, What I suffer
is in the cause of the church, spoken of here, as it is often, as
chosen, or elected; see the notes at [Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004.md).

That they may also obtain the salvation, ... - Their salvation, though
they, were elected, could not be secured without proper efforts. The
meaning of the apostle here is, that he was willing to suffer if he
might save others; and any one ought to be willing to suffer in order to
secure the salvation of the elect - for it was an object for which the
Redeemer was willing to lay down his life.

[2 Timothy 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti2 2:11</span></span>

It is a faithful saying - Or, rather, that which he was about to say was
worthy of entire credence and profound attention; see the notes at [Ti1
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015.md). The object is to encourage
Timothy to bear trials by the hope of salvation.

For if we be dead with him - see the notes at [Rom
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008.md).

We shall also live with him - This was a sort of maxim, or a settled
point, which is often referred to in the Bible; see the [Rom
6:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003.md) notes; [Joh
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025.md) note; [Th1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#014.md) note.

[2 Timothy 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti2 2:12</span></span>

If we suffer, we shall also reign with him - The meaning is, that the
members will be treated as the Head is. We become united with him by
faith, and, if we share his treatment on earth, we shall share his
triumphs in heaven; see the notes at [Rom
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017.md).

If we deny him, he also will deny us; - see the notes at [Mat
10:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#032.md).

[2 Timothy 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti2 2:13</span></span>

If we believe not, yet he abideth faithful - This cannot mean that, if
we live in sin, he will certainly save us, as if he had made any promise
to the elect, or formed any purpose that he would save them; whatever
might be their conduct; because:

\(1\) he had just said that if we deny him he will deny us; and,

\(2\) there is no such promise in the Bible, and no such purpose has
been formed. The promise is, that be that is a believer shall be saved,
and there is no purpose to save any but such as lead holy lives. The
meaning must be, that if we are unbelieving and unfaithful, Christ will
remain true to his word, and we cannot hope to be saved. The object of
the apostle evidently is, to excite Timothy to fidelity in the
performance of duty, and to encourage him to bear trials, by the
assurance that we cannot hope to escape if we are not faithful to the
cause of the Saviour. This interpretation accords with the design which
he had in view.

He cannot deny himself - Implying that it would be a denial of his very
nature to save those who are unfaithful. He is holy; and how can he save
one who is unholy? His very nature is purity; and how can he save one
who has no purity? Let no one, then, suppose that, because he is
elected, he is safe, if he lives in sin. The electing purpose of God,
indeed, makes salvation sure; but it is only for those who lead
righteous lives. Nothing would be mere dishonorable for God than to
resolve to save a man that lived habitually in sin; and if that were the
doctrine of election, it would deserve all the opprobrium that has ever
been heaped upon it.

[2 Timothy 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti2 2:14</span></span>

Of these things put them in remembrance - These great principles in
regard to the kingdom of Christ. They would be as useful to others as
they were for Timothy, to whom they were specially addressed.

Charging them before the Lord - In the presence of the Lord, implying
that it was a very important matter; see the notes at [Ti1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#018.md).

That they strive not about words to no profit; - see the notes at [Ti1
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#006.md); [Ti1
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#004.md).

But to the subverting of the hearers - Turning them away from the
simplicity of faith. It is rare, indeed, that a religious controversy
does not produce this effect, and this is commonly the case, where, as
often happens, the matter in dispute is of little importance.

[2 Timothy 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti2 2:15</span></span>

Study to show thyself approved unto God - Give diligence [Pe2
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#010.md), or make an effort so to
discharge the duties of the ministerial office as to meet the divine
approbation. The object of the ministry is not to please men. Such
doctrines should be preached, and such plans formed, and such a manner
of life pursued, as God will approve. To do this demands study or care -
for there are many temptations to the opposite course; there are many
things the tendency of which is to lead a minister to seek popular favor
rather than the divine approval. If any man please God, it will be as
the result of deliberate intention and a careful life.

A workman that needeth not to be ashamed - A man faithfully performing
his duty, so that when he looks over what he has done, he may not blush.

Rightly dividing the word of truth - The word here rendered "rightly
dividing," occurs nowhere else in the New Testament. It means, properly,
"to cut straight, to divide right;" and the allusion here may be to a
steward who makes a proper distribution to each one under his care of
such things as his office and their necessities require; compare the
notes at [Mat 13:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#052.md). Some have
supposed that there is an allusion here to the Jewish priest, cutting or
dividing the sacrifice into proper parts; others, that the allusion is
to the scribes dividing the law into sections; others, to a carver
distributing food to the guests at a feast. Robinson (Lexicon) renders
it, "rightly proceeding as to the word of truth;" that is, rightfully
and skillfully teaching the word of truth. The idea seems to be, that
the minister of the gospel is to make a proper distribution of that
word, adapting his instructions to the circumstances and wants of his
hearers, and giving to each that which will be fitted to nourish the
soul for heaven.

[2 Timothy 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ti2 2:16</span></span>

But shun profane and vain babblings, - see the notes at [Ti1
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020.md).

For they will increase unto more ungodliness - Their tendency is to
alienate the soul from God, and to lead to impiety. Such kinds of
disputation are not merely a waste of time, they are productive of
positive mischief. A man fond of contention in religious things is
seldom one who has much love for the practical duties of piety, or any
very deep sense of the distinction between right and wrong. You will not
usually look for him in the place of prayer, nor can you expect his aid
in the conversion of sinners, nor will you find that he has any very
strict views of religious obligation.

[2 Timothy 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ti2 2:17</span></span>

And their word - The word, or the discourses of those who love vain and
idle disputations.

Will eat as doth a canker - Margin, "gangrene." This word - γάγγραινα
gangraina - occurs nowhere else in the New Testament. It is derived from
γραιω graiō, γραινω grainō, to devour, corrode," and means "gangrene" or
"mortification" - the death of a part, spreading, unless arrested, by
degrees over the whole body. The words rendered "will eat," mean "will
have nutriment;" that is, will spread over and consume the healthful
parts. It will not merely destroy the parts immediately affected, but
will extend into the surrounding healthy parts and destroy them also. So
it is with erroneous doctrines. They will not merely eat out the truth
in the particular matter to which they refer, but they will also spread
over and corrupt other truths. The doctrines of religion are closely
connected, and are dependent on each other - like the different parts of
the human body. One cannot be corrupted without affecting those adjacent
to it, and unless checked, the corruption will soon spread over the
whole.

Of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus - In regard to Hymenaeus, see the
notes at [Ti1 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#020.md). Of Philetus
nothing more is known. They have gained an undesirable immortality,
destined to be known to the end of time only as the advocates of error.

[2 Timothy 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ti2 2:18</span></span>

Who concerning the truth have erred - To what extent they had erred is
unknown. Paul mentions only one point - that pertaining to the
resurrection; but says that this was like a gangrene. It would
certainly, unless checked, destroy all the other doctrines of religion.
No man can safely hold a single error, any more than he can safely have
one part of his body in a state of mortification.

Saying that the resurrection is past already - It is not known in what
form they held this opinion. It may have been, as Augustine supposes,
that they taught that there was no resurrection but that which occurs in
the soul when it is recovered from the death of sin, and made to live
anew. Or it may be that they held that those who had died had
experienced all the resurrection which they ever would, by passing into
another state, and receiving at death a spiritual body fitted to their
mode of being in the heavenly world. Whatever was the form of the
opinion, the apostle regarded it as a most dangerous error, for just
views of the resurrection undoubtedly lie at the foundation of correct
apprehensions of the Christian system; compare the notes at [Co1
15:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#012.md).

And overthrow the faith of some - That is, on this point, and as would
appear on all the correlative subjects of Christian belief; compare [Ti1
1:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#019.md).

[2 Timothy 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ti2 2:19</span></span>

Nevertheless the foundation of God is sure - Margin, "steady." The
meaning is, that though some had been turned away by the arts of these
errorists, yet the foundation of the church which God had laid remained
firm; compare [Eph 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020.md), "And are
built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief cornerstone." As long as this foundation
remained firm, there was no reason to be troubled from the few instances
of apostasy which had occurred; compare [Psa
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003.md). It is not uncommon to compare
the church to a building erected on a solid foundation; [Eph
2:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020.md); [Co1
3:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009.md); [Mat
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018.md).

Having this seal - Or rather a seal with this inscription. The word
"seal" is sometimes used to denote the instrument by which an impression
is made, and sometimes the impression or inscription itself. A seal is
used for security [Mat 27:66](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#066.md), or as a
mark of genuineness; [Rev 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#004.md). The
seal here is one that was affixed to the foundation, and seems to refer
to some inscription on the foundation-stone which always remained there,
and which denoted the character and design of the edifice. The allusion
is to the custom, in rearing an edifice, of inscribing the name of the
builder and the design of the edifice on the cornerstone. See
Rosenmuller, Alte undneue Morgenland, No. 405. So the church of Christ
is a building reared by the hands of God. Its foundation has been firmly
and securely laid, and on that foundation there is an inscription always
remaining which determines the character of the edifice.

The Lord knoweth them that are his - This is one of the inscriptions on
the foundation-stone of the church, which seems to mark the character of
the building. It always stands there, no matter who apostatizes. It is
at the same time a fearful inscription - showing that no one can deceive
God; that he is intimately acquainted with all who enter that building;
and that in the multitudes which enter there, the friends and the foes
of God are intimately known. He can separate his own friends from all
others, and his constant care will be extended to all who are truly his
own, to keep them from falling. This has the appearance of being a
quotation, but no such passage is found in the Old Testament in so many
words. In [Nah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#007.md), the following
words are found: "And he knoweth them that trust in him;" and it is
possible that Paul may have had that in his eye; but it is not necessary
to suppose that he designed it as a quotation. A phrase somewhat similar
to this is found in 1 [Num 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#005.md), "the
Lord will show who are his," rendered in the Septuagint, "God knoweth
who are his;" and Whitby supposes that this is the passage referred to.
But whether Paul had these passages in view or not, it is clear that he
meant to say that it was one of the fundamental things in religion, that
God knew who were his own people, and that he would preserve them from
the danger of making shipwreck of their faith.

And, Let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity -
This is the other seal or inscription which is made on the foundation
which God has laid. The foundation has two inscriptions - the first
implying that God knows all who are his own people; the other, that all
who are his professed people should depart from evil. This is not found
in so many words in the Old Testament, and, like the former, it is not
to be regarded as a quotation. The meaning is, that it is an elementary
principle in the true church, that all who become members of it should
lead holy lives. It was also true that they would lead holy lives, and
amidst all the defections of errorists, and all their attempts to draw
away others from the true faith, those might be known to be the true
people of God who did avoid evil.

[2 Timothy 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ti2 2:20</span></span>

But in a great house - Still keeping up the comparison of the church
with a building. The idea is, that the church is a large edifice, and
that in such a building we are not to expect entire uniformity in all
the articles which it contains.

There are not only vessels of gold and of silver, ... - You are not to
expect to find all the articles of furniture alike, or all made of the
same material. Variety in the form, and use, and material, is necessary
in furnishing such a house.

And some to honour, and some to dishonour - Some to most honorable uses
- as drinking vessels, and vessels to contain costly viands, and some
for the less honorable purposes connected with cooking, etc. The same
thing is to be expected in the church. See this idea illustrated at
greater length under another figure in the notes at [Co1
12:14-26](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#014.md); compare the notes, [Rom
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021.md). The application here seems to
be, that in the church it is to be presumed that there will be a great
variety of gifts and attainments, and that we are no more to expect that
all will be alike, than we are that all the vessels in a large house
will be made of gold.

[2 Timothy 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ti2 2:21</span></span>

If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto
honour - If a man "cleanse" or "purify" himself; compare the notes on
[Joh 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#002.md). The word "these" refers,
here, to the persons represented by the vessels of wood and of earth -
the vessels made to dishonor, as mentioned in the previous verse [Ti2
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#020.md). The idea is, that if one would
preserve himself from the corrupting influence of such men, he would be
fitted to be a vessel of honor, or to be employed in the most useful and
honorable service in the cause of his Master. On the word "vessel," see
the notes at [Act 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015.md).

And meet for the master's use - Suitable to be employed by the Lord
Jesus in promoting his work on earth.

[2 Timothy 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ti2 2:22</span></span>

Flee also youthful lusts - Such passions as youth are subject to. On the
word "flee," and the pertinency of its use in such a connection, see the
notes at [Co1 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#018.md). Paul felt that
Timothy, then a young man, was subject to the same passions as other
young men; and hence, his repeated cautions to him to avoid all those
things, arising from his youth, which might be the occasion of scandal;
compare the notes at [Ti1 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012.md); [Ti1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#002.md). It is to be remembered that this
Epistle is applicable to other ministers, as well as to Timothy; and, to
a young man in the ministry, no counsel could be more appropriate than
to "flee from youthful lusts;" not to indulge for a moment in those
corrupt passions to which youth are subject, but to cultivate the pure
and sober virtues which become the ministerial office.

But follow righteousness, ... - compare the notes at [Heb
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014.md). The general meaning here is,
that he was to practice all that is good and virtuous. He was to
practice righteousness, or justice and equity, in all his dealings with
men; faith, or fidelity in his duties; charity, or love to all men (see
the notes at 1 Cor. 13); peace, or harmony and concord with all others.
What virtues could be more appropriate for a minister of the gospel?

With them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart - That is, with all
Christians, who are often characterized as those who call on the Lord;
[Co1 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#002.md); compare [Act
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#011.md). In all his social contact with
them, Timothy was to manifest the virtues above recommended. But not
with them alone. It would be incumbent on him to exhibit the same
virtues in his intercourse with all.

[2 Timothy 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">ti2 2:23</span></span>

But foolish and unlearned questions avoid; - see the notes at [Ti2
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#016.md); compare the notes at [Ti1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#004.md), [Ti1
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#006.md); [Ti1
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#007.md). The word "unlearned," here, means
"trifling; that which does not tend to edification; stupid." The Greeks
and the Hebrews were greatly given to controversies of various kinds,
and many of the questions discussed pertained to points which could not
be settled, or which, if settled, were of no importance. Such has been
the character of no small part of the disputes which have agitated the
world. Paul correctly says that the only effect of such disputes is to
engender harsh contention. Points of real importance can be discussed
with no injury to the temper; but people cannot safely dispute about
trifles.

[2 Timothy 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ti2 2:24</span></span>

And the servant of the Lord - Referring here primarily to the Christian
minister, but applicable to all Christians; for all profess to be the
servants of the Lord.

Must not strive - He may calmly inquire after truth; he may discuss
points of morals, or theology, if he will do it with a proper spirit; he
may "contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints" [Jde
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#003.md); but he may not do that which is
here mentioned as strife. The Greek word - μάχεσθαι machesthai -
commonly denotes, "to fight, to make war, to contend." In [Joh
6:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#052.md); [Act
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#026.md); [Ti2
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024.md);, it is rendered "strove," and
"strive;" in [Jam 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#002.md), "fight." It is
not elsewhere used in the New Testament. The meaning is, that the
servant of Christ should be a man of peace. He should not indulge in the
feelings which commonly give rise to contention, and which commonly
characterize it. He should not struggle for mere victory, even when
endeavoring to maintain truth; but should do this, in all cases, with a
kind spirit, and a mild temper; with entire candor; with nothing
designed to provoke and irritate an adversary; and so that, whatever may
be the result of the discussion, "the bond of peace" may, if possible,
be preserved; compare the notes at [Rom
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#018.md).

But be gentle unto all men; - see the notes at [Th1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#007.md). The word rendered "gentle," does
not occur elsewhere in the New Testament. It means that the Christian
minister is to be meek and mild toward all, not disputatious and
quarrelsome.

Apt to teach; - see the notes at [Ti1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002.md).

Patient - Margin, "forbearing." The Greek word here used does not
elsewhere occur in the New Testament. It means, patient under evils and
injuries. Robinson, Lexicon. Compare the [Eph
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#002.md) note; [Col
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#013.md) note.

[2 Timothy 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">ti2 2:25</span></span>

In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves - That is, those
who embrace error, and array themselves against the truth. We are not to
become angry with such persons, and denounce them at once as heretics.
We are not to hold them up to public reproach and scorn; but we are to
set about the business of patiently "instructing them." Their grand
difficulty, it is supposed in this direction, is, that they are ignorant
of the truth. Our business with them is, "calmly to show them what the
truth is." If they are angry, we are not to be. If they oppose the
truth, we are still calmly to state it to them. If they are slow to see
it, we are not to become weary or impatient. Nor, if they do not embrace
it at all, are we to become angry with them, and denounce them. We may
pity them, but we need not use hard words. This is the apostolic precept
about the way of treating those who are in error; and can any one fail
to see its beauty and propriety? Let it be remembered, also, that this
is not only beautiful and proper in itself; it is the wiseST course, if
we would bring others over to our opinions. You are not likely to
convince a man that you are right, and that he is wrong, if you first
make him angry; nor are you very likely to do it, if you enter into
harsh contention. You then put him on his guard; you make him a party,
and, from self-respect, or pride, or anger, he will endeavor to defend
his own opinions, and will not yield to yours. "Meekness" and
"gentleness" are the very best things, if you wish to convince another
that he is wrong. With his heart first, and then modestly and kindly
show him "what the truth is," in as few words, and with as unassuming a
spirit, as possible, "and you have him."

If God peradventure will give them repentance, ... - Give them such a
view of the error which they have embraced, and such regret for having
embraced it, that they shall be willing to admit the truth. After all
our care in teaching others the truth, our only dependence is on God for
its success. We cannot be absolutely certain that they will see their
error; we cannot rely certainly on any power which argument will have;
we can only hope that God may show them their error, and enable them to
see and embrace the truth; compare [Act
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#018.md). The word rendered
"peradventure," here - μήποτε mēpote - means, usually, "not even,
never;" and then, "that never, lest ever" - the same as "lest perhaps."
It is translated "lest at any time," [Mat
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#006.md); [Mat
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#025.md); [Mat
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#015.md); [Mar
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#012.md); [Luk
21:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#034.md); "lest," Matt, [Luk
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#006.md); [Luk
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#029.md); [Luk
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#032.md); "et al.: lest haply," [Luk
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#012.md); [Act
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#039.md). It does not imply that there was
any CHance about what is said, but rather that there was uncertainty in
the mind of the speaker, and that there was need of caution LesT
something should occur; or, that anything was done, or should be done,
to prevent something from happening.

It is not used elsewhere in the New Testament in the sense which our
translators, and all the critics, so far as I have examined, give to it
here - as implying A hope that God would give them repentance, etc. But
I may be permitted to suggest another interpretation, which will accord
with the uniform meaning of the word in the New Testament, and which
will refer the matter to those who had embraced the error, and not to
God. It is this: "In meekness instructing 'those that oppose themselves'
(ἀντιδιατιθεμένους antidiatithemenous) 'lest' - μήποτε mēpote - God
should give them repentance, and they should recover themselves out of
the snare of the devil," etc. That is, they put themselves in this
posture of opposition so that they shall not be brought to repentance,
and recover themselves. They do it with a precautionary view that they
may not be thus brought to repentance, and be recovered to God. They
take this position of opposition to the truth, intending not to be
converted; and this is the reason why they are not converted.

[2 Timothy 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">ti2 2:26</span></span>

And that they may recover themselves - Margin, "awake." The word which
is rendered "recover" in the text, and "awake" in the margin -
ἀνανήψωσιν ananēpsōsin - occurs nowhere else in the New Testament. It
properly means, to become sober again, as from inebriation; to awake
from a deep sleep, and then, to come to a right mind, as one does who is
aroused from a state of inebriety, or from sleep. The representation in
this part of the verse implies that, while under the influence of error,
they were like a man intoxicated, or like one in deep slumber. From this
state they were to be roused as one is from sleep, or as a man is
recovered from the stupor and dullness of intoxication.

Out of the snare of the devil - The snare which the devil has spread for
them, and in which they have become entangled. There is a little
confusion of metaphor here, since, in the first part of the verse, they
are represented as asleep, or intoxicated; and, here, as taken in a
snare. Yet the general idea is clear. In one part of the verse, the
influence of error is represented as producing sleep, or stupor; in the
other, as being taken in a snare, or net; and, in both, the idea is,
that an effort was to be made that they might be rescued from this
perilous condition.

Who are taken captive by him at his will - Margin, "alive." The Greek
word means, properly, to take alive; and then, to take captive, to win
over [Luk 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#010.md); and then, to ensnare,
or seduce. Here it means that they had been ensnared by the arts of
Satan "unto (εἰς eis) his will;" that is, they were so influenced by
him, that they complied with his will. Another interpretation of this
passage should be mentioned here, by which it is proposed to avoid the
incongruousness of the metaphor of "awaking" one from a "snare." It is
adopted by Doddridge, and is suggested also by Burder, as quoted by
Rosenmuller, "A. u. n. Morgenland." According to this, the reference is
to an artifice of fowlers, to scatter seeds impregnated with some
intoxicating drugs, intended to lay birds asleep, that they may draw the
snare over them more securely. There can be no doubt that such arts were
practiced, and it is possible that Paul may have alluded to it. Whatever
is the allusion, the general idea is clear. It is an affecting
representation of those who have fallen into error. They are in a deep
slumber. They are as if under the fatal influence of some stupefying
potion. They are like birds taken alive in this state, and at the mercy
of the fowler. They will remain in this condition, unless they shall be
roused by the mercy of God; and it is the business of the ministers of
religion to carry to them that gospel call, which God is accustomed to
bless in showing them their danger. That message should be continually
sounded in the ears of the sinner, with the prayer and the hope that God
will make it the means of arousing him to seek his salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy Chapter 3](ti2003.md)

</div>
