<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Titus Index](tit.md)  
  [Previous](ti2004)  [Next](tit001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Titus Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001.md)

[Titus](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">tit 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Titus

Section 1. The History of Titus

Of Titus nothing more is certainly known than what we find in the
epistles of Paul. It is somewhat remarkable that there is no mention of
him in the Acts of the Apostles, nor does his name occur in the New
Testament anywhere, except in the writings of the apostle Paul. From his
incidental allusions to him, we learn the following particulars
respecting him.

(1.) he was by birth a Gentile. In [Gal
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003.md), he is called a Greek, and it is
certain from that passage that he had not been circumcised, and the
probability is, that up to the time of his conversion he had lived as
other Gentiles, and had not been converted to the Jewish faith. His
father and mother were, doubtless, both Greeks, and thus he was
distinguished from Timothy, whose mother was a Jewess, but whose father
was a Greek; [Act 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003.md); compare Notes
on [Gal 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003.md). If Titus had been
proselyted to the Jewish faith, it is to be presumed that he would have
been circumcised.

(2.) he had been converted to Christianity by the instrumentality of
Paul himself. This is clear from the epistle, [Tit
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#004.md), "To Titus, mine own son, after
the common faith;" see the notes at [Ti1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#002.md). This is language which the
apostle would not have used of one who had been converted by the
instrumentality of another. But where he lived, and when or how he was
converted, is wholly unknown. As to the time when he was converted, it
is known only that this occurred before the fourteenth year after the
conversion of Paul, for at that time Titus, a Christian, was with Paul
at Jerusalem; [Gal 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001.md). As to the
place where he lived, there seems some reason to suppose that it was in
some part of Asia Minor - for the Greeks abounded there; Paul laboured
much there; and there were numerous converts made there to the Christian
faith. Still this is not by any means certain.

(3.) Titus went with Paul to Jerusalem when he was deputed by the church
at Antioch with Barnabas, to lay certain questions before the apostles
and eiders there in reference to the converts from the Gentiles; Acts
15; compare [Gal 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001.md). It is not known
why he took Titus with him on that occasion and the reasons can be only
conjectural; see Notes on [Gal 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001.md). It
is possible that he was taken with him to Jerusalem because his was a
case in point in regard to the question which was to come before the
apostles and elders there. It is not improbable, from an expression
which Paul uses in describing his visit there - "neither was Titus
compelled to be circumcised " - that the case came up for discussion,
and that strenuous efforts were made by the Judaizing portion there
(compare [Gal 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#004).md), to have him
circumcised. Paul and Barnabas, however, so managed the cause that the
principle was settled that it was not necessary that converts from the
heathen should be circumcised; [Act
15:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#019.md).

(4.) after the council at Jerusalem, it seems probable that Titus
returned with Paul and Barnabas, accompanied by Silas and Judas [Act
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#023.md), and that afterwards he attended
the apostle for a considerable time in his travels and labours. This
appears from a remark in [Co2 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#023.md);
"Whether any do inquire of Titus, he is my partner and fellow-helper
concerning you." From this it would seem, that he had been with Paul;
that he was as yet not well known; and that the fact that he had been
seen with him had led to inquiry who he was, and what was the office
which he sustained. That he was also a companion of Paul, and quite
essential to his comfort in his work, is apparent from the following
allusions to him in the same epistle - [Co2
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#006.md) - "God, that comforteth those who
are cast down, comforted us by the coming of Titus;" [Co2
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#013.md). "I had no rest in my spirit
because I found not Titus my brother;" [Co2
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#013.md). "Yea and exceedingly the more
joyed we for the joy of Titus;" compare [Ti2
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#010.md); [Co2
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#018.md).

(5.) there is reason to believe that Titus spent some time with the
apostle in Ephesus. For the First Epistle to the Corinthians was written
at Ephesus, and was sent by the hand of Titus; Introduction to 1
Corinthians, Section 6. It is to be presumed also, that he would on such
an occasion send some one with the epistle in whom he had entire
confidence, and who had been so long with him as to become familiar with
his views. For Titus, on this occasion, was sent not only to bear the
epistle, but to endeavour to heal the divisions and disorders there, and
to complete a collection for the poor saints in Jerusalem which the
apostle had himself commenced; compare the notes at [Co2
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#013.md); [Co2
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#006.md); [Co2
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#006.md). After this he met Paul in
Macedonia [Co2 7:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#005.md), but whether he
was with him when he went with the collection to Jerusalem, and during
his imprisonment in Cesarea, or on his voyage to Rome, we have no
information.

(6.) we next hear of him as being left by the apostle in the island of
Crete, that he might "set in order the things that were wanting, and
ordain elders in every city;" [Tit
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005.md). This is supposed to have occurred
about the year 62, and after the first imprisonment of the apostle at
Rome. It is evidently implied that the apostle had been himself there
with him, and that he had undertaken to accomplish some important object
there, but that something had prevented his completing it, and that he
had left Titus to finish it. This was clearly a temporary arrangement,
for there is no evidence that it was designed that Titus should be a
permanent "bishop" of Crete, or that he remained there long. That he did
not design that he should be a permanent bishop of that island, is clear
from [Tit 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#012.md), where the apostle
directs him, when he should send Artemas to take his place, to come to
him to Nicopolis. If Titus was a prelatical bishop, the apostle would
not in this summary manner have superseded him, or removed him from his
diocese.

(7.) he was with Paul in Rome during his second imprisonment there. He
did not, however, remain with him until his trial, but left him and went
into Dalmatia; [Ti2 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#010.md). For the
probable reason why he had gone there, see Notes on that place. What
became of him afterward, we are not informed. The tradition is, that he
returned to Crete, and preached the gospel there and in the neighbouring
islands, and died at the age of 94. But this tradition depends on no
certain evidence.

Section 2. The Island of Crete

As Paul [Tit 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005.md) says that he had left
Titus in Crete to perform an important service there, and as the
instructions in this epistle doubtless had some peculiar applicability
to the state of things existing there, it is of importance, in order to
a correct understanding of the epistle, to have some knowledge of that
island, and of the circumstances in which the gospel was introduced
there.

The island of Crete, now Candia, is one of the largest islands in the
Mediterranean, at the south of all the Cyclades. See the Map of Asia
Minor, prefixed to the Acts of the Apostles. Its name is said by some to
have been derived from the Curetes, who are supposed to have been its
first inhabitants; by others, from the nymph Crete, daughter of
Hesperus; and by others, from Cres, a son of Jupiter and the nymph
Idaea. The ancient authors in general say that Crete was originally
peopled from Palestine. According to Bochart (Lib. 5, c. 15), that part
of Palestine which lies by the Mediterranean was called by the Arabs
Keritha, and by Syrians Creth; and the Hebrews called the inhabitants
Crethi, or Crethim, which the Septuagint has rendered Κρητας Krētas -
Cretans; [Eze 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#016.md); [Zep
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#005.md). It would be easy to pass from
Palestine to the island of Crete. Sir Isaac Newton, also, is of opinion
that Crete was peopled from Palestine. He says, "Many of the Phoenicians
and Syrians, in the year before Christ 1045, fled from Zidon, and from
king David, into Asia Minor, Crete, Greece, and Libya, and introduced
letters, music, poetry, the Octaeteris, metals and their fabrication and
other arts, sciences, and customs of the Phoenicians. Along with these
Phoenicians came a sort of men skilled in religious mysteries, arts, and
sciences of Phoenicia, and settled in several places, under the names of
Curetes, Idaei, Dactyli," etc.

According to Pliny, the extent of Crete from east to west is about 270
miles, but its breadth nowhere exceeds fifty miles. The early
inhabitants are generally supposed to be the Eteocretes of Homer; but
their origin is unknown. Minos, who had expelled his brother Sarpedon
from the throne, first gave laws to the Cretans, and, having conquered
the pirates who infested the Aegean sea, established a powerful navy. In
the Trojan war, Idomeneus, sovereign of Crete, led its forces to war in
eighty vessels - a number little inferior to those commanded by
Agamemnon himself. At this period, the island appears to have been
inhabited by a mixed population of Greeks and barbarians. After the
Trojan war, the principal cities formed themselves into several
republics, for the most part independent, while some of them were
connected with federal ties. The Cretan code of laws was supposed by
many to have furnished Lycurgus with the model of his most salutary
regulations.

It was founded on the just basis of liberty and an equality of rights,
and its great aim was to promote social harmony and peace, by enforcing
temperance and frugality. In regard to this code, see Anthon'S Class.
Dic., Art. Creta. In the time of Polybius (bc 203), the Cretans had much
degenerated from their ancient character; for he charges them repeatedly
with the grossest immorality, and the basest vices. Polyb. 4, 47, 53;
Id. 6, 46. We know, also, with what severity they are reproved by Paul,
in the words of Epimenides; see the notes at [Tit
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#012.md). Crete was subdued by the Romans,
and became a part of a Roman province. The interior of the island is
very hilly and woody, and intersected with fertile valleys. Mount Ida,
in the center of the island, is the principal mountain, and surpasses
all the others in elevation. The island contains no lakes, and its
rivers are mostly mountain torrents, which are dry during the summer
season.

The valleys, or sloping plains, in the island are represented as very
fertile. The greater portion of the land is not cultivated; but it might
produce sugar-cane, excellent wine, and the best kind of fruit. It has a
delightful climate, and is remarkably healthful. The ancients asserted
that this delightful island, the birth-place of Jupiter, was freed, by
the indulgence of the gods, from every noxious animal. No quadrupeds of
a ferocious character belong to it. The wild goat is the only inhabitant
of the forest and the lofty mountains, and sheep overspread the plains,
and graze undisturbed by ravenous enemies. The island now is under
Turkish rule, and is divided into three pachaliks; but the inhabitants
are mostly Greeks, who are kept in a state of great depression. The
native Candians are of the Greek church, and are allowed the free
exercise of their religion. The island is divided into twelve
bishoprics, the bishop of one of which assumes the title of archbishop,
and is appointed by the patriarch of Constantinople. The situation of
this island for commerce can scarcely be surpassed. It is at an almost
equal distance from Asia, Europe, and Africa, and might be made the
emporium for the manufactures and agricultural productions of each; but,
from the oppressive nature of the government, the indolence of the
Turks, and the degraded state of the Greeks, those advantages are not
improved, and its condition partakes of that of the general condition of
the Turkish empire.

This island was formerly famous for its hundred cities; it is
distinguished in the ancient fabulous legends for the arrival there of
Europa, on a bull, from Phoenicia; for the laws of Minos; for the
labyrinth, the work of Daedalus; and, above all, as the place where
Jupiter was born and was buried. According to the fables of mythology,
he was born in a cavern near Lyctus, or Cnosus; was rocked in a golden
cradle; was fed with honey, and with the milk of the goat Amalthea,
while the Curetes danced around him, clashing their arms, to prevent his
cries from being heard by Saturn. He became, according to the legend,
the king of Crete, and was buried on the island. See Anthon, Class.
Dic., Art. Jupiter.

Section 3. The introduction of the gospel into Crete

We have no certain information in regard to the time when the gospel was
first preached in Crete, nor by whom it was done. There are some
circumstances mentioned, however, which furnish all the light which we
need on this point, in order to an understanding of the epistle before
us. Among the persons who were in Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost, and
who were converted there, Cretans are mentioned [Act
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#011.md); and it is highly probable that,
when they returned to their homes, they made the gospel known to their
countrymen. Yet history is wholly silent as to the method by which it
was done, and as to the result on the minds of the inhabitants. As no
visit of any of the apostles to that island is mentioned by Luke in the
Acts of the Apostles, it may be presumed that the gospel there had not
produced any very marked success; and the early history of Christianity
there is to us unknown.

It is clear from the epistle before us [Tit
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005.md), that the apostle Paul was there
on some occasion, and that the gospel, either when he was there or
before, was attended with success. "For this cause left I thee in Crete,
that thou shouldst set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain
elders in every city." Here it is manifest that Paul had been there with
Titus; that he had commenced some arrangements which he had not been
able himself to complete; and that the gospel had had an effect
extensively on the island, since he was to ordain eiders "in every
city."

It is not certainly known, however, when Paul was there. There is no
mention in the Acts of the Apostles of his having been there, except
when he was on his way to Rome [Act
27:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#007.md); and this was in such
circumstances as to preclude the supposition that that was the time
referred to in this epistle, for.

(1.) Titus was not then with him:

\(2\) there is no reason to suppose that he remained there long enough
to preach the gospel to any extent, or to establish churches.

He was sailing to Rome as a prisoner, and there is no probability that
he would be permitted to go at large and preach for any considerable
time. There is, therefore, a moral certainty that it must have been on
some other occasion. "It is striking," says Neander (History of the
Planting of the Christian Church, vol. 1, pp. 400, 401), "that while
Luke in the Acts reports so fully and circumstantially the occurrences
of the apostles last voyage to Rome, and mentions his stay in Crete, he
says not a word (contrary to his usual practice in such cases) of the
friendly reception given to him by the Christians there, or even of his
meeting them at all. Hence, we may conclude that no Christian churches
existed in that island, though that transient visit would naturally give
rise to the intention of planting the gospel there, which he probably
fulfilled soon after he was set at liberty, when he came into these
parts."

There is reason to believe that Paul, after his first imprisonment, at
Rome, was released, and again visited Asia Minor and Macedonia. See
Introduction to 2 Timothy. On this journey, it is not improbable that he
may have visited Crete, having, as Neander supposes, had his attention
called to this island as a desirable place for preaching the gospel,
when on his way to Rome. "If we may be allowed to suppose," says Dr.
Paley (Hor. Paul.), "that Paul, after his liberation at Rome, sailed
into Asia, taking Crete in his way; that from Asia, and from Ephesus,
the capital of that country, he proceeded into Macedonia, and, crossing
the peninsula in his progress, came into the neighbourhood of Nicopolis,
we have a route which falls in with everything. It executes the
intention expressed by the apostle of visiting Colosse and Philippi, as
soon as he should be set at liberty at Rome. It allows him to leave
'Titus at Crete,' and 'Timothy at Ephesus, as he went into Macedonia,'
and to write to both, not long after, from the peninsula of Greece, and
probably from the neighbourhood of Nicopolis, thus bringing together the
dates of these two letters" (1 Tim. and Titus), "and thereby accounting
for that affinity between them, both in subject and language, which our
remarks have pointed out. I confess that the journey which we have thus
traced out for Paul is in a great measure hypothetic; but it should be
observed that it is a species of consistency which seldom belongs to
falsehood, to admit of an hypothesis which includes a great number of
remote and independent circumstances without contradiction." See
Neander, History of the Planting of the Churches, i. 401. Compare,
however, Introduction to 1 Timothy, Section 2.

Why Paul left Crete without completing the work which was to be done,
and especially without ordaining the eiders himself, is not certainly
known. There is evidently a striking resemblance between the
circumstances which induced him to leave Titus there, and those which
existed at Ephesus when he left Timothy there to complete an important
work; [Ti1 1:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#003.md). We know that Paul
was driven away from Ephesus before he had finished the work there which
he had purposed to accomplish Acts 19; [Act
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#001.md); and it is not at all improbable
that some such disturbance took place in Crete. Compare Koppe, Proleg.
p. 194. When he thus left, he committed to Titus the work which he had
designed to accomplish, with instructions to finish it as soon as
possible, and then to come to him at Nicopolis; [Tit
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#012.md).

Section 4. The place, time, and occasion of writing the epistle

There has been much diversity of opinion as to the time and place of
writing this epistle.

In regard to the place, there can be little doubt that it was at a
Nicopolis; for the apostle, in [Tit
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#012.md), directs Titus to come to him at
that place. But it is not easy to determine what Nicopolis is meant, for
there were many cities of that name. The person who affixed the
subscription at the end of the epistle, affirms that it was "Nicopolis
of Macedonia;" but, as has been frequently remarked in these Notes,
these subscriptions are of no authority. The name Nicopolis (meaning,
properly, a city of victory - νίκη nikē and πόλις polis) was given to
several places. There was a city of this name in Thrace, on the river
Nessus, now called Nikopi. There was also a city of the same name in
Epirus, two in Moesia, another in Armenia, another in Cilicia, and
another in Egypt, in the vicinity of Alexandria. It is by no means easy
to ascertain which of these cities is meant, though, as Paul was
accustomed to travel in Greece and Asia Minor, there seems to be a
probability that one of those cities is intended.

The only way of determining this with any degree of probability, is, to
ascertain what city was best known by that name at the time when the
epistle was written, or what city one would be likely to go to, if he
were directed to go to Nicopolis, without any further specification - as
if one were directed to go to Philadelphia, London, or Rome. In such a
case, he would go to the principal city of that name, though there might
be many other smaller places of that name also. But even this would not
be absolutely certain, for Paul may have specified to Titus the place
where he expected to go before he left him, so that he would be in no
danger of doubt where the place was. But if we were to allow this
consideration to influence us in regard to the place, there can be
little doubt that the city which he meant was Nicopolis in Epirus, and
the common opinion has been that the apostle alludes to this city.

This Nicopolis was situated in Epirus, in Greece, north-west of Corinth
and Athens, on the Ambracian gulf, and near its mouth. See the Map
prefixed to the Acts of the Apostles. On the same gulf, and directly
opposite to Nicopolis, is Actium, the place where Augustus achieved a
signal victory over Mark Antony; and the city of Nicopolis he built in
honour of that victory. Augustus was anxious to raise this city to the
highest rank among the cities of Greece, and caused games to be
celebrated there, with great pomp, every few years. Having afterwards
fallen into decay, the city was restored by the emperor Julian. Modern
travelers describe the remains of Nicopolis as very extensive; the site
which they now occupy is called Prevesa Vecchia. See Anthon's Class.
Dic. It should be said, however, that there is no absolute certainty
about the place where the epistle was written. Macknight and Benson
suppose it was at Colosse; Lardner supposes it was in or near Macedonia;
Hug, at Ephesus.

If the epistle was written from the Nicopolis referred to, then it was
probably after Paul's first imprisonment at Rome. If so, it was written
about the year 63 or 64. But there is great diversity of opinion as to
the time. Lardner and Hug place it in the year 56. It is of no material
importance to be able to determine the exact time.

The occasion on which it was written is specified by the apostle
himself, with such clearness, that there can be no doubt on that point.
Paul had left Titus in Crete, to "set in order the things which were
wanting, and to ordain elders in every city" [Tit
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005.md); and as he had himself, perhaps,
been called to leave suddenly, it was important that Titus should have
more full instructions than he had been able to give him on various
points of duty, or, at any rate, that he should have permanent
instructions to which he could refer. The epistle is occupied,
therefore, mainly with such counsels as were appropriate to a minister
of the gospel engaged in the duties which Titus was left to discharge.

The principal difficulties which it was apprehended Titus would meet
with in the performance of his duties there, and which in fact made his
labours there desirable, arose from two sources: (1.) the character of
the Cretans themselves; and (2.) the influence of Judaizing teachers.

(1.) the character of the Cretans themselves was such as to demand the
vigilance and care of Titus. They were a people characterized for
insincerity, falsehood, and gross living; [Tit
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#012.md). There was great danger,
therefore, that their religion would be hollow and insincere, and great
need of caution lest they should be corrupted from the simplicity and
purity required in the gospel; [Tit
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#013.md).

(2.) the influence of Judaizing teachers was to be guarded against. It
is evident from [Act 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#011.md), that there
were Jews residing there; and it is probable that it was by those who
had gone from that island to Jerusalem to attend the feast of the
Pentecost, and who had been converted on that occasion, that the gospel
was first introduced there. From this epistle, also, it is clear that
one of the great dangers to piety in the churches of Crete, arose from
the efforts of such teachers, and from the plausible arguments which
they would use in favour of the Mosaic law; see [Tit
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#010.md), [Tit
1:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#014.md); [Tit
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#009.md). To counteract the effect of their
teaching, it was necessary to have ministers of the gospel appointed in
every important place, who should be qualified for their work. To make
these arrangements, was the great design for which Titus was left there;
and to give him full information as to the kind of ministers which was
needed, this epistle was written.

There is a very striking resemblance between this epistle and the first
epistle to Timothy. See Paley's Horae Paulinae. "Both letters were
addressed to persons left by the writer to preside in their respective
churches during his absence. Both letters are principally occupied in
describing the qualifications to be sought for in those whom they should
appoint to offices in the church; and the ingredients of this
description are, in both letters, nearly the same. Timothy and Titus,
likewise, are cautioned against the same prevailing corruptions, and, in
particular, against the same misdirection of their cares and studies."
Paley. This similarity is found, not only in the general structure of
the epistles, but also in particular phrases and expressions; compare
[Ti1 1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#002.md), with [Tit
1:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#004.md); [Ti1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#004.md), with [Tit
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#014.md); [Tit
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#009.md); [Ti1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012.md), with [Tit
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#007.md); [Tit
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#015.md); [Ti1
3:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002.md), with [Tit
1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#006.md).

It is evident, from this, that the epistles were written by the same
person, and to those who were in substantially the same circumstances.
They are incidental proofs that they are genuine, and were written by
the person, and to the persons, whose names appear, and on the occasions
which are said in the epistle to have existed. On the subjects in this
introduction, the reader may consult Macknight's Introduction to the
Epistle; Michaelis's Introduction; Benson, Koppe, and especially Paley's
Horae Paulinae - a work which will never be consulted without profit.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Titus Chapter 1](tit001.md)

</div>
