<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac001)  [Next](zac003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001)

[Zechariah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 2:1</span></span>

A man with a measuring line in his hand - Probably the Angel of the
Lord, of whom Ezekiel has a like vision. Jerome: "He who before, when he
lift up his eyes, had seen in the four horns things mournful, now again
lifts up his eves to see a man, of whom it is written, "Behold a man
whose name is the Branch" [Zac 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012);
of whom we read above, "Behold a man riding upon a red horse, and he
stood among the myrtle trees, which were in the bottom" [Zac
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#008). Of whom too the Father saith; He
builded My city, "whose builder and maker is God" [Heb
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#010). He too is seen by Ezekiel in a
description like this, "a man whose appearance was like the appearance
of brass" [Eze 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#003), that is,
"burnished and shining as fire, with a line of flax in his hand and a
measuring reed" [Eze 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#007). The office
also seems to be one of authority, not to measure the actual length and
breadth of Jerusalem, but to lay down what it should be, (Cyril), "to
mark it out broad and very long."

[Zechariah 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 2:3</span></span>

The angel that talked with me went forth - Probably to receive the
explanation which was given him for Zechariah; and another angel, a
higher angel, since he gives him a commission, "went forth to meet him,"
being (it seems probable) instructed by the Angel of the Lord, who laid
down the future dimensions of the city. The indefiniteness of the
description, another angel, implies that he was neither the Angel of the
Lord, nor (were they different) Michael, or the man with the measuring
line, but an angel of intermediate rank, instructed by one higher,
instructing the lower, who immediately instructed Zechariah.

[Zechariah 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 2:4</span></span>

And said unto him, Run, speak unto this young man - The prophet himself,
who was to report to his people what he heard. Jeremiah says, "I am a
youth" [Jer 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#006); and, "the young man,"
"the young prophet," carried the prophetic message from Elisha to Jehu.
"Youth,'" common as our English term in regard to man, is inapplicable
and unapplied to angels, who have not our human variations of age, but
exist, as they were created.

Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls - Or as villages
(see the notes at [Hab 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#014)), namely,
an unconfined, uncramped population, spreading itself freely, without
restraint of walls, and (it follows) without need of them. Clearly then
it is no earthly city. To be inhabited as villages would be weakness,
not strength; a peril, not a blessing. The earthly Jerusalem, so long as
she remained unwalled, was in continual fear and weakness. God put it
into the heart of His servant to desire to restore her; her wall was
built, and then she prospered. He Himself had promised to Daniel, that
"Her street shall be rebuilt, and her wall, even in strait of times"
[Dan 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025). Nehemiah mourned 73 years
after this, 443 b.c., when it was told him, "The remnant that are left
of the captivity there in the province are in great affliction and
reproach: the wall of Jerusalem also is broken down, and the gates
thereof are burned with fire" [Neh
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#003). He said to Artaxerxes, "Why
should not my countenance be sad, when the city, the place of my
fathers' sepulehres, lieth waste, and the gates thereof are consumed
with fire?" [Neh 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#003). When permitted
by Artaxerxes to return, he addressed the rulers of the Jews, "Ye see
the distress that we are in, how Jerusalem lieth waste, and the gates
thereof are burned with fire; come, and let us build up the wall of
Jerusalem, that we be no more a reproach; and they said, let us rise and
build. So they strengthened their hands for this good work" [Neh
2:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#017). When "the wall was finished
and our enemies heard, and the pagan about us saw it, they were much
cast down in their own eyes; for they perceived that this work was
wrought of our God" [Neh 6:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#015).

This prophecy then looks on directly to the time of Christ. Wonderfully
does it picture the gradual expansion of the kingdom of Christ, without
bound or limit, whose protection and glory God is, and the character of
its defenses. It should "dwell as villages," peacefully and gently
expanding itself to the right and the left, through its own inherent
power of multiplying itself, as a city, to which no bounds were
assigned, but which was to fill the earth. Cyril: "For us God has raised
a church, that truly holy and far-famed city, which Christ fortifies,
consuming opponents by invisible powers, and filling it with His own
glory, and as it were, standing in the midst of those who dwell in it.
For He promised; "Lo, I am with you always even unto the end of the
world." This holy city Isaiah mentioned: "thine eyes shall see
Jerusalem, a quiet habitation; a tabernacle that shall not be taken
down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall
any of the cords thereof be broken" [Isa
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#020); and to her he saith, "enlarge
the place of thy, tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine
habitation; spare not; lengthen thy cords and strengthen thy stakes. For
thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left" [Isa
54:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#002). For the church of Christ is
widened and extended boundlessly, ever receiving countless souls who
worship Him." Rup.: "What king or emperor could make walls so ample as
to include the whole world? Yet, without this, it could not encircle
that Jerusalem, the church which is diffused through the whole world.
This Jerusalem, the pilgrim part of the heavenly Jerusalem, is, in this
present world, inhabited without walls, not being contained in vile
place or one nation. But in that world, where it is daily being removed
hence, much more can there not, nor ought to be, nor is, any wall
around, save the Lord, who is also the glory in the midst of it."

[Zechariah 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 2:5</span></span>

And I, Myself in My own Being, will be to her a wall of fire - Not
protection only, an inner circle around her, however near an enemy might
press in upon her, but destructive to her enemies. Isaiah says, "No
weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, and every tongue that
shall rise in judgment against thee thou shalt condemn" [Isa
54:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#017). Its defense, Isaiah says, shall
be immaterial. "We have a strong city; salvation shall God appoint for
walls and bulwarks" [Isa 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#001); "thou
shalt call thy walls salvation and thy gates praise" [Isa
60:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#018)). By a different figure it is
said, "I will encamp about mine house because of the army" [Zac
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#008).

And glory will I be in the midst of her - As Isaiah says, "The Lord
shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory" [Isa
60:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019); and of Christ, "In that day
shall the Branch of the Lord be Beauty and Glory - to the escaped of
Israel" [Isa 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002).

[Zechariah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 2:6</span></span>

Ho! ho! and flee - Such being the safety and glory in store for God's
people in Jerusalem, He who had so provided it, the Angel of the Lord,
bids His people everywhere to come to it, saving themselves also from
the peril which was to come on Babylon. So Isaiah bade them, "Go ye
forth of Babylon; flee ye from the Chaldaeans with a voice of singing;
declare ye, tell this, utter it to the end of the earth; say ye, The
Lord hath redeemed His servant Jacob" [Isa
48:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#020). "Depart ye, depart ye, go ye
out from thence; touch no unclean thing: go ye out of the midst of her;
be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord" [Isa
52:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011); and Jeremiah, "Flee ye out of
the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul; be not cut off in
her iniquity, for this is the time of the Lord's vengeance. He will
render unto her a recompense" ([Jer
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#006), add. [Jer
50:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#008)). "My people, go ye out of the
midst of her, and deliver ye, every man his soul from the fierce anger
of the Lord" [Jer 51:45](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#045).

The words, "flee, deliver thyself," imply an imminent peril on Babylon,
such as came upon her, two years after this prophecy, in the fourth year
of Darius. But the earnestness of the command, its repetition by three
prophets, the context in isaiah and Jeremiah, imply something more than
temporal peril, the peril of the infection of the manners of Babylon,
which may have detained there many who did not return. Whence in the New
Testament, the words are cited, as to the great evil city of the world;
"Wherefore come out from among them and be ye separate, and touch not
the unclean thing, and I will receive you" [Co2
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#017); and under the name of Babylon;
"I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, My people,
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues" [Rev 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004).

For I have spread you abroad as the four winds of heaven - The north
country, although its capital and center was Babylon, was the whole
Babylonian empire, called "the North" [Jer
1:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013); [Jer
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#018); [Jer
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#006); [Jer
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#001), [Jer
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#022); [Jer
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#008) because its invasions always came
upon Israel from the north. But the book of Esther shows that, sixty
years after this, the Jews were dispersed over the 127 provinces of the
Persian empire, from India (the Punjab) to Ethiopia [Est
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001); [Est
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#008), [Est
3:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#012); [Est
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#005), [Est
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#009), whether they were purposely
placed by the policy of the conquerors in detatched groups, as the ten
tribes were in the "cities of the Medes" [Kg2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006), or whether, when more trusted,
they migrated of their own accord. God, in calling them to return,
reminds them of the greatness of their dispersion. He had dispersed them
abroad as the four winds of heaven . He, the Same, recalled them.

[Zechariah 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 2:7</span></span>

Dwellest with the daughter of Babylon - The unusual idiom is perhaps
chosen as expressive of God's tenderness, even to the people who were to
be destroyed, from which Israel was to escape.

[Zechariah 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 2:8</span></span>

After the glory - Jonathan: "Which it is promised to bring upon you."
This being the usual construction, the words involve a great course of
God's dealing, of first showing favor to those who will receive favor,
then abandoning or punishing the rest; as, when the eight souls had been
received into the ark, the flood came; when Lot and his had escaped out
of Sodom, the fire came down from heaven; when Israel had passed the Red
Sea, Pharaoh's hosts were drowned; the election obtained what israel
sought for, the rest were blinded. "The glory" then would be the glory,
of which God says, "I will be the glory in the midst of you" [Rom
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#007).

But further He who speaketh is Almighty God, "Thus saith the Lord of
Hosts, He hath sent me; For lo I wave My hand against them - and ye
shall know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me; Lo I come and dwell in
the midst of thee, saith the Lord, and many nations shall cleave unto
the Lord in that day, and they shall be to Me a people and I will dwell
in the midst of thee, and thou shalt know, that the Lord of hosts hath
sent me unto you" [Zac 2:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008). In all
which series of promises, the I, of whom Israel were to know that the
Lord of hosts had sent Him, is the I, who affirms of Himself what
belongs to Almighty God only, inflicting punishment on the enemies of
Judah, indwelling the Church and people, receiving the pagan as His own;
and it is precisely by all these acts of power and love, that Israel
shall know that the Lord of hosts had sent Him.

(Jerome: "In what follows, 'Thus saith the Lord of hosts, After glory,
He hath sent Me' etc., the Saviour is introduced speaking, who, being
Almighty God, saith that He was sent by the Father Almighty, not
according to that whereby He was Almighty, but according to that, that,
after glory, He was sent, "who being in the form of God, thought it not
robbery to be equal with God; but emptied Himself, taking the form of a
servant, and was made obedient unto the Father even unto death; and
that, the death of the Cross" [Phi
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006). Nor is it marvel that Christ is
called Almighty, in whose Person we read in the Apocalypse of John,
"These things saith the faithful Witness - I am Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the ending, saith the Lord, which was and which is and
which is to come, the Almighty" [Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005), [Rev
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008), "to whom all power is given in
heaven and in earth" [Mat 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018); and
who saith, "All things of the Father's are Mine" [Joh
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015). But if all things, that is, God
from God, Lord from. Lord, Light from Light, therefore also Almighty
from Almighty; for it cannot be, that diverse should be the glory of
those whose Nature is One."

For he who toucheth - So as to injure , you, "toucheth the apple of His
eye," that is, of Him who sent Him, Almighty God. So Jerome, Theodoret
Others, as Cyril, of his own eye, turning to evil to himself; but the
analogy of the other passages is against it), as in the song of Moses,
"He led him about, He instructed him, He kept him as the apple of His
eye" [Deu 32:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#010); and David prays,
"Keep me as the apple of the eye" [Psa
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008).

[Zechariah 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 2:9</span></span>

For behold I will shake My hand against them - As God promised of old
against the enemies of His people , and they shall be a spoil to those
who served them habitually.

And ye shall know that the Lord of hosts hath sent Me - Theodoret: "He
was sent, not as God, but as Man. For as God He is equal to the Father.
For He saith, "I am in the Father and the Father in Me, and, The Father
who dwelleth in Me He doeth the works" [Joh
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010), and, "I and My Father are one"
[Joh 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030), and "He who hath seen Me
hath seen the Father" [Joh 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009). But
He is sent, as man, fulfilling the dispensation for us, not lessening
the divine nature. The prophet then intimated not the duality only, but
the equality of the persons."

[Zechariah 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 2:10</span></span>

Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion - It is a great jubilee of joy, to
which Zion is invited. Thrice beside is she invited with this same word,
and all for the restored or renewed Presence of God. "Cry aloud for joy,
thou barren which bare not" [Isa 54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001),
as here, on the coming in of the Gentiles, "Cry aloud for joy, O
daughter of Zion; jubilate, O Israel; rejoice and exult with all the
heart, O daughter of Jerusalem; the Lord, the King of Israel, is in the
midst of thee" [Zep 3:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#014). "Shout
and cry aloud for joy, O inhabitant of Zion; for great in the midst of
thee is the Holy One of Israel" [Isa
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#006). The source of joy is a fresh
coming of God, a coming, whereby He should dwell abidingly among them:
truly what is this, but the Incarnation? As John saith, "The Word was
made Flesh and dwelt among us" [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014); and, "Behold the tabernacle of
God is with men, and He will dwell with them, and they shall be His
people, and God Himself shall be with them and shall be their God" [Rev
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#003).

Cyril: "Hence too you may learn how great a subject of contentment above
is the Presence of the Saviour upon earth. He could not then but bid the
spiritual Zion, "which is the Church of the Living God" [Ti1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015), the most sacred multitude of
those saved by faith, to cry aloud for joy and rejoice. But it was
announced that He should come and be in the midst of her. For John saith
to us, The Word "was in the world" [Joh
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010), and, being God, was not severed
from His creatures, but He was Himself the Source of life to all living,
and holding all things together to well-being and life; but "the world
knew Him not" [Joh 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010) : for it
worshiped the creature. But He came among us, when, taking our likeness,
He was conceived by the holy Virgin, and "was seen upon earth and
conversed with men" , and the divine David witnesseth saying, "Our God
shall come manifestly, and shall not keep silence" [Psa
50:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003). Then also was there a haven for
the Gentiles. For now no longer was the race of Israel alone taught, but
the whole earth was engoldened with the evangelical preachings, and in
every nation and country "great is His Name."

Jerome: "This too is to be understood of the Person of the Lord, that He
exhorts His people, being restored from the captivity to their former
abode, to be glad and rejoice, because the Lord Himself cometh and
dwelleth in the midst of her, and many nations shall believe in Him, of
whom it is said, "Ask of Me and I will give Thee nations for Thine
inheritance, and the ends of the earth for Thy possession" [Psa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008), and He shall dwell in the midst
of them, as He saith to His disciples, "Lo, I am with you always, even
unto the end of the world" [Mat 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020).

[Zechariah 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 2:11</span></span>

And many nations shall join themselves - cleaving to Him by a close
union. Isaiah had so spoken of single proselytes [Isa
56:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#003); Jeremiah had used the word of
Israel's self-exhortation after the return from Babylon; "going and
weeping," they shall go and seek the Lord their God, saying, "Come and
let us join ourselves unto the Lord, in a perpetual covenant that shall
not be forgotten" [Jer 50:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#004). This
Zechariah now predicts of "many nations." The Jews were scarcely
half-restored themselves, a mere handful. They had wrought no
conversions among the pagan, yet prophecy continues its unbroken voice,
"many nations shall join themselves unto the Lord."

And shall be My people - Literally, "be to Me a people." This is exactly
the history of the Christian church, unity amid diversity; many nations
still retaining their national existence, yet owned by God as one people
and His own. The words are those in which God adopted Israel in Egypt;
"I will take you to Me for a people, and I will be your God" [Exo
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#007). This was the covenant with them,
"that thou shouldest enter into covenant with the Lord thy God, that He
may establish thee today for a people unto Himself, and that he may be
unto thee a God" ([Deu 29:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#012), add
[Lev 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#012); [Deu
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#009); [Sa1
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#022); [Sa2
7:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#023); [Kg2
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#017); [Ch1
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#022); [Ch2
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#016); [Jer
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#023); [Jer
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#004)). The contrary was the title of
the pagan, "not a people; with whom God said, I will move Israel to
jealousy" [Deu 32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021). The closeness of
union Jeremiah expresses; "As the girdle cleaveth to the loins of a man,
so have I caused to cleave to Me the whole house of Israel and the whole
house of Judah, saith the Lord, that they might be unto Me for a people
and for a name and for a praise and for a glory" [Jer
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#011). This was the object of the
existence of Israel; to this it was to be restored [Jer
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#007); [Jer
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#022); [Jer
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001); [Jer
32:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#038) by conversion [Eze
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#020); [Eze
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#011); [Eze
36:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#028); [Eze
37:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#023), [Eze
37:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#027); [Zac
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#008); to this special privilege of
Israel "many nations" were to be admitted; yet not so as to be separate
from Israel, for He adds, "and I will dwell in, the midst of thee,"
Judah. God would dwell in His Church, formed of Israel and the Gentiles,
yet so that the Gentiles should be grafted into Israel, becoming one
with them.

[Zechariah 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 2:12</span></span>

And the Lord shall inherit Judah His portion - The inheritance of the
Lord is the title which God commonly gave to Israel ([Deu
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#020); [Deu
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#026), [Deu
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#029); [Sa1
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#019); [Sa2
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#016); [Sa2
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#019); [Sa2
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#003); [Kg1
8:51](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#051); [Psa
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#009); [Psa
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#012); [Psa
68:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#010); [Psa
78:62](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#062), [Psa
78:71](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#071); [Psa
119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001); [Psa
106:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#040), [Joe
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#017); [Joe
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#002), (Hebrew) [Isa
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#025); [Isa
47:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#006); [Jer
12:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007); [Jer
50:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#011)). God is said to be the portion
of Israel [Jer 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#016); [Jer
51:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#019); of the pious [Psa
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005); [Psa
73:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#026); [Psa
119:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#057); [Psa
142:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#006); [Lam
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#024); once only beside, is Israel said
to be the portion of God [Deu 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009);
once only is God said to inherit Israel, "Pardon our iniquity and our
sin, and take us for thine inheritance" [Exo
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#009). Zechariah unites the two rare
idioms.

In the holy land - The land is again made holy by God, and sanctified by
His Presence. So He calls the place where He revealed Himself to Moses,
"holy ground" [Exo 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#005). So it is said,
"the holy place" [Lev 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#017); [Lev
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#013), "the holy house" [Ch1
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#003), "the holy ark" [Ch2
35:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#003), "the holy city" [Neh
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#001), [Neh
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#018); [Isa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#002); [Isa
52:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001), "the holy mountain" [Isa
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#013); [Jer
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#023); [Zac
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#003), "the holy people" [Isa
62:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#012), "the holy chambers" ([Eze
42:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#013) all), or, with reference to
their relation to God who consecrates them, "My holy mountain" [Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006); [Isa
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009); [Isa
56:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007); [Isa
57:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#013); [Isa
65:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#011), [Isa
65:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#025); [Isa
66:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#020); [Eze
20:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#040); [Joe
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001); [Joe
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#017); [Oba
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016). [Zep
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#011), "Thy holy habitation" [Exo
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#013), "Thy holy dwelling-place" ([Deu
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#015). "His holy hab." [Psa
68:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#006); [Jer
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#030); [Zac
2:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001) :17) "thy holy temple" ([Psa
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#008); [Psa
79:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#001); [Psa
138:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#002); [Jon
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#005), [Jon
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#008), "His holy temple," [Mic
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#002); [Hab
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#020)), "Thy holy mountain" ([Psa
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001); [Psa
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#003); [Dan
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#016). "His holy hill," [Psa
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#005); [Psa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002); [Psa
99:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#009)), "Thy holy oracle" [Psa
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#002), "Thy holy city" [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024), "cities" [Isa
64:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#009), "His holy place" [Psa
24:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001) :, "His holy border." [Psa
78:54](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#054). It is not one technical
expression, as people now by a sort of effort speak of "the holy land."
Everything which has reference to God is holy. The land is holy, not for
any merits of theirs, but because God was worshiped there, was specially
present there. It was an anticipation and type of "Thy holy Church
throughout all the world doth acknowledge Thee." This land their fathers
had "polluted with blood" [Psa 106:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#038);
God says, "they defiled My land" [Jer
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#007); [Jer
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#009); [Jer
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#018); Ezekiel called her eminently,
"the land that is not cleansed" [Eze
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#024). Now God said, "I will remove
the iniquity of the land" [Zac 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#009),
and she was again a holy land, as hallowed by Him.

It is not a mere conversion of the pagan, But, as Isaiah [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003) and Micah [Mic
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002) foretold; a conversion, of which
Jerusalem should be the center, as our Lord explained to the Apostles
after His Resurrection, "that repentance and remission of sins should be
preached in His name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem" [Luk
24:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047).

[Zechariah 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zac 2:13</span></span>

Be silent - Literally, "hush all flesh, before the Lord" (see at [Hab
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#020), p. 207); man in his weakness
[Gen 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003); [Ch2
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#008); [Job
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#004); [Psa
56:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#004); [Psa
78:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#039); [Isa
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003); [Jer
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005), "flesh and blood" in the
language of the New Testament [Mat
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017); [Co1
15:50](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#050); [Gal
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016), before God his Maker. "All
flesh," the whole human race [Gen
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#012); [Psa
65:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#003); [Psa
145:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#021); [Isa
40:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#005); [Isa
49:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#026); [Isa
66:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#023); [Joe
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#001); [Eze
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#004), [Eze
21:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#009), is to be hushed before God,
because His judgments, as His mercies, are over all.

For God ariseth - God seemeth to be quiescent, as it were, when He bears
with us; to arise, when He puts forth His power, either for us, when we
pray, "Lord, awake to help me" ([Psa
59:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#004), add [Psa
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#007); [Psa
44:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#024)); or in displeasure. His "holy
habitation" is alike the tabernacle [Sa1
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#029), [Sa1
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#032); [Psa
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009); [Psa
68:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#006), temple [Ch2
36:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#015), heaven [Deu
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#015); [Jer
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#030); [Ch2
30:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#027), since His presence is in all.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 3](zac003)

</div>
