<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Zechariah Index](zac.md)  
  [Previous](zac008)  [Next](zac010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001.md)

[Zechariah 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 9:1</span></span>

The burden - o of the word of the Lord in (or, upon) the land of Hadrach
The foreground of this prophecy is the course of the Victories of
Alexander, which circled round the holy land without hurting it, and
ended in the overthrow of the Persian empire. The surrender of Damascus
followed first, immediately on his great victory at the Issus; then
Sidon yielded itself and received its ruler from the conqueror, Tyre he
utterly destroyed; Gaza, we know, perished; he passed harmless by
Jerusalem. Samaria, on his return from Egypt, he chastised.

It is now certain that there was a city called Hadrach in the
neighborhood of Damascus and Hamath, although its exact site is not
known. "It was first found upon the geographical tablets among the
Assyrian inscriptions." "In the catalogue of Syrian cities, tributary to
Nineveh, (of which we have several copies in a more or less perfect
state, and varying from each other, both in arrangement and extent)
there are three names, which are uniformly grouped together and which we
read Manatsuah, Magida (Megiddo) and Du'ar (Dor). As these names are
associated with those of Samaria, Damascus, Arpad, Hamath, Carchemish,
Hadrach, Zobah, there can be no doubt of the position of the cities" .
In the Assyrian Canon, Hadrach is the object of three Assyrian
expeditions , 9183 (b.c. 818), 9190 (811) and 9200 (801). The first of
these follows upon one against Damascus, 9182 (817). In the wars of
Tiglath-pileser II. (the Tiglath-pileser of Holy Scripture,) it has been
twice deciphered;

\(1\) In the war b.c. 738, 737, after the mention of "the cities to Saua
the mountain which is in Lebanon were divided, the land of Bahalzephon
to Ammana" (Ammon), there follows Hadrach ; and subsequently there are
mentioned as joined to the league, "19 districts of Hamath, and the
cities which were round them, which are beside the sea of the setting
sun."

\(2\) In his "War in Palestine and Arabia" , "the city of Hadrach to the
land of Saua," and six other cities are enumerated, as "the cities
beside the upper sea," which, he says, "I possessed, and six of my
generals as governors over them I appointed." No other authority nearly
approaches these times. The nearest authority is of the second century
after our Lord, 116 a.d. : "R. Jose, born of a Damascene mother, said,"
answering R. Yehudah ben Elai, , "I call heaven and earth to witness
upon me, that I am of Damascus, and that there is a place called
Hadrach." Cyril of Alexandria says that "the land of Hadrach must be
somewhere in the eastern parts, and near to Emath (now Epiphania of
Antioch) a little further than Damascus, the metropolis of the
Phoenicians and Palestine." A writer of the 10th century says that there
was "a very beautiful mosque there, called the Mesjed-el-Khadra, and
that the town was named from it." The conjecture that Hadrach might be
the name of a king , or an idol , will now probably be abandoned, nor
can the idea, (which before seemed the most probable and which was very
old), that it was a symbolic name, hold any longer.

For the prophets do use symbolic names ; but then they are names which
they themselves frame. Micah again selects several names of towns, now
almost unknown and probably unimportant, in order to impress upon his
people some meaning connected with them , but then he does himself so
connect it. He does not name it (so to say), leaving it to explain
itself. The name Hadrach would be a real name, used symbolically,
without anything in the context to show that it is a symbol.

The cities, upon which the burden or heavy prophecy tell, possessed no
interest for Israel. Damascus was no longer a hostile power; Hamath had
ever been peaceable, and was far away; Tyre and Sidon did not now carry
on a trade in Jewish captives. But the Jews knew from Daniel, that the
empire, to which they were in subjection, would be overthrown by Greece
[Dan 8:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#020.md). When that rapid attack
should come, it would be a great consolation to them to know, how they
themselves would fare. It was a turning point in their history and the
history of the then known world. The prophet describes (see below at
[Zac 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#008).md) the circuit, which the
conqueror would take around the land which God defended; how the
thunder-cloud circled round Judaea, broke irresistibly upon cities more
powerful than Jerusalem, but was turned aside from the holy city "in
going and returning," because God encamped around it.

"The selection of the places and of the whole line of country
corresponds very exactly to the march of Alexander after the battle of
Issus, when Damascus, which Darius had chosen as the strong depository
of his wealth, of Persian women of rank, confidential officers and
envoys, , was betrayed, but so opened its gates to his general,
Parmenio. Zidon, a city renowned for its antiquity and its founders,
surrendered freely; Tyre, here specially marked out, was taken after a 7
months' siege; Gaza too resisted for 5 months, was taken, and, as it was
said, 'plucked up.'"

And Damascus shall be the rest thereof - God's judgment fell first upon
Damascus. But the word "resting-place" is commonly used of quiet
peaceful resting, especially as given by God to Israel; of the ark, the
token of the Presence of God, after its manifold removals, and of the
glorious dwelling-place of the Christ among people . The prophet seems
then purposely to have chosen a word of large meaning, which should at
once express (as he had before) [Zac
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#008.md), that the word of God should fall
heavily on Damascus and yet be its resting-place. Hence, about the time
of our Lord, the Jews interpreted this of the coming of the Messiah,
that "Jerusalem should reach to the gates of Damascus. Since Damascus
shall be the place of His rest, but the place of His rest is only the
house of the sanctuary, as it is said, "This is My rest for ever; here
will I dwell." Another added, , "All the prophets and all prophesied but
of the years of redemption and the days of the Messiah." Damascus, on
the conversion of Paul, became the first resting-place of the word of
God, the first-fruits of the Gentiles whom the Apostle of the Gentiles
gathered from east to west throughout the world.

When (or For) the eyes of man - As (literally, and that is, especially
beyond others) "of all the tribes of Israel, shall be toward the Lord."
This also implies a conversion of Gentiles, as well as Jews. For man, as
contrasted with Israel, must be the pagan world, mankind . "The eyes of
all must needs look in adoration to God, expecting all good from Him,
because the Creator of all provided for the well-being of all, as the
Apostle says, "Is He the God of the Jews only? Is He not also of the
Gentiles? Yea, of the Gentiles also" [Rom
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#029.md). God's time of delivering His
people is, when they pray to Him. So Jehoshaphat prayed, "O our God,
wilt Thou not judge them? For we have no strength against this great
company, which is come against us, and we know not what we shall do; but
our eyes are on Thee" [Ch2 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#012.md); and
the Psalmist says, "The eyes of all wait toward Thee; and, "toward them
that fear Him." [Psa 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#018.md), or in
Ezra's Chaldee, "The eye of their God was upon the elders of the Jews"
[Ezr 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#005.md)., or, "the eyes of the Lord
thy God are upon it" (the land), [Deu
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#012.md); but there is no construction
like "the Lord hath an eye on (obj.) man" (as 70: Jonathan, Syr.) The
passages, "whose eyes are opened upon all the ways of the sons of men,
to give etc." [Jer 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#019.md), "his eyes
behold the nations," are altogether different. "The eye of" must be
construed as "his own eye.") "as the eyes of servants are unto the hand
of their masters, add as the eyes of a maiden are unto the hand of her
mistress, so our eyes are unto the Lord our God, until He have mercy
upon us."

"For in those days," says a Jew, who represents the traditional
interpretation, (Rashi), man shall look to his Creator, and his eyes
shall look to the Blessed One, as it was said above, we will go with
you, and they shall join themselves, they and their cities, to the
cities of Israel." And another; (Kimchi), "In those days the eyes of all
mankind shall be to the Lord, not to idols or images; therefore the land
of Hadrach and Damascus, and the other places near the land of Israel -
shall be included among the cities of Judah, and shall be in the faith
of Israel."

[Zechariah 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 9:2</span></span>

And Hamath also shall border thereby - o. Near to it in place and
character, it shall share its subdual. After the betrayal of Damascus,
Parmenio was set over all Syria. "The Syrians, not as yet tamed by the
losses of war, despised the new empire, but, swiftly subdued, they did
obediently what they were commanded."

And Zidon - Zidon, although probably older than Tyre , is here spoken of
parenthetically, as subordinate. Perhaps, owing to its situation, it was
a wealthy , rather than a strong place. Its name is "Fishing-town;" in
Joshua, it is called "the great" [Jos
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#008.md); [Jos
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#028.md), perhaps the metropolis; while
Tyre is named from its strength [Jos
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#029.md). It infected Israel with its
idolatry [Jdg 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#006.md), and is mentioned
among the nations who oppressed them and from whom God delivered them on
their prayers [Jdg 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#012.md), probably
under Jabin. In the time of the Judges, it, not Tyre, was looked to for
protection [Jdg 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#007.md), [Jdg
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#028.md). In the times of Ezekiel it had
become subordinate, furnishing "rowers" [Eze
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#008.md) to Tyre; but Esarhaddon, about 80
years before, boasts that he had taken it, destroyed its inhabitants,
and re-populated it with people from the East, building a new city which
he called by his own name . Tyre too had been taken by Nebuchadnezzar .
At the restoration from the captivity, Sidon had the first place, [Ezr
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#007.md), which it retained in the time of
Xerxes . But Artaxerxes Ochus gained possession of it by treachery, when
all Phoenicia revolted from Persia, and, besides those crucified, 40,000
of its inhabitants perished by their own hands , twenty years before the
invasion of Alexander, to whom it submitted willingly .

The prophet having named Tyre and Zidon together, yet continues as to
Tyre alone, as being alone of account in the days of which he is
speaking, those of Alexander.

Although - Rather, "because she is very wise." Man's own wisdom is his
foolishness and destruction, "as the foolishness of God" is his wisdom
and salvation. God "taketh the wise in their own craftiness" [Job
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013.md). "For after that, in the wisdom
of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe" [Co1
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#021.md). Of the Hagarenes it is said,
they "seek wisdom upon earth; none of these know the way of wisdom, or
remember her paths" (Baruch 3:23). The wisdom of Tyre was the source of
her pride, and so of her destruction also. "Because thy heart is lifted
up, and thou hast said, I am a god, I sit in the seat of God, in the
midst of the seas; yet thou art a man and not God, though thou hast set
thine heart as the heart of God; behold thou art wiser them Daniel,
there is no secret that they can hide from thee. Therefore I will bring
strangers upon thee - they shall bring thee down to the pit" [Eze
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#002.md), [Eze
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#008.md). So of Edom Obadiah says, "The
pride of thy heart hath deceived thee, thou that dwellest in the clefts
of the rock. Shall I not destroy the wise men out of Edom, and
understanding out of the mount of Esau?" [Oba
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#003.md), [Oba
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#008.md).

[Zechariah 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 9:3</span></span>

And Tyre did build herself a stronghold - She built it for herself, not
for God, and trusted to it, not to God, and so its strength brought her
the greater fall. The words in Hebrew express yet more. "Tyre" (Zor)
literally, "the rock," "built herself mazor, tower," a rock-like fort,
as it were, a rock upon exceeding strength, binding her together. . "The
walls, 150 feet high and of breadth proportionate, compacted of large
stones, embedded in gypsum," seemed to defy an enemy who could only
approach her by sea. "In order to make the wall twice as strong they
built a second wall ten cubits broad, leaving a space between of five
cubits, which they filled with stones and earth." Yet high walls do not
fence in only; they also hem in. Mazor is both "a stronghold" and "a
siege." Wealth and strength, without God, do but invite and embitter the
spoiler and the conqueror."

And she heaped up silver as the dust, and fine gold as the mire of the
streets - "Though he heap up silver as the dust," Job says, "The King"
[Job 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#016.md), Solomon, "made silver in
Jerusalem as stones" [Ch2 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#027.md).
Through her manifold commerce she gathered to herself wealth, as
abundant as the mire and the dust, and as valueless. "Gold and silver,"
said a pagan, "are but red and white earth." Its strength was its
destruction. Tyre determined to resist Alexander, , "trusting in the
strength of the island, and the stores which they had laid up," the
strength within and without, of which the prophet speaks.

[Zechariah 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 9:4</span></span>

Behold - Such were the preparations of Tyre. Over against them, as it
were, the prophet sets before our eyes the counsels of God. Theodoret:
"Since they had severed themselves from the providence of God, they were
now to experience His power." "The Lord will cast her out" , literally,
deprive her of her possessions, give her an heir of what she had
amassed, namely: the enemy; "and he will smite her power or wealth" , of
which Ezekiel says, "With thy wisdom and with thine understanding thou
hast gotten thee riches, and hast gotten gold and silver into thy
treasures: by the greediness of thy wisdom and by thy traffic thou hast
increased thy riches, and thine heart is lifted up because of thy
riches" [Eze 28:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#004.md). All wherein she
relied, and so too the stronghold itself, God would smite in the sea.
The sea was her confidence and boast. She said "I am a God; I sit in the
seat of God, in the midst of the seas" [Eze
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#002.md).

The scene of her pride was to be that of her overthrow; the waves, which
girt her round, should bury her ruins and wash over her site. Even in
the sea the hand of God should find her, and smite her in it, and into
it, and so that she should abide in it. "They mocked at the king, as
though be thought to prevail against Neptune (the sea)." "Ye despise
this land-army, through confidence in the place, that ye dwell in an
island," was the message of Alexander, "but soon will I show you that ye
dwell on a continent."

Every device had been put in force in its defense: the versatility by
which the inhabitants of an island, some 2 12 miles in circumference,
held at bay the conqueror of the battle of Issus with unlimited
resources, , "engineers from Cyprus and all Phoenicia," and , "a fleet
of 180 ships from Cyprus," attests the wisdom in which the prophet says,
she would trust. "She had already a profusion of catapults and other
machines useful in a siege, and easily prepared manifold others by the
makers of war-engines and all sorts of artificers whom she had, and
these invented new engines of all sorts; so that the whole circuit of
the city was filled with engines." Divers who should loosen the mole;
grappling hooks and nets to entangle near-assailants; melted metal or
heated sand to penetrate between the joints of their armor; bags of
sea-weed to deaden the blows of the battering machines; a fireship
navigated so as to destroy the works of the enemy, while its sailors
escaped; fiery arrows; wheels set in continual motion, to turn aside the
missiles against them, , bear witness to an unwearied inventiveness of
defense. The temporary failures might have shaken any mind but
Alexander's (who is even said to have hesitated but that he dared not,
by abandoning the enterprise, lose the prestige of victory. Yet all
ended in the massacre of 6,000, 7,000, or 8,000 of her men, the
crucifixion of 2,000, the sale of the rest, whether 13,000 or 30,000,
into slavery . None escaped save those whom the Sidonians secreted in
the vessels, , with which they had been compelled to serve against her.

And she herself - When her strength is overthrown, "shall be devoured
with fire." : "Alexander, having slain all, save those who fled to the
temples, ordered the houses to be set on fire."

[Zechariah 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 9:5</span></span>

Ashkelon shall see and fear - The words express that to see and fear
shall be as one. The mightiest and wealthiest, Tyre, having fallen, the
neighbor cities of Philistia who had hoped that her might should be
their stay, shall stand in fear and shame. Tyre, being a merchant-city,
the mother-city of the cities of the African coast and in Spain, its
desolation caused the more terror [Isa
23:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#005.md).

And the - (a) king shall perish from Gaza - that is it shall have no
more kings. It had been the policy of the world-empires to have
tributary kings in the petty kingdoms which they conquered, thus
providing lot their continued tranquil submission to themselves . The
internal government remained as before: the people felt no difference,
except as to the payment of the tribute. The policy is expressed by the
title "king of kings," which they successively bore. Sennacherib speaks
of the kings of Ascalon, Ekron and Gaza .

A contemperary of Alexander mentions, that the king of Gaza was brought
alive to Alexander on its capture. Alexander's policy was essentially
different from that of the world-monarchs before him. They desired only
to hold an empire as wide as possible, leaving the native kings, if they
could; and only, if these were intractable, placing their own
lieutenants. Alexander's policy was to blend East and West into one. .
These petty sovereignties, so many insulated centers of mutual
repulsion, were essentially at variance with this plan, and so this
remnant of sovereignty of 1,500 years was taken away by him, when, after
a siege in which he himself was twice wounded, he took it. Alexander
wholly depopulated it, and repeopled the city with strangers.

And Ashkelon shall not be inhabited - Ashkelon yielded at once to
Jonathan, when he "camped against it" (1 Macc. 10:86), after he had
taken and "burned Ashdod and the cities round about it." In another
expedition of Jonathan its inhabitants "met him honorably," while "they
of Gaza shut him out" at first (1 Macc. 11:60, 61). "Simon - passed
through the country unto Ascalon, and the holds there adjoining,"
without resistance, whereas "he turned aside to Joppe, and won it" (1
Macc. 12:33). He placed Jews in Gaza, but of Ascalon nothing is said.
The ruins of a Christian city, built on its site, "khirbet-Ascalon,"
have been lately discovered in the hills near Tell Zakariyeh, , and so,
a little south of Timnath, a Philistine city in the days of Samson,
whence Samson went to it, to gain the 30 changes of raiment [Jdg
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#019.md). Commentators have assigned
reasons, why Samson might have gone so far as the maritime Ascalon,
whereas, in fact, he went to a city close by.

That city, in 536 a.d., had its Bishop . : "The site shows the remains
of an early Christian Church or convent:" as a great lintel of stone ,
resembling somewhat the Maltese Cross, lies on the ground." It was
probably destroyed by the inundation of Muslim conquest. In 1163 a.d. it
was a ruin. The distance of the ruins from the Ascalon Maiumas
corresponds to that assigned by Benjamin of Tudela, being twice the
distance of that city from Ashdod ; but since he was at Beth Jibrin, he
must have been not far from the spot where it has been recently
discovered . The Ashkelon, which was Herod's birth-place and which he
beautified, must have been the well-known city by the sea; since the
distance from Jerusalem assigned by Josephus is too great for the old
Ashkelon, and he speaks of it as on the sea .

[Zechariah 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 9:6</span></span>

And a bastard shall dwell at Ashdod - o The "mamzer" was one born
unlawfully, whether out of marriage, or in forbidden marriage, or in
adultery . Here it is, probably, like our "spurious brood" ; whether it
was so itself or in the eyes of the Ashdodites; whence he adds.

I will cut off the pride of the Philistines - Pride would survive the
ruin of their country, the capture of their cities, the less of
independence. It would not survive the loss of their nationality; for
they themselves would not be the same people, who were proud of their
long descent and their victories over Israel. The breaking down of
nationalities, which was the policy of Alexander, was an instrument in
God's hands in cutting off their pride.

[Zechariah 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 9:7</span></span>

And I will take away his blood out of his mouth - The "abominations"
being idol-sacrifices , the "bloods" will also be, the blood mingled
with the wine of sacrifices, of which David says, "Their drink-offerings
of blood will I not offer" [Psa 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#004.md);
and Ezekiel unites the offences, "Ye eat With the blood, and lift up
your eyes toward your idols, and shed blood" [Eze
33:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#025.md).

But he that remaineth - Better, "And he too" shall remain over to our
God." Of the Philistines too, as of Israel, "a remnant shall be saved."
After this visitation their idolatry should cease; God speaks of the
Philistine nation as one man; He would wring his idol-sacrifices and
idol-enjoyments from him; he should exist as a nation, but as God's.

And he shall be as a governor in Judah - Literally, "a captain of a
thousand," merged in Judah as in a larger whole, as each tribe was
divided into its "thousands," yet intimately blended, in no inferior
position, with the people of God, as each converted nation became an
integral yet unseparated whole in the people of God.

And Ekron as a Jebusite - Ekron was apparently the least important of
the few remaining Philistine cities (see at [Joe
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#008), vol. 1.md); yet he shall he, as
those of the Canaanite nations who were not destroyed, nor fled, but in
the very capital and center of Israel's worship, "dwelt with the
children of Benjamin and Judah" [Jos
15:63](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#063.md); [Jdg
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#021.md), and were, as a type of the
future conversion and absorption of the pagan, incorporatcd into Judah.

[Zechariah 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 9:8</span></span>

And I will encamp about my house - (for my house's sake) because of the
army "Because," it is added in explanation, "of him that passeth by and
of him that returneth;" Alexander, who passed by with his army, on his
way to Egypt, and "returned," having founded Alexandria.

It was a most eventful march; one of the most eventful in the history of
mankind. The destruction of the Persian empire, for which it prepared,
was in itself of little moment; Alexander's own empire was very brief.
As Daniel had foretold, he came, cast down Persia "to the ground, waxed
very great, and when he was strong, the great horn was broken" [Dan
8:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#007.md). But with the marvelous
perception which characterized him, he saw and impressed upon his
successors the dependibleness of the Jewish people. When he came into
Judaea, he sent to the high priest for aid against Tyre and for the like
tribute as he used to pay to Darius, promising that he would not repent
of choosing the friendship of the Macedonians . The high priest refused
on the ground of the oath, by which his people were bound in fealty to
the earthly king of kings, whom Alexander came to subdue.

Alexander threatened to teach all, through its fate, to whom fealty was
due. This, after the conquest of Gaza, he prepared to fulfill. He came,
he saw, he was conquered . Jaddua and his people prayed to God. Taught
by God in a dream not to fear, he went to meet the conqueror. The gates
of the city were thrown open. There marched out, not an army such as
encountered the Romans, but as he had been taught, a multitude in white
garments, and the priests going belove in their raiment of fine linen.
The high priest, in his apparel of purple and gold, having on his head
the mitre, and on it the golden plate , whereon was written the name of
God, advanced alone, and the Conqueror, who was expected to give the
city to be plundered, and the high priest to be insulted and slain,
kissed the name of God, recognizing in the priest one whom lie had seen
in the like dress in a dream, who had bidden him, when hesitating, cross
to Asia; for that he would go before his army and deliver the Persian
empire to him.

The result is related to have been, that Alexander promised to allow the
Jews in Judea to live according to their own laws, remitted the tribute
of every seventh year, acceded beforehand to the terms to be proposed by
those in Babylonia and Media, and that many Jews joined his army, under
condition that they might live under their own laws.

Rationalism, while it remains such, cannot admit of Daniel's prophecies
which the high priest showed him, declaring that a Greek should destroy
the Persian empire, which Alexander rightly interpreted of himself. But
the facts remain; that the conqueror, who, above most, gave way to his
anger, bestowed privileges almost incredible on a nation, which under
the Medes and Persians had been "the most despised part of the
enslaved;" made them equal in privileges to his own Macedonians , who
could hardly brook the absorption of the Persians, although in inferior
condition, among themselves .

The most despised of the enslaved became the most trusted of the
trusted. They became a large portion of the second and third then known
cities of the world. They became Alexandrians, Antiochenes, Ephesians ,
without ceasing to be Jews. The law commanded faithfulness to oaths, and
they who despised their religion respected its fruits.

The immediate successors of Alexander, Ptolemy Lagi and Antiochus
Nicator, followed his policy; Ptolemy especially on the ground of the
fealty shown to Darius; Nicator, as having observed their faithfulness
as soldiers, who had served with him ; but they were so enrolled on this
visit to Jerusalem. The pagan kings multiplied, in their own purpose,
faithful subjects to themselves; in God's design, they prepared in Asia
and Egypt a seed-plot for the Gospel. The settlement of the Jews at
Alexandria formed the language of the Gospel; that wonderful blending of
the depth of the Hebrew with the clearness and precision of the Greek.
Everywhere the seed of the preparatory dispensation was sown, to be
fostered, grow and ripen with the harvest of the Gospel.

For now have I seen with Mine eyes - This is the counterpart of what the
Psalmists and pious people so often pray, "Awake to help me and behold"
[Psa 59:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#004.md); "Look down from heaven,
behold and visit this vine" [Psa
80:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#014.md); [Psa
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#013.md); "Look upon my trouble from them
that hate me" "Look upon my affliction and my trouble; look upon my
enemies, for they are many" [Psa
25:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#018.md); "Look upon my adversity and
deliver me" [Psa 119:153](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#153.md); "O Lord,
behold my affliction" ([Lam 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#009.md), add
11; [Lam 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#020).md); "Behold, O Lord, for I
am in distress" [Lam 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#020.md); "Look and
behold my reproach" [Lam 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#001.md); "Open
Thine eyes, O Lord, and see" [Isa
37:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#017.md); [Dan
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#018.md); "Look clown from heaven, and
behold from the habitation of Thy holiness and glory" [Isa
63:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#015.md). With God, compassion is so
intrinsic an attribute, that He is pictured as looking away, when He
does not put it forth. With God, to behold is to help.

[Zechariah 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 9:9</span></span>

From the protection, which God promised to His people and to His House,
the prophet passes on to Him who was ever in his thoughts, and for whose
sake that people and temple were preserved. He had described the great
conqueror of this world, sweeping along in his course of victory. In
contrast with such as he, he now exhibits to his people the character
and procession of their king. "Rejoice greatly." Not with this world's
joy. God never exhorts man to "rejoice greatly" in this world's fleeting
joys. He allows us to be glad, as children, before Him; He permits such
buoyancy of heart, if innocent; but He does not command it. "Now" He
commands His people to burst out into a jubilee of rejoicing: they were
to dance and shout for gladness of spirit; "despising the poor
exultation of this world and exulting with that exceeding" yet chaste
joy, which befits the true bliss to be brought by their King and
Saviour. Rup.: "This word, 'greatly,' means that there should be no
measure whatever in their exultation; for the exultation of the children
of the bridegroom is far unlike to the exultation of the children of
this world." Cyril: "He biddeth the spiritual Zion rejoice, inasmuch as
dejection was removed. For what cause of sorrow is there, when sin has
been removed, death trampled under foot, and human nature called to the
dignity of freedom, and crowned with the grace of adoption and illumined
with the heavenly gift?"

Behold, thy king cometh unto thee - He does not say "a king," but "'thy'
king;" thy king, thine own, the long-promised, the long-expected; He
who, when they had kings of their own, given them by God, had been
promised as "the" king ; "the righteous Ruler among men" [Sa2
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#003.md), of the seed of David; He who,
above all other kings, was "their" King and Savior; whose kingdom was to
absorb in itself all kingdoms of the earth; "the King of kings, and Lord
of lords." Her king was to come "to her." He was in a manner then "of
her," and "not of her;" "of her," since He was to be "her king," "not of
her," since He was to "come to her." As Man, He was born of her: as God,
the Word made flesh, He "came to" her. "'To thee,' to be manifest unto
thee; 'to be thine by communion of nature' [Ti1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016.md); 'as He is thine, by the earnest
of the Eternal Spirit and the gift of the Father, to procure thy good'
[Heb 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014.md). 'Unto us a Child is born,
unto us a Son is given' [Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md)." Of
this, His entry into Jerusalem was an image. But how should he come? "He
shall come to thee," says an old Jewish writing, , "to atone thee; He
shall come to thee, to upraise thee; He shall come to thee, to raise
thee up to His temple, and to espouse thee with an everlasting
espousal."

He is just and having salvation - Just or righteous, and the Fountain of
justice or righteousness. For what He is, "that" He diffuseth.
Righteousness which God "Is," and righteousness which God, made Man,
imparts, are often blended in Holy Scripture. [Isa
45:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#021.md); [Isa
53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011.md); [Jer
23:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005.md); [Jer
33:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#015.md); [Mal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002.md). This is also the source of the
exceeding joy. For the coming of their king in righteousness would be,
to sinful man, a cause, not of joy but of fear. This was the source of
the Angel's message of joy; "I bring you good tidings of great joy,
which shall be to all people; for unto you is born this day, in the city
of David, a Saviour" [Luk 2:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#010.md).

He is just - Dionysius: "Because in the Divine Nature, He is the
Fountain of all holiness and justice." "As Thou art righteous Thyself,
Thou orderest all things righteously. For Thy power is the beginning of
righteousness" . According to the nature which He took, He was also most
just; for He ever sought the glory of the Father, and "He did no sin,
neither was guile found in His Mouth" [Pe1
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022.md). In the way also of justice He
satisfied for people, delivering Himself for their faults to the pain of
the most bitter death, to satisfy the honor of the Divine Majesty, so
that sin should not remain unpunished. Hence, He saith of Himself; "He
that seeketh His glory that sent Him, the same is true, and no
unrighteousness is in Him" [Joh 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#018.md).
Of whom also Stephen said to the Jews, "Your fathers slew them which
showed before of the coming of the Just One, of whom ye have been now
the betrayers and murderers" [Act
7:52](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#052.md).

Righteousness is an awful attribute of God. It is a glory and perfection
of His Being, for the perfect to gaze on and adore. Mercy, issuing in
our salvation, is the attribute which draws us sinners. And this lies in
the promise that He should "come to them," however the one word נושׁע
nôsha‛ be rendered . The meaning of such a prophecy as this is secure,
independent of single words. The whole context implies, that He should
come as a ruler and deliverer, whether the word נושׁע nôsha‛ signify
"endued with salvation" (whereas the old versions rendered it,
"Saviour"), or whether it be, "saved." For as He came, not for Himself
but for us, so, in as far as He could be said to be saved, He was
"saved," not for Himself but for us. Of our Lord, as Man, it is, in like
way, said, "Thou shalt not leave His soul in Hell" [Psa
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010.md), or, "whom God raised up, having
loosed the pains of death, because it was not possible that He should be
holden of it" [Act 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024.md).

As Man, He was raised from the dead; as God, He raised Himself from the
dead, for our sakes, for whom He died. For us, He was born a Saviour;
for us, He was endued with salvation; for us, He was saved from being
held of death; in like way as, of His Human Nature, the Apostle says,
"He was heard, in that He feared" [Heb
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007.md). To us, as sinners, it is happiest
to hear of the Saviour; but the most literal meaning "saved" has its own
proper comfort: for it implies the Sufferings, by which that salvation
was procured, and so it contains a hint of the teaching by Isaiah, "He
was taken from oppression and from judgment;" upon which that same wide
reign follows, of which David, in his picture of the Passion [Psa
22:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027.md), and Isaiah [Isa
53:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010.md) prophesy. Osorius: "This
'saved' does not imply, that He obtained salvation for His own otherwise
than from Himself. "Mine own arm," He saith in Isaiah, "brought
salvation unto Me" [Isa 63:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#005.md). But its
Man, He obtained salvation from the indwelling Godhead. For when He
destroyed the might of death, when, rising from the dead, He ascended
into heaven, when He took on Him the everlasting kingdom of heaven and
earth, He obtained salvation from the glory of the Father, that is, from
His own Divinity, to impart it to all His. The Hebrew word then in no
way diminishes the amplitude of His dignity. For we confess, that the
Human Nature of Christ had that everlasting glory added to It from His
Divine Nature, so that He should not only be Himself adorned with those
everlasting gifts, but should became the cause of everlasting salvation
to all who obey Him."

Lowly - Outward lowliness of condition, is, through the grace of God,
the best fosterer of the inward. The word "lowly" wonderfully expresses
the union of both; lowness of outward state with lowliness of soul. The
Hebrew word expresses the condition of one, who is bowed down, brought
low through oppression, affliction, desolation, poverty, persecution,
bereavement; but only if at the same time, he had in him the fruit of
all these, in lowliness of mind, submission to God, piety. Thus, our
Lord pronounces the blessedness of "the poor" and "the poor in spirit,"
that is, poor in estate, who are poor in soul also. But in no case does
it express lowliness of mind without lowness of condition. One lowly,
who was not afflicted, would never be so called. The prophet then
declares that their king should come to them in a poor condition,
"stricken, smitten, and afflicted" [Isa
53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004.md), and with the special grace of
that condition, meekness, gentleness and lowliness of soul; and our Lord
bids us, "Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly of heart" [Mat
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029.md). Dionysius: "He saith of Himself
in the Gospel, 'The foxes have holes and the birds of the air have
nests, but the Son of Man hath not where to lay His Head' [Mat
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#020.md). 'For though He was rich, He for
our sakes became poor, that we through His poverty might be rich' [Co2
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009.md)."

Lowly and riding upon an ass - Kings of the earth ride in state. The
days were long since by, when the sons of the judges rode on asses [Jdg
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#004.md); [Jdg
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#014.md). Even then the more
distinguished rode on "white" (that is, roan) [Jdg
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#010.md) asses. The mule, as a taller
animal, was used by David [Kg1 1:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#033.md),
[Kg1 1:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#038.md), [Kg1
1:44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#044.md) and his sons [Sa2
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#029.md); [Sa2
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#009.md), while asses were used for his
household [Sa2 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#002.md), and by Ziba,
Shimei, Mephibosheth, Ahitophel, [Sa2
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001.md); [Sa2
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#023.md); [Sa2
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#026.md); [Kg1
2:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#040.md), and, later, by the old prophet
of Bethel [Kg1 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#013.md), [Kg1
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#023.md), [Kg1
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#027.md). David had reserved horses for
100 chariots, [Sa2 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#004.md), after the
defeat of the Syrians, but he himself did not use them. Absalom employed
"chariots and horses" [Sa2 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#001.md) as
part of his pomp, when preparing to displace his father; and Solomon
multiplied them [Kg1 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#026.md); [Kg1
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#026.md); [Ch2
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#014.md); [Ch2
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#025.md). He speaks of it as an indignity
or reverse; "I have seen servants upon horses, and princes walking, as
servants, upon the earth" [Ecc 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#007.md).

The burial of an ass became a proverb for a disgraced end [Jer
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#019.md). There is no instance in which a
king rode on an ass, save He whose kingdom was not of this world. The
prophecy, then, was framed to prepare the Jews to expect a prophet-king,
not a king of this world. Their eyes were fixed on this passage. In the
Talmud, in their traditional interpretations, and in their mystical
books, they dwelt on these words. The mention of the ass, elsewhere,
seemed to them typical of this ass, on which their Messiah should ride.
"If a man in a dream seeth an ass," says the Talmud, "he shall see
salvation." It is an instance of prophecy which, humanly speaking, a
false Messiah could have fulfilled, but which, from its nature, none
would fulfill, save the True. For "their" minds were set on earthly
glory and worldly greatness: it would have been inconsistent with the
claims of one, whose kingdom was of this world.

It belonged to the character of Him, who was buffeted, mocked, scourged,
spit upon, crucified, died for us, and rose again. It was divine
humiliation, which in the purpose of God, was to be compensated by
divine power. In itself it would, if insulated, have been unmeaning. The
Holy Spirit prophesied it, Jesus fulfilled it, to show the Jews, of what
nature His kingdom was. Hence, the challenge; , "Let us look at the
prophecy, that in words, and that in act. What is the prophecy? "Lo, thy
king cometh unto thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass, and upon a colt;"
not driving chariots as other kings, not in pomp nor attended by guards,
but showing herein also all gentleness. Ask the Jew then, What king,
riding on an ass, came to Jerusalem? He could name none, save this One
alone." An ancient writer says, , "The Greeks too" (not the Jews only)
"will laugh at us, saying, that 'The God of the Christians, who is
called Christ, sat upon an ass.'" The same mockery was probably intended
by Sapor king of Persia, which the Jews met with equal pride.

The taunt continues until now. : "It is not hid from you, O congregation
of Christians, that 'rider upon an ass' indicates Christ." The
Mohammedans appropriate the title "rider upon a camel" to Mohammad, as
the grander animal . The taunt of worshiping "Him who sat upon an ass"
was of the same class as those of the worship of the Crucified; , "one
dead and crucified, who could not save himself;" "a crucified Man,"
"that great Man," or (if it suited them so to speak) "that great sophist
who was crucified," but who now, for above 1800 years, reigns, "to all,
the King; to all, the Judge; to all, Lord and God." "Christ did not only
fulfill prophecies or plant the doctrines of truth, but did thereby also
order our life for us, everywhere laying down for us rules of necessary
use and, by all, correcting our life." Even Jews, having rejected our
Lord, saw this. "Not from poverty," says one, (Kimchi), "for behold the
whole world shall be in his power - but from humility he will ride upon
an ass; and further to show that Israel (namely, the establishment of
His kingdom or Church) shall not lack horse nor chariot: therefore it is
added, "And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim and the horse from
Jerusalem." And another; , "He, that is, thy true king David, shall come
to thee; and he mentions of his qualities that he shall be "righteous
and נושׁע nôsha‛ , in his wars; but his salvation shall not be from
strength of his wars, for he shall come "lowly" and "riding upon an
ass." "And riding on an ass," this is not on account of his want, but to
show that peace and truth shall be in his days; and therefore he says
immediately, "And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim and the horse
from Jerusalem;" namely, that such shall be the peace and stillness in
the world, that in Ephraim (that is, the tribes) and in Jerusalem (that
is, the kingdom of Judah) they shall "trust" no more in horse and in
rider, but "in the name of God." And because it is the way of princes
and chiefs to take example from the life of their kings, and to do as
they, therefore he saith, that when the king Messiah rideth upon an ass,
and "has no pleasure in the strength of a horse," there will be no other
in Jerusalem or the lands of the tribes, who will have pleasure in
riding on a horse. And therefore he says, "And I will cut off the
chariot from Ephraim and the horse from Jerusalem;" and he assigns the
reason for this, when he says, "And the battlebow shall be cut off and
he shall speak peace among the nations," that is, there shall be no more
war in the world, because he shall "speak peace unto the nations, and by
the word of his lips he shall dispose peace unto them." [Isa
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#012.md).

And upon a colt, the foal of an ass - The word rendered "colt," as with
us, signifies the young, as yet unbroken animal. In the fulfillment, our
Lord directed His disciples to find "an ass tied, and a colt with her,
whereon never man sat" [Mat 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#002.md); [Mar
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#002.md); [Luk
19:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#030.md). The prophet foretold that He
would ride on both animals; our Lord, by commanding both to be brought,
showed that the prophet had a special meaning in naming both. Matthew
relates that both were employed. "They brought the ass and the colt, and
put on them their clothes, and they set Him thereon." The untrained
colt, an appendage to its mother, was a yet humbler animal. But as the
whole action was a picture of our Lord's humility and of the
unearthliness of His kingdom, so, doubtless, His riding upon the two
animals was a part of that picture. There was no need of two animals to
bear our Lord for that short distance. John notices especially, "These
things understood not His disciples at the first" [Joh
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#016.md). The ass, an unclean stupid
debased ignoble drudge, was in itself a picture of unregenerate man, a
slave to his passions and to devils, toiling under the load of
ever-increasing sin. But, of man, the Jew had been under the yoke and
was broken; the Gentiles were the wild unbroken colt. Both were to be
brought under obedience to Christ.

[Zechariah 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 9:10</span></span>

And I will cut off the chariot - The horse is the symbol of worldly
power, as the ass is of meekness. "Some," says the Psalmist, "put their
trust in chariots, and some in horses; but we will remember the name of
the Lord our God" [Psa 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007.md). "A horse
is but a vain thing to save a man" [Psa
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#017.md). "He delighteth not in the
strength of a horse" [Psa 147:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#010).md). In
scarcely any place in Holy Scripture is the horse spoken of in relation
to man, except as the instrument of war. It represents human might,
which is either to be consecrated to the Lord, or destroyed by Him (see
[Mic 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#010).md). As the "stone, cut out
without hands" [Dan 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034.md), broke in
pieces and absorbed into itself all the kingdoms of the world, so here
He, whose Kingdom should not be of this world, should supersede human
might. His kingdom was to begin by doing away, among His followers, all,
whereby human kingdoms are established. He first cuts off the chariot
and the horse, not from His enemies, but from His own people; His
people, not as a civil polity, but as the people of God. For the prophet
speaks of them as Ephraim and Judah, but Ephraim had no longer a
distinct existence.

And He shall speak peace unto the pagan - As the Apostle says, "He came
and preached peace to you which were afar off, and to them that were
nigh" [Eph 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#017.md). He shall speak it to
them, as He who hath power to give it to them, peace with God, peace in
themselves, the reconciliation of God and man, and the remission of
their sins.

Osorius: "At His birth the heavenly host announced peace to men; all His
doctrine has peace for its end; when His death was at hand, He
especially commended peace to His disciples, that peace which the world
knoweth not, which is contained in tranquility of mind, burning zeal for
charity. Divine grace. This same peace He brought to all who gathered
themselves to His empire and guidance, that, emerging from intestine
wars and foul darkness, they might behold the light of liberty, and, in
all wisdom keep the grace of God."

And His dominion shall be from sea to sea - The bounds of the promised
land, in its utmost range, on the west, were the Mediterranean sea; on
the east, "the great river," the Euphrates. The prophet pictures its
extension, so as to embrace the whole world, taking away, first the one
bound, then the other. "From sea to sea" is from the Mediterranean to
the most extreme east, Where the Ocean encircles the continent of Asia;
"from the river to the ends of the earth," is from the Euphrates to the
most extreme west, embracing the whole of Europe; and whatever may lie
beyond, to the ends of the earth, where earth ceaseth to be . It is this
same lowly and afflicted king, whose entry into Jerusalem is on a
despised animal, who shall, by His mere will, make war to cease, who
shall, by His mere word, give peace to the pagan.

[Zechariah 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 9:11</span></span>

As for thee also - The prophet turns from the deliverance of the whole
world to the former people, the sorrows which they should have in the
way, and the protection which God would bestow upon them for the sake of
Him, who, according to the flesh, was to be born of them. "Thou too;" he
had spoken of the glories of the Church, such as her king, when He
should come, should extend it, embracing earth's remotest bounds: he
turns to her, Israel after the flesh, and assures her of the continued
protection of God, even in her lowest estate. The deliverance under the
Maccabees was, as those under the judges had been, an image of the
salvation of Christ and a preparation for it. They were martyrs for the
One God and for the faith in the Resurrection, and, whether by doing or
by suffering, preserved the sacred line, until Christ should come.

By the blood of thy covenant - Osorius: "Not by the blood of those
victims of old, but by the blood of thy covenant, wilt thou be united to
the empire of Christ, and so obtain salvation. As the Lord Himself says,
This is the blood of covenant, which is shed for you." "The gifts and
calling of God are without repentance" [Rom
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029.md). That symbolic blood, by which,
fore-signifying the New Covenant, He made them His own people, "Behold
the blood of the covenant, which the Lord hath made with you concerning
all these words," [Exo 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008.md), endured
still, amid all their unfaithfulness and breaches of it. By virtue of it
God would send forth her imprisoned ones "out of the" deep, dry "pit,"
"the dungeon" wherein they could be kept securely, because life was not
threatened (as in [Gen 37:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#024).md). Out of
any depth of hopeless misery, in which they seemed to be shut up, God
would deliver them; as David says, "He brought me up also out of a
horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a rock and
established my goings" [Psa 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#002.md); and
Jeremiah, "They have cut off my life in the dungeon, and cast a stone
upon me. I called upon Thy Name, O Lord; out of the low dungeon Thou
hast heard my voice" [Lam 3:53](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#053.md), [Lam
3:55-56](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#055.md). Augustine, de Civ. Dei.
xviii. 35. 3): "The dry and barren depth of human misery, where are no
streams of righteousness, but the mire of iniquity."

[Zechariah 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 9:12</span></span>

Turn ye to the stronghold - that is, Almighty God; as the Psalmists so
often say, "The Lord is the defense of my life" ([Psa
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001.md), add [Psa
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#005.md); [Psa
37:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#039.md); [Psa
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002.md); [Psa
52:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#009).md); and Joel, "The Lord shall be a
stronghold of the children, of Israel" ; and Nahum, "The Lord is a
stronghold in the day of trouble" [Nah
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#007.md); And, David said, "Thou hast been
a shelter for me, a strong tower against the enemy" [Psa
61:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#003.md); "the Name of the Lord is a
strong tower, the righteous runneth into it and is safe" [Pro
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#010.md); and again, "Be Thou to me a
rock of strength, a house of defense to save me - Bring me forth out of
the net that they have laid privily for me; for Thou art my stronghold"
. The "stronghold," "cut off" from all approach from an enemy, stands in
contrast with the deep dungeon of calamity. The "return" must be a
willing return, one in their own power; "return to the stronghold,"
which is Almighty God, must be by conversion of heart and will. Even a
Jewish commentator Kimchi paraphrases, "Turn ye to God; for He is a
stronghold and tower of strength."

Ye prisoners of - (the) hope Not, accordingly, any hope, or generally,
"hope," but the special hope of Israel, "the hope" which sustained them
in all those years of patient expectations, as Paul speaks of "the hope
of Israel," for which he says, "I am bound with this chain" [Act
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#020.md). "I stand to be judged for the
hope of the promise made by God unto our fathers, unto which promise our
twelve tribes, serving God instantly day and night, hope to come; for
which hope's sake, King Agrippa, I am accused of the Jews" [Act
26:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#006.md). And in his Epistles, "the hope
laid up for you in heaven" [Col 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#005.md);
"the hope of the Gospel" [Col 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023.md);
and, "looking for the blessed hope and the glorious appearing of the
great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ" [Tit
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013.md). He writes also of "keeping the
rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end" [Heb
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#006.md); of "the full assurance of the
hope unto the end" [Heb 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#011.md); of
"fleeing to lay hold on the hope set before us; which hope we have as an
anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast" [Heb
6:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#018.md). He does not speak of hope as
a grace or theological virtue, but, objectively, as the thing hoped for.
So Zechariah calls to them as bound, held fast by "the hope," bound, as
it were, to it and by it, so as not to let it go, amid the persecution
of the world, or weariness of expectation; as Paul also says, "before
faith came, we were guarded, kept in ward, under the law, shut up unto
the faith which was about to be revealed" [Gal
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#023.md).

Even to-day - Amid all contrary appearances, "do I declare, that I will
render double unto thee;" as He had said by Isaiah, "For your shame ye
shall have double" [Isa 61:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#007.md).

[Zechariah 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zac 9:13</span></span>

When - or For I have bent Judah for me As a mighty bow which is only
drawn at full human strength, the foot being placed to steady it. It
becomes a strong instrument, but only at God's Will. God Himself bends
it. It cannot bend itself. "And filled the bow with Ephraim." The bow is
filled, when the arrow is laid upon it. God would employ both in their
different offices, as one. "And raised up thy sons, O Zion, against thy
sons, O Greece." Let people place this prophecy where they will, nothing
in the history of the world was more contradictory to what was in human
sight possible. "Greece was, until Alexander, a colonizing, not a
conquering, nation. The Hebrews had no human knowledge of the site or
circumstances of Greece. There was not a little cloud, like a man's
hand, when Zechariah thus absolutely foretold the conflict and its
issue. Yet here we have a definite prophecy later than Daniel, fitting
in with his temporal prophecy, expanding part of it, reaching on beyond
the time of Antiochus, and fore-announcing the help of God in two
definite ways of protection;

\(1\) "without war," against the army of Alexander [Zac
9:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001.md);

\(2\) "in the war" of the Maccabees; and these, two of the most critical
periods in their history after the captivity Zech. 9-16.

Yet, being expansions of part of the prophecy of Daniel, the period, to
which they belong, becomes clearer in the event by aid of the more
comprehensive prophecies. They were two points in Daniel's larger
prediction of the 3rd empire."

And I will make thee as the sword of a mighty man - The strength is
still not their own. In the whole history of Israel, they had only once
met in battle an army, of one of the world-empires and defeated it, at a
time, when Asa's whole population which could bear arms were 580,000
([Ch2 14:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#008) ff.md), and he met Zerah
the Ethiopian with his million of combatants, besides his 500 chariots,
and defeated him. And this, in reliance on the "Lord his God, to whom he
cried, Lord, it is nothing to Thee to help, whether with many, or with
them that have no power; help us, O Lord our God; for we rest on Thee,
and in Thy Name we go against this multitude" [Ch2
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#011.md). Asa's words found an echo in
Judas Maccabaeus (1 Macc. 3:16-19), when the "small company with him
asked him, How shall we be able, being so few, to fight against so great
a multitude and so strong?" "It is no hard matter," Judas answered, "for
many to be shut up in the hands of a few, and with Heaven it is all one
to deliver with a great multitude or a small company. For the victory of
battle standeth not in the multitude of an host; but strength cometh
from Heaven." But his armies were but a handful; 3,000, on three
occasions (1 Macc. 4:6; 7:40; 9:5), on one of which they are reduced by
fear to 800 (1 Macc. 9:6); 10,000 on two occasions (1 Macc. 4:29;
10:74); on another, two armies of 8,000 and 3,000, with a garrison, not
trusted to fight in the open field (1 Macc. 5:17-20); on one, 20,000 (1
Macc. 16:4); once only 40,000, which Tryphon treacherously persuaded
Jonathan to disperse ; these were the numbers with which, always against
"great hosts," God gave the victory to the lion-hearted Judas and his
brothers. But who except He, in whose hands are the hearts of people,
could foresee that He, at that critical moment, would raise up that
devoted family, or inspire that faith, through which they "out of
weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the
armies of the aliens?" [Heb 11:34](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#034.md).

[Zechariah 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zac 9:14</span></span>

And the Lord shall be seen over them - o "He will reveal himself,"
protecting them. Cyril: "He says plainly, that the Lord God will be with
them and will fight in serried array with them and will with them subdue
those who resist them." It is as if he would say, "When they go forth
and preach everywhere, the Lord shall work with them and confirm the
word with signs following" [Mar 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#020.md).
"And His arrow shall go forth as the lightning." Habakkuk directly calls
the lightnings the arrows of God: "at the light of Thine arrows they
went" . Here it is probably of an invisible agency, and so compared to
that awful symbol of His presence, the lightning.

And the Lord God shall blow with the trumpet - As their Commander,
ordering their goings. The blowing of the trumpet by the priests in war
was commanded, as a reminiscence of themselves before God, "If ye go to
war in your land against the enemy that oppresseth you, then ye shall
blow an alarm with the trumpets, and ye shall be remembered before the
Lord your God, and ye shall be saved from your enemies" [Num
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#009.md). Abijah said, "God Himself is
with us for our captain, and His priests with sounding trumpets to cry
alarm against you" [Ch2 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#012.md).

And shall go with whirlwinds of the south - As being the most vehement
and destructive. So Isaiah, "As whirlwinds in the south sweep by, He
cometh from a desert, from a terrible land" [Isa
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001.md). Such smote the four corners of
the house where Job's children were , and they perished.

[Zechariah 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zac 9:15</span></span>

The Lord of hosts, shall defend them - As God says, "I will defend this
city to save it, for Mine own sake and for My servant David's sake" .
The word is used by Isaiah only before Zechariah, and of the protection
of Almighty God. The image of the complete protection on all sides
stands first in God's words to Abraham, "I am thy shield" [Gen
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001.md); David thence says to God, "Thou,
O Lord, art a shield around me" ([Psa
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#004.md), ([Psa
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#003) in English).md).

And they shall devour, and subdue - Or more probably (as in the margin),
"shall tread on, the stones of the sling," as in the image of leviathan
in Job, "The son of the bow will not make him flee; sling-stones are to
him turned into stubble; clubs are counted as stubble; he laugheth at
the shaking of a spear" ([Job 41:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#020.md)
(28, 29 English)). Their enemies shall fall under them, as harmless and
as of little account as the slingstones which have missed their aim, and
lie as the road to be passed over. It is not expressed what they shall
devour, and so the image is not carried out, but left indefinite, as
destruction or absorption only; as in that, "thou shalt consume
(literally, eat) all the people which the Lord thy God shall deliver
thee" [Deu 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#016.md); and, "they are our
bread" [Num 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#009.md); and in that, "they
shall devour (literally, eat) all the people round about" [Zac
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#006.md), where the image is of fire, not
of eating. The one thought seems to be, that their enemies should cease
to be, so as to molest them any more, whether by ceasing to be their
enemies or by ceasing to be. There is no comparison here, (as in Balaam)
with the lion; or of eating flesh or drinking blood, which, apart from
the image of the wild beast, would be intolerable to Israel, to whom the
use of blood, even of animals, was so strictly forbidden. They should
disappear, as completely as fuel before the fire, or food before the
hungry. The fire was invigorated, not extinguished, by the multitude of
the fuel: the multitude of the enemies but nerved and braced those, whom
they sought to destroy.

And they shall be filled like bowls, like the corners of the altar -
They shall be consecrated instruments of God; they shall not prevail for
themselves, but for Him; they shall be hallowed like the bowls of the
temple, from which the sacrificial blood is sprinkled on His altar, or
"as the corners of the altar" which receive it.

[Zechariah 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">zac 9:16</span></span>

And the Lord their God shall save them in that day - Still all should be
God's doing; they themselves were but as a flock, as sheep among wolves,
ready for the slaughter; but they were "the flock, His people," as He
says, "I will increase them like the flock, men, as the flock of holy
things, as the flock of Jerusalem in her solemn feasts; so shall the
waste cities be filled with flocks, men" [Eze
36:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#037.md). "As a man saves his flock
with all his strength, so He will save His people; for they are His
flock." As in, "Thou leddest Thy people like sheep by the hand of Moses
and Aaron" [Psa 77:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#020.md).

They shall be as the stones of a crown - While God's enemies shall be
trampled under foot, as a common thing which has failed its end, these
shall be precious stones; a consecrated diadem of king or priest,
"raised aloft," so that all can see. "On His land." It was laid down, as
the title-deed to its whole tenure, "the land is Mine" [Lev
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#023.md), and much more our Christian
land, bought and purified by the blood of Christ.

[Zechariah 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">zac 9:17</span></span>

For how great is His goodness - For it is unutterable! As the Psalmist
said, "O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is Thy Name in all the earth!"
[Psa 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001.md), and Jacob, "How awful is
this place!" [Gen 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#017.md), and the
Psalmist, "How awful are Thy doings!" The goodness and the beauty are
the goodness and beauty of God, whose great doings had been his theme
throughout before. Of the goodness the sacred writers often speak ,
since of this we have extremest need. And this He showed to Moses, "I
will cause all My goodness to pass before thy face" [Exo
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#019.md). Of this we know somewhat
personally in this life; for beside the surpassing. amazingness of it in
the work of our redemption, we are surrounded by it, immersed in it, as
in a fathomless, shoreless ocean of infinite love, which finds entrance
into our souls, whenever we bar it not out.

Goodness is that attribute of God, whereby He loveth to communicate to
all, who can or will receive it, all good; yea, Himself , "who is the
fullness and universality of good, Creator of all good, not in one way,
not in one kind of goodness only, but absolutely, without beginning,
without limit, without measure, save that whereby without measurement He
possesseth and embraceth all excellence, all perfection, all
blessedness, all good." This Good His Goodness bestoweth on all and
each, according to the capacity of each to receive it, nor is there any
limit to His giving, save His creature's capacity of receiving, which
also is a good gift from Him. "From Him all things sweet derive their
sweetness; all things fair, their beauty; all things bright, their
splendor; all things that live, their life; all things sentient, their
sense; all that move, their vigor; all intelligences, their knowledge;
all things perfect, their perfection; all things in any wise good, their
goodness."

The beauty of God - Belongs rather to the beatific vision. Yet David
speaks of the Beauty of Christ, "Thou art exceeding fairer then the
children of men" [Psa 45:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#002.md); and Isaiah
says, "Thine eyes shall behold the King in His beauty" [Isa
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#017.md). But the Beauty of God "eye hath
not seen nor ear heard nor can heart of man conceive." Here, on earth,
created beauty can, at least when suddenly seen, hold the frame
motionless, pierce the soul, glue the heart to it, entrance the
affections. Light from heaven kindles into beauty our dullest material
substances; the soul in grace diffuses beauty over the dullest human
countenance; the soul, ere it has passed from the body, has been known
to catch, through the half-opened portals, such brilliancy of light,
that the eye even for some time after death has retained a brightness,
beyond anything of earth . "The earth's form of beauty is a sort of
voice of the dumb earth. Doth not, on considering the beauty of this
universe, its very form answer thee with one voice, 'Not I made myself,
but God?'" Poets have said:

"Old friends ... shall lovelier be,

As more of heaven in each we see,"

(Christian Year. Morning Hymn.)

Or,

"When he saw,

" - God within him light his face."

(Tennyson, In memoriam. T. has "The God.")

And Holy Scripture tells us that when Stephen, "full of faith and of the
Holy Spirit," was about to speak of Jesus to the council which arraigned
him, "all that sat in the council, looking steadfastly at him, saw his
face as it had been the face of an angel" [Act
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#005.md), [Act
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#015.md). It has been said, that if we
could see a soul in grace, its beauty would so pierce us, that we should
die. But the natural beauty of the soul transcends all corporeal beauty
which so attracts us; the natural beauty of the last angel surpasseth
all natural beauty of soul. If we could ascend from the most beautiful
form, which the soul could here imagine, to the least glorious body of
the beatified, on and on through the countless thousands of glorious
bodies, compared wherewith heaven would be dark and the sun lose its
shining; and yet more from the most beautiful deified soul, as visible
here, to the beauty of the disembodied soul, whose image would scarce be
recognized, because , "the bodily eyes gleamed with angelic radiancy;"
yea, let the God-enlightened soul go on and on, through all those choirs
of the heavenly hierarchies, clad with the raiment of Divinity, from
choir to choir, from hierarchy to hierarchy, admiring the order and
beauty and harmony of the house of God; yea, let it, aided by divine
grace and light, ascend even higher, and reach the bound and term of all
created beauty, yet it must know that the divine power and wisdom could
create other creatures, far more perfect and beautiful than all which He
hath hitherto created.

Nay, let the highest of all the Seraphs sum in one all the beauty by
nature and grace and glory of all creatures, yet could it not be
satisfied with that beauty, but must, because it was not satisfied with
it, conceive some higher beauty. Were God immediately, at every moment
to create that higher beauty at its wish, it could still conceive
something beyond; for, not being God, its beauty could not satisfy its
conception. So let him still, and in hundred thousand, hundred thousand,
thousand years with swiftest flight of understanding multiply
continually those degrees of beauty, so that each fresh degree should
ever double that preceding, and the divine power should, with like
swiftness, concur in creating that beauty, as in the beginning He said,
"let there be light and there was light;" after all those millions of
years, he would be again. at the beginning, and there would be no
comparison between it and the divine beauty of Jesus Christ, God and
Man. For it is the bliss of the finite not to reach the Infinite . That
city of the blest which is lightened by the glory of God, and the Lamb
is the light thereof, sees It, enabled by God, as created eye can see
It, and is held fast to God in one jubilant exstacy of everlasting love.

"The prophet, borne out of himself by consideration of the divine
goodness, stands amazed, while he contemplates the beauty and Deity of
Christ: he bursts out with unaccustomed admiration! How great is His
goodness, who, to guard His flock, shall come down on earth to lay down
His life for the salvation of His sheep! How great His beauty, who is
the ""brightnesss of the glory and the Image of the Father," and
comprises in His Godhead the measure of all order and beauty! With what
firm might does He strengthen, with what joy does He overwhelm the souls
which gaze most frequently on His beauty, and gives largely and
bountifully that corn, by whose strength the youths are made strong. He
supplieth abundantly the wine, whereby the virgins, on fire with His
love, are exhilarated and beautified. But both are necessary, that the
strength of the strong should be upheld by the "bread from heaven," and
that sound and uncorrupt minds, melted with the sweetness of love,
should be recreated with wine, that is, the sweetness of the Holy
Spirit, and be borne aloft with great joy, in the midst of extreme
toils. For all who keep holily the faith of Christ, may be called
"youths," for their unconquered strength, and virgins for their purity
and integrity of soul. For all these that heavenly bread is prepared,
that their strength be not weakened, and the wine is inpoured, that they
be not only refreshed, but may live in utmost sweetness."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 10](zac010.md)

</div>
