<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac010)  [Next](zac012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 11:0</span></span>

Rup.: "'All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth,' saith the
Psalmist [Psa 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#011), and, 'I will sing
to Thee of mercy and judgment' [Psa
101:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001). So is this prophecy divided.
Above , almost all were promises of mercy, which are now fulfilled in
deed; and from this, "Open, O Lebanon, thy doors" , all are terrible
edicts of truth and tokens of just judgment. How much sweetness and
softness and pleasantness is therein, "Rejoice greatly, daughter of
Zion: shout, O daughter of Jerusalem;" what bitterness and acerbity and
calamity to those, to whom he says, "Open, O Lebanon, thy doors, that
the fire may devour thy cedars; howl, O fir tree; howl, O ye oaks of
Basan." As then, before, we beheld His mercy in those who believed and
believe; so now let us contemplate His just judgment on those who
believed not." Gilead and Lebanon [Zac
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#010) had been named as the restored
home of Ephraim; but there remained a dark side of the picture, which
the prophet suddenly presents, with the names of those self-same lands,
"Open thy doors, O Lebanon; howl, O ye oaks of Basan" [Zac
11:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001).

[Zechariah 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 11:1</span></span>

Open thy doors, O Lebanon - Lebanon, whose cedars had stood, its glory,
for centuries, yet could offer no resistance to him who felled them and
were carried off to adorn the palaces of its conquerors (see above at
[Zep 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#014), and note 2. p. 276), was in
Isaiah [Isa 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#008); [Isa
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#024) and Jeremiah [Jer
22:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#006) the emblem of the glory of the
Jewish state; and in Ezekiel, of Jerusalem, as the prophet himself
explains it [Eze 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#003), [Eze
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#012); glorious, beauteous,
inaccessible, so long as it was defended by God; a ready prey, when
abandoned by Him. The center and source of her strength was the worship
of God; and so Lebanon has of old been understood to be the temple,
which was built with cedars of Lebanon, towering aloft upon a strong.
summit; the spiritual glory and the eminence of Jerusalem, as Lebanon
was of the whole country, and , "to strangers who came to it, it
appeared from afar like a mountain full of snow; for, where it was not
gilded, it was exceeding white, being built of marble." But at the time
of destruction it was "a den of thieves" [Mat
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#013), as Lebanon, amidst its beauty,
was of wild beasts.

Rup.: "I suppose Lebanon itself, that is, "the temple," felt the command
of the prophet's words, since, as its destruction approached, its doors
opened without the hand of man. Josephus relates how , "at the passover,
the eastern gate of the inner temple, being of brass and very firm, and
with difficulty shut at eventide by twenty men; moreover with bars
strengthened with iron, and having very deep bolts, which went down into
the threshold, itself of one stone, was seen at six o'clock at night to
open of its own accord. The guards of the temple running told it to the
officer, and he, going up, with difficulty closed it. This the
uninstructed thought a very favorable sign, that God opened to them the
gate of all goods. But those taught in the divine words, understood that
the safety of the temple was removed of itself, and that the gate
opened."

A saying of this sort is still exstant. : "Our fathers have handed down,
forty years before the destruction of the house, the lot of the Lord did
not come up on the right hand, and the tongue of splendor did not become
white, nor did the light from the evening burn, and the doors of the
temple opened of their own accord, until Rabbi Johanan ben Zaccai
rebuked them, and said, 'O temple, why dost thou affright thyself? I
know of thee that thy end is to be destroyed, and of this Zechariah
prophesied, "Open thy doors, O Lebanon, and let the fire devour thy
cedars.'" The "forty years" mentioned in this tradition carry back the
event exactly to the Death of Christ, the temple having been burned 73
a.d. . Josephus adds that they opened at the passover, the season of His
Crucifixion. On the other hand, the shutting of the gates of the temple,
when they had "seized Paul and dragged him out of the temple" [Act
21:30](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#030), seems miraculous and
significant, that, having thus violently refused the preaching of the
Gospel, and cast Paul out, they themselves were also shut out, denoting
that an entrance was afterward to be refused them.

And let afire devour thy cedars - Jerusalem, or the temple, were, after
those times, burned by the Romans only. The destruction of pride,
opposed to Christ, was prophesied by Isaiah in connection with His
Coming [Isa 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#034); [Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001).

[Zechariah 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 11:2</span></span>

Howl, O cypress, for the cedar is fallen - Jerusalem or the temple
having been likened to Lebanon and its cedars, the prophet carries on
the image, speaking of the priests princes and people, under the title
of firs, cypresses and oaks, trees inferior, but magnificent. He shows
that it is imagery, by ascribing to them the feelings of people. The
more glorious and stately, "the cedars," were destroyed. Woe then to the
rest, "the cypress;" as our Lord says, "If they do these things in the
green tree, what shall be done, in the dry?" [Luk
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#031), and Peter, "If the righteous
scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?" [Pe1
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#018).

For the defensed forest is come down - That which was closed and
inaccessible to the enemy. All which was high and lifted up was brought
low, "came down," even to the ground .

[Zechariah 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 11:3</span></span>

A voice of the howling of the shepherds, for their glory is spoiled - It
echoes on from Jeremiah before the captivity, "Howl, ye shepherds - A
voice of the cry of the shepherds. and an howling of the principal of
the flock; for the Lord hath spoiled their pasture" [Jer
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#034), [Jer
25:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#036). There is one chorus of
desolation, the mighty and the lowly; the shepherds and the young lions;
what is at other times opposed is joined in one wailing. "The pride of
Jordan" are the stately oaks on its banks, which shroud it from sight,
until you reach its edges, and which, after the captivity of the ten
tribes, became the haunt of lions and their chief abode in Palestine,
"on account of the burning heat, and the nearness of the desert, and the
breadth of the vast solitude and jungles" (Jerome). See [Jer
49:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#019); [Jer
50:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#044); [Kg2
17:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#025). The lion lingered there even to
the close of the 12th cent. Phocas in Reland Palaest. i. 274. Cyril says
in the present, "there are very many lions there, roaring horribly and
striking fear into the inhabitants").

[Zechariah 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 11:4</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord my God, Feed the flock of the slaughter - The
fulfillment of the whole prophecy shows, that the person addressed is
the prophet, not in, or for himself, but (as belongs to symbolic
prophecy) as representing Another, our Lord. It is addressed, in the
first instance, to Zechariah. For Zechariah is bidden, "take unto thee
yet the instruments of a foolish shepherd" [Zac
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#015), in words addressed to himself,
personally; "And the Lord said unto me." But he who was to represent the
foolish shepherd, had represented the True Shepherd, since it is said to
him, "Take unto thee yet." But He, the Shepherd addressed, who does the
acts commanded, speaks with the authority of God. He says, "I cut off
three shepherds in one month" [Zac
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#008); "I broke My covenant which I had
made with all the peoples" [Zac 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#010);
"the poor of the flock waited upon Me" [Zac
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#011); "I cut asunder Mine other
staff, Bands, that I might break the brotherhood between Judah and
Israel" [Zac 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#014). But in Zechariah's
time, no three shepherds were cut off, the covenant made by God was not
broken on His part, there was no such visible distinction between those
who waited on God, and those who, outwardly too, rejected Him.

Feed the flock of the slaughter - Those who were, even before the end,
slain by their evil shepherds whom they followed, and who in the end
would be given to the slaughter, as the Psalmist says, "we are counted
as sheep for the slaughter" [Psa
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#022), because they would not hear the
voice of the True Shepherd, and were not His sheep. They were already,
by God's judgment, a prey to evil shepherds; and would be so yet more
hereafter. As a whole then, they were "sheep of the slaughter." It is a
last Charge given to feed them. As our Lord says, "Last of all, He sent
unto them His Son, saying, They will reverence My Son" [Mat
21:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#037). This failing, nothing remained
but that the flock would be given up, as they themselves say, "He will
miserably destroy those wicked people, and will let out His vineyard
unto other husbandmen, which shall render Him the fruits in their
seasons" [Mat 21:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#041), that is, our Lord
explains it, "The kingdom of heaven shall be taken from them, and given
to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. Yet a remnant should be
saved" [Mat 21:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#043), for whose sake the
larger flock was still to be fed: and, as our Lord, as Man, wept over
Jerusalem, whose sentence He pronounced, so He still feeds those who
would not turn to Him that they might be saved, and who would in the end
be "a flock of slaughter," "Death their shepherd" [Psa
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#014), since they chose death rather
than Life.

[Zechariah 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 11:5</span></span>

Whose possessors - (buyers) slay them and hold themselves not guilty,
rather, are not guilty either in their own eyes, or in the sight of God,
since He gave them up and would no more avenge them. They contract no
guilt. Aforetime God said; "Israel was holiness to the Lord, the
first-fruits of His increase; all that devour him shall be guilty: evil
shall come upon them, saith the Lord" [Jer
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#003). Now God reversed this, as He said
by the same prophet, "My people hath been lost sheep; their shepherds
have caused them to go astray; they have turned them away on the
mountains; all that found them have devoured them; and their adversaries
say, We are not guilty, because they have sinned against the Lord, the
habitation of justice, yea, the hope of their fathers, the Lord" [Jer
50:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#006). The offence of injuring Israel
was that they were God's people: when He cast them forth, they who
chastened them were His servants [Jer
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#009); [Jer
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#006); [Jer
43:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#010), His instruments, and offended
only when through pride they knew not in whose hands they themselves
were [Isa 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#007); [Hab
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#011), or through cruelty exceeded
their office [Isa 47:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#006); [Zac
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#018), and so they became guilty.

And they that sell them say, Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich - Even
Sennacherib felt himself in part, or thought best to own himself, to be
an instrument in God's hand [Isa
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#010). But Titus when he "entered
Jerusalem, marveled at the strength of the city and its towers, which
'he tyrants' in phrensy abandoned. When then he had beheld their solid
strength and the greatness of each rock, and how accurately they were
fitted in, and how great their length and breadth, he said 'By the help
of God we have warred: and God it was who brought down the Jews from
those bulwarks: for what avail the hands of man or his engines against
such towers?' Much of this sort he said to his friends." The Jews also
were "sold" in this war, as they had not been in former captures; and
that, not by chance, but because the Roman policy was different from
all, known by "experience" in the time of Zechariah. Into Babylon they
had been carried captive, as a whole, because it was the will of God,
after the "seventy years" to restore them. In this war, it was His will
to destroy or disperse them; and so those above 17 were sent to Egypt to
the works; those below 17 were sold. : "The whole number taken prisoners
during the wars were 1,100,000," beside those who perished elsewhere.
Jerome: "Read we the ancient histories and the traditions of the
mourning Jews, that at the Tabernaculum Abrahae (where now is a very
thronged mart every year) after the last destruction, which they endured
from Adrian, many thousands were sold, and what could not be sold were
removed into Egypt, and destroyed by shipwreck or famine and slaughter
by the people. No displeasure came upon the Romans for the utter
destruction, as there had upon the Assyrians and Chaldaeans."

And their own shepherds - (In contrast to those who "bought" and "sold"
them, who accordingly were not their own, temporal or spiritual) they to
whom God had assigned them, who should have fed them with the word of
God, strengthened the diseased, healed the sick, bound up the broken,
and sought the lost, "pity them not" [Eze
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#004). He says what they should have
done, in blaming them for what they did not do. They owed them a tender
compassionate love; they laid aside all mercy, and became wolves, as
Paul says; "After my departure shall grievous wolves enter in among you,
not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking
perverse things, to draw away disciples after them" [Act
20:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#029). They who owed them all love,
shall have none. Jerome: "No marvel then, he says, if enemies shall use
the right of conquest, when their very shepherds and teachers spared
them not, and, through their fault, the flock was given over to the
wolves." All were corrupted, high priest, priests, scribes, lawyers,
Pharisees, Sadducees. No one had pity on them.

[Zechariah 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 11:6</span></span>

For I will no more pity - Therefore were they a "flock of the
slaughter," because God would "have no pity" on those who went after
shepherds "who had no Pity" upon them, but corrupted them; who "entered
not in themselves, and those who were entering in, they hindered" [Luk
11:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#052).

The inhabitants of the land - "That land, of which he had been
speaking," Judaea. "And lo." God, by this word, "lo," always commands
heed to His great doings with man; I, I, Myself, visibly interposing,
"will deliver man," the whole race of inhabitants, "every one into his
neighbor's hand," by confusion and strife and hatred within, "and into
the hand of his king," him whom they chose and took as their own king,
when they rejected Christ as their King, repudiating the title which
Pilate gave Him, to move their pity. Whereas He, their Lord and God, was
their King, they formally "denied Him in the presence of Pilate, when he
was determined to let Him go; they denied the Holy One and the Just"
[Act 3:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#013), and said, "We have no
king but Caesar" [Joh 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#015).

And they - The king without and the wild savages within, "shall smite,"
bruise, crush in pieces, like a broken vessel, "the land, and out of
their hand I will not deliver" them. Their captivity shall be without
remedy or end. Holy Scripture often says, "there is no deliverer [Jdg
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#028); [Sa2
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#006); [Job
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#004); [Psa
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#003); [Psa
50:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#022); [Psa
71:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#011); [Isa
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#029); [Isa
42:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#022); [Hos
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#014), [Mic
5:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#007), or "none can deliver out of My
hand" [Deu 32:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039); [Job
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#007); [Psa
50:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#022); [Psa
71:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#011); [Isa
43:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#013); [Dan
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#004), [Dan
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#007), or, since God delighteth in doing
good, I [Exo 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006); [Kg2
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#006); [Jer
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#021); [Jer
39:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#017); [Eze
34:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#027), He [Sa1
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003); [Psa
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#015); [Psa
72:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#012); [Kg2
17:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#039); [Isa
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#020); [Isa
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#005); [Job
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#019), will deliver, or delivered [Exo
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#010); [Jos
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#010); [Jdg
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#009); [Sa1
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#018); [Sa1
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#010); [Sa2
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#001); [Psa
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#005), [Psa
34:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#018); 54:9; [Ezr
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#031); [Jer
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#013) from the hands of the enemy, or
their slavery, or their own fears, or afflictions, or the like. God
nowhere else says absolutely as here, "I will not deliver" . "Hear, O
Jew," says Jerome, "who holdest out to thyself hopes most vain, and
hearest not the Lord strongly asserting, "I will not deliver them out of
their hands," that thy captivity among the Romans shall have no end." In
the threatened captivity before they were carried to Babylon, the
prophet foretold the restoration: here only it is said of Judah, as
Hosea had said of lsrael, that there should be no deliverer out of the
hand of the king whom they had chosen.

[Zechariah 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 11:7</span></span>

The prophetic narrative which follows, differs in its form, in some
respects, from the symbolical actions of the prophets and from
Zechariah's own visions. The symbolical actions of the prophets are
actions of their own: this involves acts, which it would be impossible
to represent, except as a sort of drama. Such are the very central
points, the feeding of the flock, which are still intelligent people who
understand God's doings: the cutting off of the three shepherds; the
asking for the price; the unworthy price offered; the casting it aside.
It differs from Zechariah's own visions, in that they are for the most
part exhibited to the eye, and Zechariah's own part is simply to enquire
their meaning and to learn it, and to receive further revelation. In one
case only, he himself interposes in the action of the vision [Zac
3:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001) :15; but this too, as asking
that it might be done, not, as himself doing it. Here, he is himself the
actor, yet as representing Another, who alone could cut off shepherds,
abandon the people to mutual destruction, annulling the covenant which
He had made. Maimonides, then, seems to say rightly; : "This, "I fed the
flock of the slaughter," to the end of the narrative, where he is said
to have asked for his hire, to have received it, and to have cast it
into the temple, to the treasurer, all this Zechariah saw in prophetic
vision. For the command which he received, and the act which he is said
to have done, took place in prophetic vision or dream." "This," he adds,
"is beyond controversy, as all know, who are able to distinguish the
possible from the impossible."

Osorius: "The actions, presented to the prophets are not always to be
understood as actions but as predictions. As when God commands Isaiah,
to make the heart of the people dull [Isa
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010) that is, to denounce to the
people their future blindness, through which they would, with obstinate
mind, reject the mercies of Christ. Or when He says, that He appointed
Jeremiah [Jer 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010) to destroy and to
build; to root out and to plant. Or when He commanded the same prophet
to cause the nations to drink the cup, whereby they should be bereft of
their senses ([Jer 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015) ff), Jeremiah
did nothing of all this, but asserted that it would be. So here."

And I will feed the flock of the slaughter - Rather And (our, so) "I
fed." The prophet declares, in the name of our Lord, that He did what
the Father commanded Him. He fed the flock, committed to His care by the
Father, who, through their own obstinacy, became "the flock of
slaughter." What could be done, He did for them; so that all might see
that they perished by their own fault. The symbol of our Lord, as the
Good Shepherd, had been made prominent by Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel,
"Behold the Lord will come, as a Mighty One - He shall feed His flock
like a shepherd: He shall gather the lambs with His arm and carry them
in His bosom: He shall gently lead those that are with young" [Isa
40:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#010). And Jeremiah, having
declared God's judgments on the then shepherds [Jer
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#002), "I will gather the remnant of My
flock out of all countries whither I have driven them, and will bring
them again to their fold; and they shall be fruitful and increase. And I
will set up shepherds over them which shall feed them. Behold the days
come, saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch,
and a king shall reign and prosper - and this is the name whereby He
shall be called, the Lord our Righteousness" [Jer
23:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#003). And Ezekiel with the like
context Ezek. 34:1-21; "Therefore will I save My flock and they shall be
no more a prey; and I will judge between cattle and cattle. And I will
set One Shepherd over them, and He shall feed them: My servant David, He
shall feed them; and He shall be their Shepherd" [Eze
34:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#022); and, uniting both offices,
"David, My servant, shall be king over them, and they shall all have One
Shepherd" [Eze 37:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#024). It was apparent
then beforehand, who this Shepherd was to be, to whom God gave the
feeding of the flock.

"Even 'you,' or 'for you, ye poor of the flock;' or, 'therefore,' being
thus commanded, (fed I) the poor of the flock". The whole flock was
committed to Him to feed. He had to seek out all "the lost sheep of the
house of Israel" [Mat 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#006); [Mat
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024). Dionysius: "He fed, for the
time, the Jews destined to death, until their time should come;" the
fruit of His labor was in the "little flock" [Luk
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#032), "the faithful Jews who believed
in Him, out of the people of the flock aforesaid, or the synagogue, who
in the primitive Church despised all earthly things, leading a most pure
life." So He says, "I will feed My flock and I will cause them to lie
down, saith the Lord God: I will seek that which was lost, and bring
again that which was driven away, and will bind that which was broken,
and will strengthen that which was sick: but I will destroy the fat and
the strong, I will feed them with judgment" [Eze
34:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#015).

The elect are the end of all God's dispensations. He fed all; yet the
fruit of His feeding, His toils, His death, the travail of His soul, was
in those only who are saved. So Paul says, "Therefore I endure all
things for the elect's sakes, that they may also obtain the salvation
which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory" [Ti2
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#010). He fed all; but the "poor of the
flock" alone, those who were despised of men, because they would not
follow the pride of the high priests and scribes and Pharisees, believed
on Him, as they themselves say, "Have any of the rulers or the Pharisees
believed on Him?" [Joh 12:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#048), and Paul
says, "Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many
noble are called; but God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to
confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to
confound the things that are mighty; and base things of the world, and
things despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to
bring to nought things that are" [Co1
1:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026).

And I took unto Me two - (shepherd's) staves as David says, "Thy rod and
Thy staff they comfort me" [Psa 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004).
"The one I called Beauty or Loveliness" , as the Psalmist longs to
"behold the beauty or loveliness" of God in His temple [Psa
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004), and says; let "the beauty of the
Lord our God be upon us" [Psa 90:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#017).

And the other I called Bands - Literally, "Binders" . The one staff
represents the full favor and loving-kindness of God; when this was
broken, there yet remained the other, by which they were held together
as a people in covenant with God. "And I fed the flock." This was the
use of his staves; He tended them with both, ever putting in exercise
toward them the loving beauty and grace of God, and binding them
together and with Himself.

[Zechariah 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 11:8</span></span>

And I cut off three shepherds in one month - Jerome: "I have read in
some one's commentary, that the shepherds, cut off in the indignation of
the Lord, are to be understood of priests and false prophets and kings
of the Jews, who, after the passion of Christ, were all cut off in one
time, of whom Jeremiah speaketh, "The priests said not, Where is the
Lord? and they that handle the law knew Me not; the pastors also
transgressed against Me, and the prophets prophesied by Baal, and walked
after things which do not profit" [Jer
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#008), and again, "As the thief is
ashamed when he is found, so is the house of Israel ashamed; they, their
kings, their princes, and their priests and their prophets" [Jer
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#026); and "they said, Come, let us
devise devices against Jeremiah; for the law shall not perish from the
priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet" [Jer
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#018).

Theodoret: "He speaks of the kings of the Jews, and prophets and
priests; for by the three orders they were shepherded." Cyril: "The true
and good Shepherd having been already pointed out, it was right and
necessary that the hirelings and false shepherds should be removed, the
guides of the Jews in the law. The three shepherds were, I deem, those
who exercised the legal priesthood, and those appointed judges of the
people, and the interpreters of Scripture, that is, the lawyers. For
these too fed Israel. Those who had the glory of the priesthood were of
the tribe of Levi only; and of them Malachi says, "The priest's lips
shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek the law at his mouth" [Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007). But those who received authority
to judge were also selected, yet were appointed out of every tribe. In
like way the lawyers, who were ever assessors to the judges, and adduced
the words of the law in proof of every matter.

But we shall find that our Lord Jesus Christ Himself expressly
pronounced woe on the Pharisees and scribes and lawyers. For He said,
"Woe unto you scribes and Pharisees" [Luk
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#044). And when one of the lawyers
hereupon answered Him saying, "Master, so saying Thou reproachest us
also," He said, "Woe unto you also, ye lawyers! for ye lade men with
burdens grievous to be borne, and ye yourselves touch not the burdens
with one of your fingers" [Luk
11:45-46](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#045). These "three Shepherds"
then, priests and judges and lawyers o, who remained in their own orders
and places, until the coming of Christ, were very justly taken away "in
one month." For since "they killed the Prince of life" [Act
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#015), thereby also are they mown down,
and that in the month of the first fruits, in which Emmanuel endured to
be slain for us. They remained indeed administering Israel, even after
the Saviour's Cross, through the long-suffering and compassion of
Almighty God calling them to repentance; but, in the sentence passed by
God, they were taken away, at that time, when they delivered to the
Cross the Saviour and Redeemer of all. They were taken away then in one
mouth;" Nisan. a.d. 33. The three offices, King, Divine Teacher, Priest,
were to be united in Christ: they might have been held under Him: those
who rejected them in Him, forfeited them themselves. These then He made
to disappear, effaced them from the earth.

And My soul was straightened - For them o. It is used of the divine
grief at the misery of His people. "And their soul abhorred Me,
nauseated Me" o. Kimchi: "When it is said, "Their soul also abhorreth
Me," the meaning is, 'My soul did not loathe them first, but their soul
first despised Me, therefore My Soul abhorred them.'" The soul which
drives away God's good Spirit, comes at last to loathe Him and the
thought and mention of Him.

[Zechariah 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 11:9</span></span>

And I said, I will not feed you - God, at last, leaves the rebellious
soul or people to itself, as He says by Moses, "Then My anger shall be
kindled against them in that day, and I will forsake them, and will hide
My Face from them, and they shall be devoured, and many evils and
troubles shall find them" [Deu 31:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#017) :
and our Lord tells the captious Jews; "I go My way, and ye shall seek Me
and shall die in your sins" [Joh 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#021).

That which dieth, let it die - Zechariah seems to condense, but to
repeat the abandonment in Jeremiah; "Cast them out of My sight, and let
them go forth. And it shall be, if they shall say unto thee, Where shall
we go forth? then thou shalt tell them, Thus saith the Lord, Such as are
for death, to death; and such as are for the sword, to the sword; and
such as are for the captivity, to the captivity" o. First, God gives
over to death without violence, by famine or pestilence, those whose lot
it should be; another portion to violent death by the sword; "that which
is cut off shall be cut off; and the rest," the flock of slaughter,
would be turned into wolves; and, as in the awful and horrible siege of
Jerusalem, those who had escaped these deaths, "the left-over, shall eat
every one of the flesh of his neighbor," every law of humanity and of
nature broken. Osorius: "So should they understand at last, how evil and
bitter a thing it is for all who lived by My help to be despoiled of
that help?"

[Zechariah 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 11:10</span></span>

And I took my staff Beauty, and cut it asunder - Not, as aforetime, did
He chasten His people, retaining His relation to them: for such
chastening is an austere form of love. By breaking the staff of His
tender love, He signified that this relation was at an end.

That I might dissolve My covenant which I had made with all the people -
Rather, "with all the peoples," that is, with all nations. Often as it
is said of Israel, that they brake the covenant of God [Lev
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#015); [Deu
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#016), [Deu
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#020); [Isa
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#005); [Jer
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#010); [Jer
31:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032); [Eze
16:59](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#059); [Eze
44:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#007), it is spoken of God, only to
deny that He would break it ([Lev
26:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#044); [Jdg
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#001), and, strongly, [Jer
33:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#020)), or in prayer that He would
not [Jer 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#021). Here it is not
absolutely the covenant with His whole people, which He brake; it is
rather, so to speak, a covenant with the nations in favor of Israel,
allowing thus much and forbidding more, with regard to His people. So
God had said of the times of Christ; "In that day I will make a covenant
for them with the beasts of the field and with the fowls of the heaven,
and with the creeping things of the ground" ([Hos
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#018), (20, Hebrew)); and, "I will make
with them a covenant of peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease
out of the land" [Eze 34:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#025); and in
Job "thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field, and the
beasts of' the field shall be at peace with thee" [Job
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#023). This covenant He willed to
annihilate. He would no more interpose, as He had before said, "I will
not deliver from their hand" [Zac
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#006). whoever would might do, what
they would, as the Romans first, and well nigh all nations since, have
inflicted on the Jews, what they willed; and Mohammedans too have
requited to them their contumely to Jesus.

[Zechariah 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 11:11</span></span>

And so the poor of the flock that waited upon Me knew - The rest were
blinded; those who listened to God's word, observed His prophet, waited
on Him and observed His words, knew from the fulfillment of the
beginning, that the whole was God's word. Every darkening cloud around
the devoted city was an earnest, that the storm, which should destroy
it, was gathering upon it. So our Lord warned, "When ye shall see
Jerusalem compassed with armies, then know that the desolation thereof
is near. Then let them which are in Judaea flee to the mountains; and
let them which are in the midst of it depart" [Luk
21:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#020). The "little flock which
waited upon" the Good Shepherd, obeyed the warning, and, fleeing to
Pella, escaped the horrible judgment which fell on those who remained.
Osorius: "They remembered that it had been predicted many centuries
before, and that the Lord, by whose Spirit the prophet spake, foretold
that in that city "one stone should not be left upon another" [Mat
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#002).

[Zechariah 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 11:12</span></span>

And I said unto them, If ye think good, give Me My price - God asks of
us a return, not having any proportion to His gifts of nature or of
grace, but such as we can render. He took the Jews out of the whole
human race, made them His own, "a peculiar people," freed them from "the
bondage and the iron furnace of Egypt," gave them "the land flowing with
milk and honey," fed and guarded them by His Providence, taught them by
His prophets. He, the Lord and Creator of all, was willing to have them
alone for His inheritance, and, in return, asked them to love Him with
their whole heart, and to do what He commanded them. "He sent His
servants to the husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits of the
vineyard; and the husbandmen took His servants, and beat one, and killed
another, and stoned another. Last of all, He sent unto them His Son"
[Mat 21:34-37](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#034), to ask for those
fruits, the return for all His bounteous care and His unwearied acts of
power and love. o "Give Me," He would say, "some fruits of piety, and
tokens of faith."

Osorius: "What? Does He speak of a price? Did the Lord of all let out
His toil? Did He bargain with those, for whom he expended it for a
certain price? He did. He condescended to serve day and night for our
salvation and dignity; and as one hired, in view of the reward which He
set before Him, to give all His care to adorn and sustain our condition.
So He complains by Isaiah, that He had undergone great toil to do away
our sins. But what reward did He require? Faith and the will of a
faithful heart, that thereby we might attain the gift of righteousness,
and might in holy works pant after everlasting glory. For He needeth not
our goods; but He so bestoweth on us all things, as to esteem His labor
amply paid, if He see us enjoy His gifts. But tie so asketh for this as
a reward, as to leave us free, either by faith and the love due, to
embrace His benefits, or faithlessly to reject it. This is His meaning,
when He saith,"

And if not, forbear - God does not force our free-will, or constrain our
service. He places life and death before us, and bids us choose life. By
His grace alone we can choose Him; but we can refuse His grace and
Himself. "Thou shalt say unto them," He says to Ezekiel, "Thus saith the
Lord God, He that heareth, let him hear, and he that forbeareth, let him
forbear" ([Eze 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#027); add [Eze
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#005), [Eze
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#007); [Eze
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#011)). This was said to them, as a
people, the last offer of grace. It gathered into one all the past. As
Elijah had said, "If the Lord be God, follow Him; but if Baal, then
follow him" [Kg1 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#021); so He bids
them, at last to choose openly, whose they would be, to whom they would
give their service; and if they would refuse in heart, to refuse in act
also. "Forbear," cease, leave off, abandon; and that forever.

So they weighed for My price thirty pieces of silver - The price of a
slave, gored to death by an ox [Exo
21:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#032). Whence one of themselves says,
o, "you will find that a freeman is valued, more or less, at 60 shekels,
but a slave at thirty." He then, whom the prophet represented, was to be
valued at "thirty pieces of silver." It was but an increase of the
contumely, that this contemptuous price was given, not to Him, but for
Him, the Price of His Blood. It was matter of bargain. "Judas said, What
will ye give me, and I will deliver Him unto you?" [Mat
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#015). The high priest, knowingly or
unknowingly, fixed on the price, named by Zechariah. As they took into
their mouths willingly the blasphemy mentioned in the Psalm; "they shoot
out the lip, they shake the head, saying, He trusted in the Lord, that
He would deliver Him; let Him deliver Him, seeing that He delighted in
Him" [Psa 22:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#007); so perhaps they
fixed on the "thirty pieces of silver," because Zechariah had named them
as a sum offered in contumely to him, who offered to be a shepherd and
asked for his reward.

[Zechariah 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zac 11:13</span></span>

And the Lord said unto me, Cast it - As a thing vile and rejected, as
torn flesh was to be cast to dogs [Exo
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#031), or a corpse was cast unburied
[Isa 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#019); [Isa
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#003); [Jer
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#016); [Jer
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#019); [Jer
26:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#023); [Jer
36:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#030), or the dead body of Absalom was
cast into the pit [Sa2 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#017), or the
dust of the idolaltars into the brook Kedron by Josiah [Kg2
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#012), or the idols to the moles and
the bats ([Isa 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#020), add [Eze
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#008)); or Judah and Israel from the
face of God [Kg2 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#023); [Kg2
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#020); 24:21; [Jer
52:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#003) into a strange land ([Deu
29:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#027), (28 English); Coniah and his
seed, a vessel in which is no pleasure, [Jer
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#028), into a land which they knew
not; or the rebels against God, said, "let us cast away their cards from
us" [Psa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#003); or wickedness was cast
into the Ephah [Zac 5:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#001) :18; once
it is added, "for loathing" [Eze 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#005).

Unto the potter - The words exactly correspond with the event, that the
"thirty pieces of silver" were "cast" or flung away o; that their
ultimate destination was the potter, whose field was bought with them;
but that they were not cast directly to him, (which were a contemptuous
act, such as would not be used whether for a gift or a purchase), but
were cast to him "in the house of the Lord." They were "flung away" by
the remorse of Judas, and, in God's Providence, came to the potter.
Whether any portion of this was a direct symbolic action of the prophet,
or whether it was a prophetic vision, in which Zechariah himself was an
actor, and saw himself in the character which he described, doing what
he relates, cannot now be said certainly, since God has not told us. It
seems to me more probable, that these actions belonged to the vision,
because in other symbolic actions of the prophets, no other actors take
part; and it is to the last degree unlikely, that Zechariah, at whose
preaching. Zerubbabel and Joshua and all the people set themselves
earnestly to rebuild the temple, should have had so worthless a price
offered to him; and the casting a price, which God condemned, into the
house of God, at the command of God, and so implying His acceptance of
it, were inconsistent. It was fulfilled, in act consistently, in Judas'
remorse; in that he "flung away the pieces of silver," which had stained
his soul with innocent blood, "in the temple," perhaps remembering the
words of Zechariah; perhaps wishing to give to pious uses, too late,
money which was the price of his soul; whereas God, even through the
chief priests, rejected it, and so it came to the potter, its ultimate
destination in the Providence of God. Osorius: "He saith, "cast it unto
the potter," that they might understand that they would be broken as a
potter's vessel."

A goodly price, that I was prized at of them - Literally, "the
magnificence of the value, at which I was valued of them!" The strong
irony is carried on by the, "at which I was valued of them," as in the
idiom, "thou wert precious in my sight" [Sa1
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#021); [Psa
72:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#014); [Kg2
1:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#013); [Isa
43:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#004). Precious the thought of God to
David [Psa 139:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#017); precious the
redemption of the soul of man [Psa
49:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#009); and precious was the Shepherd
who came to them; precious was the value, whereat He was valued by them
o. And yet He, who was so valued, was Almighty God. For so it stands:
"Thus saith the Lord God, Cast it unto the potter, the goodly price that
I was prized at of them." The name, "the potter," connects the prophecy
with that former prophecy of Jeremiah [Jer
19:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#001), denouncing the judgment of
God for the shedding of innocent blood, whereby they had defiled "the
valley of the son of Hinnom, which was at the entry of the gate of the
pottery, o, and which, through the vengeance of God there, should be
called "the valley of slaughter" [Jer
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#006).

The price of this innocent Blood, by the shedding of which the
iniquities of their fathers were filled up, should rest on that same
place, for whose sake God said, "I will break this people and this city,
as one breaketh a potter's vessel, that cannot be made whole again" [Jer
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#011). So then Matthew may have quoted
this prophecy as Jeremiah's, to signify how the woes, denounced on the
sins committed in this same place, should be brought upon it through
this last crowning sin, and "all the righteous blood which had been
shed, should come upon that generation" o

None of the other cases of mixed quotation come up to this. Mark quotes
two prophecies, of Malachi and of Isaiah as Isaiah's [Mar
1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#002). Matthew blends in one, words of
Isaiah [Isa 62:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#001) and Zechariah [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009) as "the prophet" [Mat
21:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#004). Our Lord unites [Isa
56:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007), and [Jer
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#011), with the words," It is written."

Of earlier fathers "Tertullian" simply quotes the prophecy as Jeremiah's
(adv. Marc. iv. 40). "Origen" says, "Jeremiah is not said to have
prophesied this anywhere in his books, either what are read in the
Churches, or reported (referuntur) among the Jews. I suspect that it is
an error of writing, or that it is some secret writing of Jeremiah
wherein it is written." (in Matt. p. 916.) "Euscbius" says, "Consider
since this, is not in the prophet Jeremiah, whether we must think that
it was removed from it by some wickedness, or whether it was a clericai
error of those who made the copies of the Gospels carelessly." Dem. Ev.
x. p. 481).

[Zechariah 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zac 11:14</span></span>

And I cut asunder mine other staff, Bands, to dissolve the brotherhood
between Judah and Israel - Hitherto prophecy had spoken of the healing
of the great breach between Israel and Judah, in Christ. "The Lord,"
Isaiah said, "shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together
the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth. The envy of
Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off:
Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim" [Isa
11:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012); and Hosea, "Then shall the
children of Judah and the children of Israel be gathered together and
shall appoint themselves one Head" [Hos
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#011); and Jeremiah, "In those days the
house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel." [Jer
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#018). And Ezekiel, in the midst of the
captivity, in a symbolic action the counterpart of this, is bidden,
"Take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children
of Israel his companions; then take another stick, and write upon it,
For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and all the house of Israel his
companions, and join them one to another into one stick, and they shall
become one in thy hand" [Eze 37:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#016);
and, when asked the meaning of this act, he was to say, "Thus saith the
Lord God, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of
Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put them with
him, even with the stick of Judah, and will make them one stick, and
they shall be one in Mine hand" [Eze
37:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#019).

And dropping the symbol; "Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I will take
the children of Israel from among the pagan, whither they be gone - and
I will make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel:
and one king shall be king to them all: and they shall be no more two
nations, neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all
- I will cleanse them, and they shall be My people and I will be their
God, and David My servant shall be king over them, and they all shall
have one Shepherd" [Eze 37:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#021). Such
should be the unity of those who would be gathered under the One
Shepherd. And so it was, "The multitude of them that believed were of
one heart and of one soul" [Act 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032);
and long afterward it was a proverb among the pagan, o, "See how these
Christians love one another." Zechariah is here speaking of those who
had rejected the Good Shepherd, the Israel and Judah after the flesh,
who shut themselves out from the promises of God. This had its first
fulfillment in the terrible dissolution of every band of "brotherhood"
and of our common nature, which made the siege of Jerusalem a proverb
for horror, and precipitated its destruction. o "Having thus separated
the believing from the unbelieving, He bared the rest of His care. And
what we now see bears witness to the prophecy. For the Jews, being
deprived, of prophets and priests and kings and temple and ark and altar
and mercy-seat and candlestick and table and the rest, through which the
legal worship was performed, have come to be deprived also of the
guardianship from above; and, scattered, exiled, removed, serve against
their will those who preach Christ: denying Him as Lord, they yield
service to His servants. The prophet having foretold these things of
Christ, our God and Saviour, and reproved the obstinacy of the Jews,
naturally turns his prophecy straight to the God-opposed christ whom
they expect, as they say. So said the Lord in the holy Gospels to them,
"I am come in My Father's name, and ye receive Me not; another will come
in his own name, and him ye will receive" [Joh
5:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#043). This the blessed Paul also
prophesied of them, "Because they received not the love of the truth,
that they might be saved, God shall send them strong delusion that they
should believe a lie, that all might be damned, who believe not the
truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness" [Th2
2:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010). The like does the blessed
Zechariah prophesy, having received the power of the Holy Spirit."

[Zechariah 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zac 11:15</span></span>

Take to thee yet the instrument - o

Of a foolish shepherd - Osorius: "Yet He had enacted one tragedy, in
which he clearly set forth the future guilt of Judas; now another is set
forth, the accumulated scoffing through antichrist. For as Paul said,
because they receive not the Spirit of truth, the Allrighteous Judge
shall send them a spirit of "delusion, that they should believe a lie"
[Th2 2:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010). He calls him a foolish
shepherd, for since the extremest folly consists in the extremest
wickedness, he will be the most foolish, who reached the highest
impiety, and this he will do by arrogating to himself divinity and
claiming divine honors [Th2 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004).

This is the only action, which the prophet had to enact or to relate. If
it was a visible act, the instrument might be a staff which should
bruise, an instrument which should bear a semblance to that of the good
shepherd, but which should be perncious. Cyril: "Good shepherds, who
understood their business, had slight staves, that, if there should be
occasion to strike, the stricken sheep might not be bruised; but one who
understandeth not, beats them with thicker clubs." Or it may mean also,
whatever he would use for the hurtful treatment of the sheep, such as he
proceeds to speak of. He is spoken of as, in fact, foolishly sinful: for
sin is the only real folly, and all real folly has sin mingled in it.
The short-lived wisdom of the foolish shepherd for his own ends should
also be his destruction.

[Zechariah 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">zac 11:16</span></span>

I will raise up - God supplies the strength or wisdom which people abuse
to sin. He, in His Providence, disposeth the circumstances, of which the
ambitious avail themselves. antichrist, whom the Jews look for, will be
as much an instrument of God for the perfecting the elect, as the
Chaldees [Hab 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#006) or the Assyrians
[Amo 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#014) whom God raised up, for the
chastisement of His former people, or the Medes against Babylon [Isa
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017).

Which shall not visit them that be cut off - Zechariah uses the imagery,
yet not the exact words of Jeremiah [Jer
23:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#001) and Ezekiel [Eze
34:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#003). Neglect of every duty of a
shepherd to his flock, to the sick, the broken, the sound; direct injury
of them, preying upon them, make up the picture.

Which shall not visit - Or tend, "that which is cut off:" fulfilling
God's judgment, "that which is to be cut off let it be cut off" [Zac
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#009).

Neither shall seek the young one - Better, "the scattered , dispersed,"
as the Good Shepherd "came to seek and to save that which was lost" [Luk
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010); [Mat
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#011). "Nor heal that which is broken;
bound not," Ezekiel says [Eze 34:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#004). :
"The broken legs of sheep are healed no otherwise than those of people;
rolled in wool impregnated with oil and wine, and then bound up with
splinters placed round about it."

Nor feed that which standeth still - Better, "the whole" Yet Jonathan
renders as English), as the word always means, "in its good estate,"
like our prayer, "that Thou wouldest strengthen those who do stand."

[Zechariah 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">zac 11:17</span></span>

Woe to the idol shepherd - (A shepherd of nothingness, one who hath no
quality of a shepherd ;) "who leaveth the flock." The condemnation of
the evil shepherd is complete in the abandonment of the sheep; as our
Lord says, "He that is an hireling and not the Shepherd, whose own the
sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming and leaveth the sheep and fleeth:
and the wolf catcheth them and scattereth the sheep. The hireling
fleeth, because he is an hireling and careth not for the sheep" [Joh
10:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#012).

Or it may equally be, "Shepherd, thou idol," including the original
meaning of nothingness, such as antichrist will be, (Jerome), "while he
calleth himself God, and willeth to be worshiped." Jerome: "This
shepherd shall therefore arise in Israel, because the true Shepherd had
said, 'I will not feed you.' He is prophesied of by another name in
Daniel the prophet Dan. 9, and in the Gospel Mark 13, and in the Epistle
of Paul to the Thessalonians 2 Thes 2, as 'the abomination of
desolation,' who shall sit in the temple of the Lord, and make himself
as God. He cometh not to heal but to destroy the flock of Israel. This
shepherd the Jews shall receive, whom the 'Lord Jesus shall slay with
the breath of His mouth; and destroy with the brightness of His
coming?"'

The sword shall be upon - (against) his arm and right eye His boast
shall be of intelligence, and might. The punishment and destruction
shall be directed against the instrument of each, the eye and the arm.
Jerome: "The eye, whereby he shall boast to behold acutely the mysteries
of God, and to see more than all prophets heretofore, so that he shall
call himself son of God. But the word of the Lord shall be upon his arm
and upon his right eye, so that his strength and all his boast of might
shall be dried up, and the knowledge which he promised himself falsely,
shall be obscured in everlasting darkness." (Dionysius: "Above and
against the power of antichrist, shall be the virtue and vengeance and
sentence of Christ, who shall 'slay' him 'with the breath of His mouth.'
The right arm, the symbol of might, and the right eye which was to
direct its aim, should fail together, through the judgment of God
against him. He, lately boastful and persecuting shall become blind and
powerless, bereit alike of wisdom and strength.

The "right" in Holy Scripture being so often a symbol of what is good,
the left of what is evil, it may be also imagined, that (Osorius), "the
left eye, that is, the acumen and cunning to devise deadly frauds, will
remain uninjured: while the 'right eye,' that is, counsel to guard
against evil, will be sunk in thick darkness. And so, the more he
employs his ability to evil, the more frantically will he bring to bear
destruction upon himself:"

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 12](zac012)

</div>
