<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac002)  [Next](zac004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001)

[Zechariah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 3:1</span></span>

And He - God, (for the office of the attendant angel was to explain, not
to show the visions) "showed me Joshua the high priest, standing before
the Angel of the Lord;" probably to be judged by him ; as in the New
Testament, "to stand before the Son of Man;" for although "standing
before," whether in relation to man or God, , expresses attendance upon,
yet here it appears only as a condition, contemporaneous with that of
Satan's, to accuse him. Although, moreover, the Angel speaks with
authority, yet God's Presence in him is not spoken of so distinctly,
that the high priest would be exhibited as standing before him, as in
his office before God.

And Satan - Etymologically, the enemy, as, in the New Testament, "your
adversary the devil" [Pe1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008),
etymologically, the accuser. It is a proper name of the Evil one, yet
its original meaning, "the enemy, was not lost. Here, as in Job, his
malice is shown in accusation; "the accuser of our brethren, who accused
them before our God, day and night" [Rev
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010). In Job [Job
1:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#008); [Job
2:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#003), the accusations were
calumnious; here, doubtless, true. For he accused Job of what would have
been plain apostacy [Job 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#011); [Job
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#005); Joshua and Zerubbabel had shared,
or given way to, the remissness of the people, as to the rebuilding of
the temple and the full restoration of the worship of God [Ezr
3:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001); 4. For this, Haggai had
reproved the people, through them [Hag
1:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001). Satan had then a real charge,
on which to implead them. Since also the whole series of visions relates
to the restoration from the captivity, the guilt, for which Satan
impleads him with Jerusalem and Jerusalem in him, includes the whole
guilt, which had rested upon them, so that for a time God had seemed to
have cast "away His people" [Rom 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001).
Satan "stands at his right hand," the place of a protector [Psa
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#008); [Psa
109:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#031); [Psa
121:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#005); [Psa
142:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#004), to show that he had none to
save him, and that himself was victorious.

[Zechariah 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 3:2</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Satan, The Lord rebuke thee - Jerome: "This they
so explain, that the Father and the Son is Lord, as we read in the [Psa
110:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001), "The Lord said unto my Lord,
Sit Thou on My right hand." The Lord speaketh of another Lord; not that
He, the Lord who speaketh, cannot rebuke, but that, from the unity of
nature, when the Other rebuketh, He Himself who speaketh rebuketh. For
"he who seeth the Son, seeth the Father also" [Joh
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009). It may be that God, by such
sayings , also accustomed people, before Christ came, to believe in the
Plurality of Persons in the One Godhead. The rebuke of God must be with
power. "Thou hast rebuked the nations, Thou hast destroyed the ungodly"
[Psa 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#005). "Thou hast rebuked the
proud, accursed" [Psa 119:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#021). "They
perish at the rebuke of Thy Countenance" [Psa
80:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#016). "At Thy rebuke, O God of Jacob,
both the chariot and horse are cast into a deep sleep" [Psa
76:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#006). "God shall rebuke him, and he
fleeth far off, and shall be chased as the chaff of the mountains before
the wind" [Isa 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#013). "He rebuked the
Red Sea and it dried up" [Psa 106:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#009).
"The foundations of the world were discovered at Thy rebuke, O Lord"
([Psa 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#015), add [Nah
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#004)). He "rebuked the seed" [Mal
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#003), and it perished; the devourer"
[Mal 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#011), and it no longer devoured.
The rebuke then of the blasted spirit involved a withering rejection of
himself and his accusations, as when Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit
and he departed out of his victim [Mar
1:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#025); [Mar
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#025); [Luk
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#035); [Luk
9:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#042).

The Lord hath chosen Jerusalem - Joshua then is acquitted, not because
the accusation of Satan was false, but out of the free love of God for
His people and for Joshua in it and as its representative. "Who shall
lay anything to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth.
Who is he that condemneth?" [Rom
8:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033). The high priest, being
"himself also compassed with infirmity, needed daily to offer up
sacrifices first for his own sins, and then for the people's" [Heb
5:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#002). As Isaiah said, on the sight of
God, "I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in
the midst of a people of unclean lips" [Isa
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#005), and, until cleansed by the
typical coal, dared not offer himself for the prophetic office, so here
Satan, in Joshua, aimed at the whole priestly office, and in it, at
Israel's relation to God.

Is not this a brand plucked out of the fire? - Cyril: "As if he should
say, Israel confessedly has sinned, and is liable to these charges. Yet
it has suffered no slight punishment; it has endured sufferings, and has
scarce been snatched out of them, as a half-burned "brand out of the
fire." For not yet had it shaken off the dust of the harms from the
captivity; only just now and scarely had it escaped the flame of that
most intolerable calamity. Cease then imputing sin to them, on whom God
has had mercy."

[Zechariah 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 3:3</span></span>

Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments - Such, it is expressed, was
his habitual condition; he was one so clothed. The "filthy garment," as
defilement generally, is, in Scripture, the symbol of sin. "We are all
as the unclean, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags" [Isa
64:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#006). "He that is left in Zion and he
that remaineth in Jerusalem shall be called holy - when the Lord shall
have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion" [Isa
4:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#003). "There is a generation, pure in
its own eyes, and it is not washed from its filthiness" [Pro
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#012). The same is expressed by
different words, signifying pollution, defilement by sin; "Woe unto her
that is filthy and polluted" [Zep 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#001);
"The land was defiled with blood" [Psa
106:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#038); "they were defiled with their
own works". It is symbolized also by the "divers washings" [Heb
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#010) of the law, representing restored
purity; and the use of the word by Psalmists and prophets; "Wash me
thoroughly from mine iniquity" [Psa
51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004); "wash you, make you clean; put
away the evil of your doings from before Mine eyes" [Isa
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016); "O Jerusalem, wash thy heart
from wickedness" [Jer 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#014). In later
times at least, the accused were clothed in black , not in defiled
garments.

[Zechariah 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 3:4</span></span>

And He spake to those who stood before Him - the ministering angels who
had waited on the Angel of the Lord to do His bidding.

See, I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee - The pardoning
words of the Lord to David by Nathan, "The Lord too hath put away thy
sin" [Sa2 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#013). "And clothe thee with
change of raiment, that is, such as were taken off and reserved for
great occasions. As the filthy garments were not necessarily other than
the high priest's vesture, symbolically defiled through the sins of the
people, so neither need these be other than the priestly garments in
their purity and freshness. The words imply the condition, not the
nature of the vestment. (Cyril: "The high priest having been thus taken
to represent the whole people, the filthy garments would be no unclear
symbol of the wickedness of the people. For clad, as it were, with their
sins, with the ill-effaceable spot of ungodliness, they abode in
captivity, subject to retribution, paying the penalty of their unholy
deeds. But when God had pity on them, He bade them be freed from their
defilements, and in a manner re-clad with justifying grace. He indicates
to them the end of their toils. For where remission of sin is, there
follows of necessity freedom from the evils brought through sin." He
adds that a clean mitre should be put upon his head, (Cyril), "that so
we might understand that the glory of the priesthood ever, in a sort,
concurs with the condition of the people. For the boast of the
priesthood is the purity of those in their charge. As then when the
people was in sin, the raiment of the priest also was in a manner
defiled, so if it were again well-approved, pure and bright is the
fashion of the priesthood, and free its access to God. So the inspired
Paul having ministered to the Gentiles the Gospel of Christ, seeing them
advancing in graces, writes, "By your boast, brethren, which I have in
Christ Jesus" [Co1 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#031), and, "my joy
and crown" [Phi 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001).

[Zechariah 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 3:5</span></span>

And I said, let them set a fair mitre on his head - This seems to have
been purposely omitted, in order to leave something, and that, the
completion of all, to be done at the intercession of the prophet. The
glory and complement of the high priest's sacrificial attire was the
mitre with the "holy crown upon it and the plate of prate gold, on which
was graven, Holiness to the Lord" [Exo
28:36-38](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#036); [Exo
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#006); which was to "be upon" the high
priest's "forehead, that he may bear the iniquity of the holy things
which the children of Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts; which
was always to be upon his forehead, that they may be accepted before the
Lord." The renewed gift of this was reserved for the intercession of man
co-working with God.

And the angel of the Lord standing by - Seeing that all was done aright,
and, now that the acquittal was complete, standing to give the charge.

[Zechariah 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 3:6</span></span>

And the angel of the Lord protested - Solemnly (etymologically, called
God to witness) as in, "Did I not make thee swear by the Lord and
protested unto thee" [Kg1 2:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#042), laying
it as an obligation upon him. The charge is given to Joshua, and in him
to all successive high priests, while Israel should continue to be God's
people, as the condition of their acceptance.

[Zechariah 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 3:7</span></span>

If thou wilt walk in My ways and if thou wilt keep My charge - Both of
these are expressions, dating from the Pentateuch, for holding on in the
way of life, well-pleasing to God and keeping the charge given by God.
It was the injunction of the dying David to Solomon, "Keep the charge of
the Lord thy God, to walk in His ways, to keep His statutes ..." [Kg1
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#003).

Then shalt thou also judge My house - Judgment, in the place of God, was
part of the high priest's office [Deu
17:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#009); [Deu
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#017); [Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007). Yet these judgments also were
given in the house of God. The cause was directed to be brought to God,
and He through His priests judged it. Both then may be comprehended in
the world, the oversight of the people itself and the judgment of all
causes brought to it. Jonathan: "Thou shalt judge those who minister in
the house of My sanctuary."

And I will give thee place to walk among those who stand by - that is,
among the ministering spirits, who were "standing before the Angel of
the Lord" [Zac 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#004). This can be fully
only after death, when the saints shall be received among the several
choirs of angels. Jonathan: "In the resurrection of the dead I will
revive thee and give thee feet walking among these Seraphim." Even in
this this since "our conversation is in heaven" [Phi
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020), and the life of priests should
be an angel-life, it may mean, that he should have free access to God,
his soul in heaven, while his body was on this earth.

[Zechariah 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 3:8</span></span>

Thou and thy companions which sit before thee; yea men of marvelous
signs are they - o It seems probable that the words addressed to Joshua
begin here; else the "men of signs" would be the companions of Joshua,
to the exclusion of Himself. His companions are probably ordinary
priests, who sit as sharing his dignity as priest, but "before him," as
inferiors. So Ezekiel says, "I was sitting in my house, and the elders
of Israel were sitting before me" [Eze
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#001). They are "images of the things to
come" [Heb 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001). Isaiah's two sons,
with their prophetic names, "Haste-spoil speed-prey, and a-remnant
shall-return," were with his own name, "salvation-of-the-Lord, signs and
portents" [Isa 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018) of the future
Israel. Isaiah, walking naked and barefoot, was "a sign and portent"
[Isa 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#003) against Egypt. God tells
Ezekiel, that in the "removal of his stuff, as stuff for the captivity,
I have set thee for a portent unto the house of Israel" [Eze
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#006).

I, he explains his act, "am your portent; like as I have done, so shall
it be done unto you" [Eze 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#011). When
forbidden to mourn on the death of his wife; "Ezekiel is unto you for a
portent; according to all that he hath done, shall ye do; and when this
cometh, ye shall know that I am the Lord God" [Eze
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#024). Wherein then were Joshua and
the other priests portents of what should be? One fact alone had stood
out, the forgiveness of sins. Accusation and full forgiveness, out of
God's free mercy, were the substance of the whole previous vision. It
was the full reinstatement of the priesthood. The priesthood so restored
was the portent of what was to come. To "offer the offering of the
people, and make an atonement for them; [Lev
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#007); "to make an atonement for the
children of Israel for all their sins once a year" [Lev
16:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#034), was the object of the existence
of the priesthood. Typical only it could be, because they had "but the
blood of bulls and goats to offer, which could," in themselves, "never
take away sins" [Heb 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#004). But in this
their act they were portents of what was to come. He adds here, "For,
behold, I will bring My Servant the Branch."

The Branch - Had now become, or Zechariah made it, a proper name. Isaiah
had prophesied, "In that day shall the Branch of the Lord be beautiful
and glorious for the escaped of Israel" [Isa
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002); and, in reference to the low
estate of him who should come, "There shall come forth a rod out of the
stump of Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his roots" [Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001); and Jeremiah, "Behold the days
come, saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch,
and a king shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and
justice in the earth, and this is the name whereby He shall be called,
The Lord our Righteouness" [Jer
23:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005); and, "In those days and at
that time, will I cause the Branch of righteousness to grow up unto
David, and he shall execute judgment and righteousness in the land" [Jer
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#015). Of him Zechariah afterward
spoke as, "a man whose name is the Branch" [Zac
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012).

Here Zechariah names him simply, as a proper name, "My servant, the,
Branch," as Ezekiel prophesied of "My servant David." The title "My
servant," which is Isaiah's chiefest title of the Messiah, occurs in
connection with the same image of ills youth's lowly estate, and of His
atoning Death. "He shall grow up before Him as a sucker, and as a root
from a dry ground" [Isa 53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002); "a scion
shall grow out of his roots" [Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001). . Lest then God should seem to
have spoken untruly, in promising to the legal priesthood that it should
ever have the oversight over His house, there was need to fore-announce
the mystery of Christ, that the things of the law should cease and He
Himself should judge His own house through the Scion from Himself, His
Son.

Osorius: "Look ye to the Branch of the Lord; set Him as the example of
life; in Him, as a most strong tower, place with most becoming faith all
your hope of salvation and immortality. For He is not only a Branch, who
shall fill you with the richness of divine fruit, but a stone also, to
break all the essays of the enemy."

[Zechariah 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 3:9</span></span>

For behold the stone, that I hare laid before Joshua - This must be an
expansion of what he had said, or the ground of it, being introduced by,
for. It must be something future, to be done by God Himself, since God
says, "I will grave the graving thereof;" something connected with the
remission of sins, which follows upon that graying. The stone, then,
cannot be the stone of foundation of the material temple (Rashi). For
this had long before been laid. The head-cornerstone, the completion of
the building , had nothing remarkable, why God should be said to grave
it. The plumbline was not a part even of the material temple. "The stone
is one stone." But to interpret it by other prophecy, one stone there
is, of which God says, "Behold I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone,
a tried stone, a precious cornerstone, a sure foundation, he that
believeth shall not make haste" [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016); that stone, of which our Lord
reminded the Jews, "the stone which the builders refused is become the
head-stone of the corner" ; "Jesus Christ Himself, the chief
cornerstone, in whom all the building, fitly framed together, groweth
into an holy temple in the Lord, in whom ye also are builded together
for an habitation of God through the Spirit" [Eph
2:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020).

On this stone had Joshua, with all those typical priests, to look, in
whom alone they and all have forgiveness, whose Sacrifice their
sacrifices pictured and pleaded. "It," says an old mystical Jewish book
, a "is the stone of foundation, on which the earth is founded, which
God Himself laid, that the world might receive blessing from it" . "The
Shechinah is called the stone, through which the world subsisteth; of
which it is said, 'A stone of seven eyes, and, the stone which the
builders refused.'" This "stone," God says, I have laid or set before
Joshua, that is, for him to consider; as He speaks to Solomon and his
children, of "My commandments which I have set before you" [Kg1
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#006).

Rup.: "That the stone is the Lord Jesus Christ, the head cornerstone,
elect, laid as a foundation; and that the seven eyes on the one stone
are the sevenfold Spirit of God which rested upon Him, is or ought to be
unknown to no one. For to Him "God giveth not the Spirit by measure"
[Joh 3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034), and "in Him dwelleth all
the fullness of the Godhead bodily" [Col
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009). This stone was rejected by
people, but chosen and honored by God." Osorius: "This stone then, on
which the house of God and our whole salvation resteth, is placed by God
before that high priest. That is, the most holy Name of Jesus, the
virtue piety and largeness of Jesus is, by the Divine Spirit, showed to
the priest, that he might understand the End of the law and holiness, to
whom all the actions of life and the offices of the priesthood were to
be referred. In which stone was foreshown to the divine man, not the
invisible strength only, but also the manifold light of the Divine
Intelligence. For it follows;"

Upon this one stone are seven eyes - Whether they are the eyes of God,
resting in loving care upon it, or whether, as the wheels in Ezekiel's
vision were "full of eyes round about" [Eze
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#018); [Eze
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#012), the eyes are pictured as on the
stone itself, marking that it symbolized a being with manifold
intelligence. Zechariah speaks of the eyes of "the Lord which run to and
fro on the earth" [Zac 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#010), and John,
of the "Lamb, as it had been slain, having seven horns and seven eyes,
which are the seven spirits of God, seat forth into all the earth" [Rev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006). Either symbol harmonizes with the
context, and is admissible in language. before and afterward, I have
laid it, I will engrave the graving thereof; and so it corresponds to
the "It shall grow up before Him as a tender plant" [Isa
53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002). But the contrast, that on one
stone there are seven eyes, perhaps rather suggests that the eyes are on
the stone itself, and He, the "Living Stone," is pictured with an
universality of sight, whereby, with a divine knowledge, He surveys and
provides for the well-being of His whole Church. It has some analogy too
to the sevenfold Spirit which was to rest upon Him. . "For this stone to
have seven eyes is to retain in operation the whole virtue of the Spirit
of seven-fold grace. For according to the distribution of the Holy
Spirit, ones receives prophecy; another, knowledge; another, miracles;
another, kinds of tongues; another, interpretation of words; but no one
attaineth to have all the gifts of that same Spirit. But our Creator
taking on Him our infirmities, because, through the power of His
Divinity, He showed that He had at once in Him all the virtues of the
Holy Spirit, united beyond doubt the bright gleams of the sevenfold
constellation." "None among men had together all the operations of the
Holy Spirit, save the Mediator of God and man alone, whose is that same
Spirit, who proceeds from the Father before all worlds."

Osorius: "The stone is one. For as we have in God One Spirit, one faith,
one sacrament of that most pure laver, so we worship One Christ, the one
only Deliverer of the human race, and Author of our righteousness and
everlasting salvation; and strengthened by His guardianship, we hope for
immortality and eternal glory. Who, though He be One, governs all things
with ineffable wisdom. For His wisdom is aptly described by the seven
eyes. For the number seven generally describes an universality of good."

Behold I will engrave the graving thereof - As of a costly stone. What
the graving is, is not explained; but manifestly it is everything which
concurs to its beauty. . "This stone is of earth, and of the power and
workmanship of God." . "It signifies Him who had His birth in
virgin-earth, but framed skillfully by the power of the Holy Spirit."
That Precious Stone was further graven, through the providence and will
of God, when Jerome: "He caused it to be wounded by the nails of the
Cross and the soldier's lance, and in His passion took away the iniquity
of the earth in one day, of which it is written, "This is the day which
the Lord hath made, we will rejoice and be glad in it" [Psa
118:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#024). Beautiful were the gifts and
graces which Christ received, as Man; but beautiful beyond all beauty
must be those glorious scars, with which He allowed His whole Body to be
riven, that , "throughout the whole frame His love might be engraven."
Ribera: "What even in the Body of the Lord can be lovelier or more
lightful than those five Wounds, which He willed to retain in His
immortal Being, lest the blessed should be deprived of that splendor,
surpassing far the light of sun had stars?"

And I will remove the iniquity of the land in one day - On "one day" in
the year was the typical atonement; in one day absolutely, God Himself
would make the iniquity of that land to depart. "One day" is always
emphatic , that things are crowded into it, which seemed too much for
one day. Year by year came the day of atonement: its yearly repetition
showed that nothing lasting was effected. On "one day" that removal
should be, which needed no renewal . A Jewish writer confessed the
mystery, while he said, (Rashi), "One day; I know not what that day is."
Ask any Christian child, "On what day was iniquity removed, not from the
land only, but from all lands?" he would say, "On the day when Jesus
died."

[Zechariah 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 3:10</span></span>

Under the vine and under the fig tree - Micah had already made the
description of the peaceful days of Solomon [Kg1
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#025), a symbol [Mic
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#004) of the universal fearless peace of
the time of Christ. Lap.: "Christ by His passion shall not only take
away iniquity, but also bring peace, delight, free communication of all
things, so that all things among Christians should be common. For the
law of Christ enjoineth charity, forgiveness of injuries, patience, love
of enemies etc., all which bring temporal peace."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 4](zac004)

</div>
