<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](hag002)  [Next](zac001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Zechariah

Zechariah entered into his prophetic function two months after Haggai's
first prophecy. He was still a youth, when God called him [Zac
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#004), and so, since in the second year
of Darius Hystaspis 18 years had elapsed from the first of Cyrus, he
must have been brought in infancy from Babylon. His father Berechiah
probably died young, since, in Ezra, the prophet is called after his
grandfather, "Zechariah the son of Iddo" [Ezr
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#001); [Ezr
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#014). He succeeded his grandfather in
the office of "the priests, the chief of the fathers," (of which there
were twelve) in the days of Joiakim, the son of Joshua, the High priest
[Neh 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#010), [Neh
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#012), [Neh
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#016). Since then, while he prophesied
together with Haggai, Joshua was still high priest, and it is Joshua
whom he sees in his vision in that same year [Zac
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001), he must have entered into his
prophetic function before he succeeded to that other dignity. Yet
neither is there any reason to think that he ever laid it aside, since
we do not hear of any prophet, called by God, who did abandon it.
Rather, like Jeremiah, he exercised both; called to the priesthood by
the birth given to him by God, called to the prophetic function by
divine inspiration.

Like Jeremiah, Zechariah was called in early youth to the prophetic
function. The same designation, by which Jeremiah at first excused
himself as unfit for the office, is given to Zechariah, "youth." The
term does not indeed mark any definite age; for Joseph, when he was so
designated by the chief butler [Gen
41:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#012), was 28 ; Benjamin and Absalom
had sons of their own . They were probably so called as terms of
affection, the one by his brother Judah [Gen
43:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#008); [Gen
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#022), [Gen
44:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#030), [Gen
44:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#033), the other by David his father
[Sa2 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#005), [Sa2
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#012), [Sa2
18:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#029), [Sa2
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#032). But his grandfather Iddo was
still in the discharge of his office. The length of his ministry is
equally unknown. Two years after his first entrance upon it [Zac
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#001), when Haggai's function was
closed, he was bidden to answer from God those who enquired whether, now
that they were freed from the captivity, they should keep the national
fasts which they had instituted on occasion of some of the mournful
events which had ushered it in. His remaining prophecies bear no date.
The belief, that he lived and prophesied to old age, may have a true
foundation, though unknown to us. We only know that he survived the high
priest, Joshua, since his own accession to his office of head of the
priests, in his division, was in the days of Joiakim, the son of Joshua.

Zechariah's book opens with a very simple, touching call to those
returned from the captivity, linking himself with the former prophets,
but contrasting the transitoriness of all human things, those who
prophesied and those to whom they prophesied, with the abidingness of
the Word of God. It consists of four parts, differing in outward
character, yet with a remarkable unity of purpose and end. All begin
with a foreground subsequent to the captivity; all reach on to a further
end; the first two to the coming of our Lord; the third from the
deliverance of the house then built, during the invasion of Alexander,
and from the victories of the Maccabees, to the rejection of the true
Shepherd and the curse upon the false; the last, which is connected with
the third by its title, reaches from a future repentance for the death
of Christ to the final conversion of the Jews and Gentiles.

The outward difference, that the first prophecy is in visions; the
second prophecy is a response to an enquiry made of him; the last two
visions, in free delivery, obviously did not depend upon the prophet.
The occasion also of the first two bodies of prophecy involved that they
were written in prose. For the imagery was borne on the prophet's mind
in visions. The function of the prophet was only to record them and the
explanations given to him of parts of them, which could only be done in
prose. So far, he was like the apostles, who enquired of our Lord (when
in the flesh) as to the meaning of His parables. There is, as in the
later chapters, an abundance of imagery; and it may have pleased God to
adapt the form of His revelation to the imaginative mind of the young
prophet who was to receive it. But the visions are, as the name implies,
pictures which the prophet sees, and which he describes.

Even a rationalist writer saw this. : "Every vision must form a picture,
and the description of a vision must have the appearance of being read
from a picture. It follows from the nature of the description of a
vision, that for the most part it cannot be composed in any elevated
language. The simplest prose is the best vehicle for a relation (and
such is the description of a vision), and elaborate ornament of language
were foreign to it. The beauty, greatness, elevation of a vision, as
described, must lie in the conception, or in the symmetry, or wondrous
boldness in the grouping of the images. Is the whole group, piece by
piece, in all its parts, to the most minute shading, faithful and
described with the character of truth, the exhibition of the vision in
words is perfect."

The four portions were probably of different dates, since they stand in
order in the prophet's book, as indeed the second portion is dated two
years later than the first . For in the first part God's people are
exhorted to come from Babylon [Zac
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#007), which command, many in the time
of Ezra, obeyed, and doubtless individuals subsequently, when a
prosperous polity was restored; in the latter part, Babylon is mentioned
no more; only in one place, in the imagery of earlier prophets, the
future gathering of God's people is symbolized under the previous
deliverance from West and East, Egypt and Assyria ([Zac
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#010), compare [Isa
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011), [Isa
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#016); [Hos
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#011)).

But they agree in this, that the foreground is no longer, as in the
former prophets, deliverance from Babylon. In the first part, the
reference to the vision of the four empires in Daniel removes the
promise of the Deliverer to the fourth empire. For the series of visions
having closed with the vision of the four chariots, there follows at
once the symbolic act of placing the crown or crowns on the head of the
high priest and the promise of the Messiah, Who should be king and
priest [Zac 6:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#010). In the later part
the enemies spoken of are in one place the Greeks [Zac
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#013), subsequent to the protection of
the temple under Alexander ; in another, they are the final gathering of
all nations against Jerusalem [Zac
12:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#002), [Zac
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#009); [Zac
14:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#002), [Zac
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#014), [Zac
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#016), which Joel also places at the
end of all things [Joe 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#002), after the
outpouring of the Spirit, as it was poured out on the day of Pentecost.

In both parts alike, there is no mention of any king or of any earthly
ruler; in both, the ruler to come is the Messias. In both, the division
of the two kingdoms is gone. The house of Israel and house of Judah are
united, not divided ; they had been distinct wholes, now they are in
interests as one. Zechariah promises a future to both collectively, as
did Jeremiah [Jer 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006); [Jer
50:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#020) long after the captivity of
Israel, and Ezekiel promised that they should both again be one in the
hand of God [Eze 37:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#016). The
"brotherhood between Judah and Israel" still existed, after they had
weighed the thirty pieces of silver for the Good Shepherd. The
captivity, in God's Providence, ended at once the kingdom of Israel and
the religious schism, the object of which was to maintain the kingdom.

Even before the captivity, "divers of Asher and Manasseh and Zebulun
humbled themselves, and came to Jerusalem" [Ch2
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#011), to the Passover of Hezekiah;
nay, "a great multitude of the people from Ephraim and Manasseh,
Issachar and Zebulun" [Ch2 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#018), who
had neglected or despised the first invitation [Ch2
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#010), came subsequently. In the great
passover of Josiah, we hear of "all Judah and Israel that were present"
[Ch2 35:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#018). The edict of Cyrus related
to the "people of the Lord God of heaven, and was published throughout
all his kingdom" [Ezr 1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001), which
included "the cities of the Medes" [Kg2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006), where Israel had been removed.
The sacred history is confined to Jerusalem, whence the Gospel was to go
forth; yet, even "the sons of Bethel" [Ezr
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#002), [Ezr
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#028), the center of the rival,
idolatrous worship, which was "among the mountains of Ephraim," were
among those of the people of Israel who returned with Zerubbabel. It is
inconceivable that, as the material prosperity of Palestine returned,
even many of the ten tribes should not have returned to their country.

But place was no condition of the unity of the Church. Those who
returned recognized the religious oneness of all the twelve tribes,
wherever dispersed. At the dedication of the house of God, they [Ezr
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#017) "offered a sin-offering for all
Israel, twelve he-goats, according to the number of the tribes of
Israel." At that passover were present, not only "the children of Israel
which had come again out of the captivity," but, "all such as had
separated themselves unto them from the defilements of the people of the
land, to seek the Lord God of Israel" [Ezr
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#021), i. e., Israelites, who had been
defiled by the heathen idolatries. The "house of David" is mentioned;
for of his seed according to the flesh Messiah was to be born, but it is
his "house," not any earthly ruler in it.

In both parts alike, Zechariah connects his prophecies with the former
prophets, the fulfillment of whose warnings he impressed upon his people
in his opening exhortation to them [Zac
1:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#004), and in his answer to the
question about keeping the fasts [Zac
7:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#007) which related to the
destruction of the city and temple. In the first part, the title "the
Branch" [Zac 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#008); [Zac
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012) is used as a proper name,
recalling the title of the Messiah in Isaiah and Jeremiah, "the Branch
of the Lord" [Isa 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002), "a righteous
Branch" [Jer 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005), "a Branch of
righteousness" [Jer 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#015), whom God
would raise up to David. The prophecy of the mutual exhortation of
peoples and cities to worship at Jerusalem ([Zac
8:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#020), compare [Mic
4:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001); [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)) is an echo of those of Isaiah and
Micah, prolonging them. The prophecy of the four chariots , the symbol
of those world-empires, would be unintelligible without the visions in
Daniel which it presupposes.

The union of the offices of priest and king in the Messiah is a renewal
of the promise through David ([Zac
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#013), coll. [Psa
110:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)). In the last chapters, the
continuousness of the prophet's diction admits still more of this
interweaving of the former prophecies, and these alike from the earlier
and later prophets. The censure of Tyre for its boast of its wisdom is a
renewal of that of Ezekiel ([Zac 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#002),
and [Eze 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#003)); the prophecy against
the Philistine cities, of that of Zephaniah [Zac
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#005); [Zep
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#004); the remarkable prediction that,
when the king should come to Zion, chariots and horses, not of the enemy
but of Judah should be cut off, is renewed from Micah [Zac
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#010); [Mic
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#010); the extent of his peaceful
kingdom is from a psalm of Solomon [Psa
72:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008); the loosing of the exile from
the pit, and God's rendering double unto them, are in Isaiah [Zac
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#012); [Isa
51:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#014); [Isa
61:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#007). The description of the sifting,
in which, two parts having been cut off; even the remaining third should
be anew tried and cleansed, is condensed from Ezekiel, so that, "shall
be cut off, shall expire," correspond to the natural and violent deaths,
by famine and by the sword, spoken of in Ezekiel . The words , "I have
said, it is My people, and it will say, the Lord my God," are almost
verbally from Hosea, "I say to not-my-people, thou art My people, and it
will say, my God;" only omitting the allusion to the significant name of
the prophet's son. : "The first part of [Zac
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010), "the whole land shall be turned
as a plain from Gebah to Rimmon, and Jerusalem shall be exalted,"
reminds of Isaiah and Ezekiel; the latter part, "it shall be inhabited
in her place from the tower of Hananeel to the king's winepresses, and
men shall dwell in it and there shall be no more utter desolation, but
Jerusalem shall dwell securely," reminds of Jeremiah, "The city shall be
built to the Lord from the tower of Hananeel unto the gate of the
corner; it shall not be plucked up nor thrown down any more" [Jer
31:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#038), [Jer
31:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#040).

The words, "and every one that is left of all the nations shall go up to
worship the king, the Lord of hosts, and to keep the feast of
tabernacles" [Zac 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#016), reminds of
Isaiah, "From new-moon to his newmoon, and from sabbath to his sabbath
shall all flesh come to worship before Me, saith the Lord" [Isa
66:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#023). [Zac
14:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#017) are an expansion of [Isa
60:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#012); [Isa
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#020) expresses the thought of [Eze
43:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#013) : the prophecy [Zac
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#021), "there shall be no more the
Canaanite in the house of the Lord forever," refers back to Ezekiel"
[Eze 44:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#009). The symbolizing of the
Gospel by the life-giving waters which should flow forth from Jerusalem,
originally in [Joe 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#018), is a
miniature of the full picture in Ezekiel [Zac
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#008); [Eze
47:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001). The promise, "I will cut off
the names of the idols from the land and they shall be no more
remembered" [Zac 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#002); [Hos
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#017), in part verbally agrees with
that of Hosea, "And I will remove "the names of the" Baalim "from" her
mouth, "and they shall be no more remembered" by their names;" only,
since the Baal-worship was destroyed by the captivity, the more general
name of "idols" is substituted.

Equally, in descriptions not prophetic, the symbolizing of the wicked by
the title of the goats, "I punished the goats" [Zac
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003); [Eze
34:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#017), is renewed from Ezekiel; "I
judge between flock and flock, between the rams and the he-goats." The
description of the shepherds who destroyed their flocks retains from
Jeremiah the characteristic expression, "and hold themselves not
guilty." The minuteness of the enumeration of their neglects and
cruelties is the same (amid differences of the words whereby it is
expressed): "the perishing shall he not visit, those astray shall he not
seek, and the broken shall he not heal; the sound shall he not nurture,
and the flesh of the fat shall he eat and their claws he shall split"
[Zac 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#016). In Ezekiel, "Ye eat the
fat and clothe you with the wool; the fat ye slay; the flock ye feed
not; the diseased have ye not healed; and the broken have ye not bound,
and the wandering have ye not sought" [Eze
34:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#003). The imagery of Obadiah, that
Israel should be a flame amidst grain to consume it, is retained; the
name of Edom is dropped, for the prophecy relates to a larger gathering
of enemies. Zechariah has, "In that day I will make the governors of
Judah like a hearth of fire among wood and like a lamp of fire in a
sheaf of corn, and they shall eat on the right hand and on the left all
nations round about" [Zac 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#006) :
Obadiah; "The house of Jacob shall be 'fire' and the house of Jacob a
'flame,' and the house of Esau stubble, and it shall kindle on them and
shall eat them" [Oba 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018). Even so
slight an expression as "the pride of Jordan" [Zac
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#003), as designating the cane-break
around it, is unique to Jeremiah [Jer
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005); [Jer
49:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#019); [Jer
50:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#044).

Zechariah is eminently an Evangelic prophet, as much as Isaiah, and
equally in both portions.

The use of different words in unlike subjects is a necessary consequence
of that unlikeness. In contrast with that pseudo-criticism, which counts
up the unlike words in different chapters of a prophet, the different
words used by the same modern poet have been counted . A finer
perception will see the correspondence of a style, when the rhythm,
subject, words, are different. No one familiar with English poetry could
doubt that "the Bard," and "the Elegy in a country Churchyard," however
different in subject and style and words, were by the same hand, judging
alone from the labored selection of the epithets, however different.
Yet, there is not one characteristic word or idiom which occurs in both.
But the recurrence of the same or like words or idioms, if unusual
elsewhere, is a subordinate indication of sameness of authorship.

They are thus enumerated by the writers who have answered the attacks on
the authorship of Zechariah.

"Common to both parts are the idioms, from him who goeth and from him
who returneth, which do not occur elsewhere ; the whole Jewish people
are throughout designated as "the house of Israel and the house of
Judah" [Zac 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#013), or "the house of
Judah and the house of Joseph" [Zac
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#006), or "Judah Israel and Jerusalem"
([Zac 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#019), ([Zac
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#002), Hebrew)), or "Ephraim and
Jerusalem" [Zac 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#010), or "Judah and
Ephraim" [Zac 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#013), or "Judah and
Israel" [Zac 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#014). There is in both
parts the appeal to future knowledge of God's doings to be obtained by
experience [Zac 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#013); [Zac
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#011); in both, internal discord is
directly attributed to God, whose Providence permits it [Zac
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#010); [Zac
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#006); in both the prophet promises
God's gifts of the produce of the earth [Zac
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#012); [Zac
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001); in both he bids Jerusalem burst
out for joy; in the first, "for lo, God says, I come and will dwell in
the midst of thee" ([Zac 2:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001) :14,
(10, English)); in the second, "behold thy King cometh unto thee" [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009).

The purity of language is alike in both parts of the book. No one
Syriasm occurs in the earlier chapters. The prophet, who returned as a
child to Judea, formed his language upon that of the older prophets.

In both there is a certain fullness of language, produced by dwelling on
the same thought or word; in both, the whole and its parts are, for
emphasis, mentioned together . In both parts, as a consequence of this
fullness, there occurs the division of the verse into live sections,
contrary to the usual rule of Hebrew parallelism.

This rhythm will appear more vividly in instances ;

"And He shall build the temple of the Lord;

And He shall bear majesty;

And he shall sit and rule on his throne;

And he shall be a priest on his throne;

And a counsel of peace shall be between them both.

[Zac 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#013)

Ashkelon shall see, and shall fear;

Gaza, and shall tremble exceedingly;

And Ekron, and ashamed is her expectation;

And perished hath a king from Gaza,

And Ashkelon shall not be inhabited.

[Zac 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#005)

And I will take away his blood from his mouth;

And his abominations from between his teeth;

And he too shall be left to our God,

And he shall be as a govenor in Judah;

And Ekron as a Jebusite.

[Zac 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#007)

"In that day, saith the Lord,

I will smite every horse with astonishment,

And his rider with madness;

And upon the house of Judah I will open my eyes,

And every horse of the nations I will smite with blindness."

[Zac 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#004)

Koster further refers to [Zac 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#004),
[Zac 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#017); [Zac
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#005), [Zac
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#009) and, on the other hand, to [Zac
9:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009), [Zac
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#013), [Zac
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#015); [Zac
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#011); [Zac
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#002), [Zac
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#007), [Zac
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#009), [Zac
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#017); [Zac
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010); [Zac
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#004), [Zac
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#008).

With one considerable exception , those who would sever the six last
chapters from Zechariah, are now at one in placing them before the
captivity. Yet, Zechariah here too speaks of the captivity as past.
Adopting the imagery of Isaiah, who foretells the delivery from the
captivity as an opening of a prison, he says, in the name of God, "By
the blood of thy covenant I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit
wherein is no water" [Zac 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#011). Again,
"The Lord of hosts hath visited His flock, the house of Judah. I will
have mercy upon them (Judah and Joseph) and they shall be as though I
had not cast them off" [Zac 10:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003).
The mention of the mourning of all the "families that remain" [Zac
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#014) implies a previous carrying
away. Yet more; Zechariah took his imagery of the future restoration of
Jerusalem, from its condition in his own time. "It shall be lifted up
and inhabited in its place from Benjamin's gate unto the place of the
first gate, unto the corner-gate, and from the tower of Hananeel unto
the king's winepresses" [Zac 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010).
"The gate of Benjamin" is doubtless "the gate of Ephraim," since the
road to Ephraim lay through Benjamin; but the gate of Ephraim existed in
Nehemiah's time [Neh 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#016); [Neh
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#039), yet was not then repaired, as
neither was the tower of Hananeel [Neh
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001), having been left, doubtless, at
the destruction of Jerusalem, being useless for defense, when the wall
was broken down. So at the second invasion the Romans left the three
impregnable towers, of Hippicus, Phasaelus, and Mariamne, as monuments
of the greatness of the city which they had destroyed. Benjamin's gate,
the corner gate, the tower of Hananeel, were still standing; "the king's
winepresses" were naturally uninjured, since there was no use in
injuring them; but "the first gate" was destroyed, since not itself but
"the place" of it is mentioned.

The prophecy of the victory over the Greeks fits in with times when
Assyria or Chaldaea were no longer the instruments of God in the
chastisement of His people. The notion that the prophet incited the few
Hebrew slaves, sold into Greece, to rebel against their masters, is so
absurd, that one wonders that any one could have ventured to forge it
and put it upon a Hebrew prophet .

Since, moreover, all now, who sever the six last chapters from the
preceding, also divide these six into two halves, the evidence that the
six chapters are from one author is a separate ground against their
theory. Yet, not only are they connected by the imagery of the people as
the flock of God [Zac 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#016); [Zac
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003), whom God committed to the hand
of the Good Shepherd [Zac 11:4-14](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#004), and
on their rejecting Him, gave them over to an evil shepherd [Zac
11:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#015); but the Good Shepherd is One
with God [Zac 11:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#007); [Zac
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007). The poor of the flock, who would
hold to the Shepherd, are designated by a corresponding word.

A writer has been at pains to show that two different conditions of
things are foretold in the two prophecies. Granted. The first, we
believe, has its foreground in the deliverance during the conquests of
Alexander, and under the Maccabees, and leads on to the rejection of the
true Shepherd and God's visitation on the false. The later relates to a
later repentance and later visitation of God, in part yet future. By
what law is a prophet bound down to speak of one future only?

For those who criticize the prophets, resolve all prophecy into mere
"anticipation" of what might, or might not be, denying to them all
certain knowledge of any future, it is but speaking plainly, when they
imagine the author of the three last chapters to have "anticipated" that
God would interpose miraculously to deliver Jerusalem, then, when it was
destroyed. It would have been in direct contradiction to Jeremiah, who
for 39 years in one unbroken dirge predicted the evil which should come
upon Jerusalem. The prophecy, had it preceded the destruction of
Jerusalem, could not have been earlier than the reign of the wretched
Jehoiakim, since the mourning for the death of Josiah is spoken of as a
proverbial sorrow of the past. This invented prophet then would have
been one of the false prophets, who contradicted Jeremiah, prophesying
good, while Jeremiah prophesied evil; who encouraged Zedekiah in his
perjury, the punishment whereof Ezekiel solemnly denounced [Eze
13:10-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#010), prophesying his captivity in
Babylon as its penalty; he would have been one of those, of whom
Jeremiah said that they spake lies [Jer
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#014); [Jer
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#022); [Jer
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#015); [Jer
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#015); [Jer
29:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#008) in the name of the Lord. It was
not "anticipation" on either side.

It was the statement of those who spoke more certainly than we could
say, "the sun will rise tomorrow." They were the direct contradictories
of one another. The false prophets said, "the Lord hath said, Ye shall
have peace" [Jer 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#011); [Jer
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#017); the true, "they have said,
'Peace, peace,' when there is no peace" [Eze
13:2-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#002); the false said, "sword and
famine shall not be in the land" [Jer
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#015); the true "By sword and famine
shall their prophets be consumed;" the false said, "ye shall not serve
the king of Babylon; thus saith the Lord, even so will I break the yoke
of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, from the neck of all nations within
the space of two full years" [Jer
27:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#009); [Jer
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#011); the true, "Thus saith the Lord
of hosts, Now have I given all these lands into the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, My servant, and all nations shall
serve him, and his son and his son's son" [Jer
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#004), [Jer
27:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#006). The false said, "I will bring
again to this place Jeconiah, with all the captives of Judah, that went
into Babylon, for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon" [Jer
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#004); the true, "I will cast thee out
and the mother that bare thee, into another country, where ye were not
born, and there ye shall die. But to the land, whereunto they desire to
return, thither they shall not return" [Jer
22:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#026). The false said; "The vessels
of the Lord's house shall now shortly be brought again from Babylon"
[Jer 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#016); the true "the residue of
the vessels that remain in this city, - they shall be carried to
Babylon" [Jer 27:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#019).

If the writer of the three last chapters had lived just before the
destruction of Jerusalem in those last reigns, he would have been a
political fanatic, one of those who, by encouraging rebellion against
Nebuchadnezzar, brought on the destruction of the city, and, in the name
of God, told lies against God. "That which is most peculiar in this
prophet," says one , "is the uncommon high and pious hope of the
deliverance of Jerusalem and Judah, notwithstanding all visible greatest
dangers and threatenings. At a time when Jeremiah, in the walls of the
capital, already despairs of any possibility of a successful resistance
to the Chaldees and exhorts to tranquility, this prophet still looks all
these dangers straight in the face with swelling spirit and divine
confidence, holds, with unbowed spirit, firm to the like promises of
older prophets, as Isa. 29, and anticipates that, from that very moment
when the blind fury of the destroyers would discharge itself on the
sanctuary, a wondrous might would crush them in pieces, and that this
must be the beginning of the Messianic weal within and without."

Zech. 14 is to this writer a modification of those anticipations. In
other words there was a greater human probability, that Jeremiah's
prophecies, not his, would be fulfilled: yet, he cannot give up his
sanguineness, though his hopes had now become fanatic. This writer says
on Zech. 14 , "This piece cannot have been written until somewhat later,
when facts made it more and more improbable, that Jerusalem would not
any how be conquered, and treated as a conquered city by coarse foes.
Yet, then too, this prophet could not yet part with the anticipations of
older prophets and those which he had himself at an earlier time
expressed: so boldly, amid the most visible danger, he holds firm to the
old anticipation, after that the great deliverance of Jerusalem in
Sennacherib's time Isa. 37 appeared to justify the most fanatic hopes
for the future, (compare Ps. 59). And so now the prospect moulds itself
to him thus, as if Jerusalem must indeed actually endure the horrors of
the conquest, but that then, when the work of the conquerors was
half-completed, the great deliverance, already suggested in that former
piece, would come, and so the Sanctuary would, notwithstanding, be
wonderfully preserved, the better Messianic time would notwithstanding
still so come."

It must be a marvelous fascination, which the old prophets exercise over
the human mind, that one who can so write should trouble himself about
them. It is such an intense paradox, that the writing of one convicted
by the event of uttering falsehood in the name of God, incorrigible even
by the thickening tokens of God's displeasure, should have been inserted
among the Hebrew prophets, in times not far removed from those whose
events convicted him, that one wonders that anyone should have invented
it, still more that any should have believed in it. Great indeed is "the
credulity of the incredulous."

And yet, this paradox is essential to the theories of the modern school
which would place these chapters before the captivity. English writers,
who thought themselves compelled to ascribe these chapters to Jeremiah,
had an escape, because they did not bind down prophecy to immediate
events. Newcome's criticism was the conjectural criticism of his day; i.
e. bad, cutting knots instead of loosing them. But his faith, that God's
word is true, was entire. Since the prophecy, placed at the time where
he placed it, had no immediate fulfillment, he supposed it, in common
with those who believe it to have been written by Zechariah, to relate
to a later period. That German school, with whom it is an axiom, "that
all definite prophecy relates to an immediate future," had no choice but
to place it just before the destruction of the temple by the Chaldees,
or its profanation by Antiochus Epiphanes; and those who placed it
before the Captivity, had no choice, except to believe, that it related
to events, by which it was falsified.

Nearly half a century has passed, since a leading writer of this school
said , "One must own, that the division of opinions as to the real
author of this section and his time, as also the attempts to appropriate
single oracles of this portion to different periods, leave the result of
criticism simply "negative;" whereas on the other hand, the view itself,
since it is not yet carried through exegetically, lacks the completion
of its proof. It is not till criticism becomes "positive," and evidences
its truth in the explanation of details, that it attains its completion;
which is not, in truth, always possible." Hitzig did what he could, "to
help to promote the attainment of this end according to his ability."
But although the more popular theory has of late been that these
chapters are to be placed before the captivity, the one portion
somewhere in the reigns of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, or Hezekiah; the other,
as marked in the chapters themselves, after the death of Josiah; there
have not been wanting critics of equal repute, who place them in the
time of Antiochus Epiphanes. Yet, criticism which reels to and fro in a
period of near 500 years, from the earliest of the prophets to a period
a century after Malachi, and this on historical and philological
grounds, certainly has come to no definite basis, either as to history
or philology.

Rather, it has enslaved both to preconceived opinions; and at last, as
late a result as any has been, after this weary round, to go back to
where it started from, and to suppose these chapters to have been
written by the prophet whose name they bear .

It is obvious that there must be some mistake either in the tests
applied, or in their application, which admits of a variation of at
least 450 years from somewhere in the reign of Uzziah (say 770 b.c.) to
"later than 330 b.c."

Philological and historical criticism, bearing on events (as it is
assumed) of the day, which should, in its variations, oscillate between
the reign of John or of Charles I, or (to bring it nearer to ourselves)
the first half of the 14th century or the latter part of the 18th
century, would not gain much attention. Indeed, it is instructive, that
after the philological argument has figured so much in all questions
about the date of books of Holy Scripture, it is virtually admitted to
be absolutely worthless, except negatively. For, in regard to Zechariah,
the argument is not used, except in proof that the same writer cannot
have written prose and poetry, which would establish that Hosea did not
write either his three first chapters or his last nine; nor did Ezekiel
write his inaugural vision, the visions of Ezek. 9-10, and the simple
exhortations to repentance in Ezek. 18 and Ezek. 33. Based upon the same
"evidence," I do not know how, of modern writers, Scott and Southey
could be supposed to have written their own prose and poetry. How easy
it would be to prove that the author of Thalaba did not write the life
of Wesley or the history of the peninsular war, nor did Shakespeare
author Macbeth and any comedy which criticism may yet leave to him;
still more that he cannot have written the deep tragic scenes of Hamlet
and that of the gravediggers.

Yet, such negations have been practically considered as the domain of
the philological neo-criticism. Style is to be evidence that the same
prophet did not write certain prophecies; but, this being demonstrated,
it is to yield no evidence, whether he wrote, when Hebrew was a dead
language or in the time of its richest beauty. Individuals indeed have
their opinions; but philological criticism, as a whole, or as relates to
any acknowledged result, is altogether at fault. Having done its
function of establishing, that, in the mind of the critic and his
disciples, certain chapters are not Zechariah's, the witness is
immediately dismissed as incompetent even to assist in proving anything
beside. The rest is to be established by historical allusions, which are
by some adapted to events in the reign of Uzziah, by others to those of
the Maccabees: or rather, it being assumed that there is no prophecy,
this latter class assumes that the book is to belong to the times of the
Maccabees, because one part of it predicts their victories.

Those who tell us of the unity of the results of this modern criticism,
must have been thinking of the agreement of its negations. As to the
positive results, a table will best show their harmony. Yet, the fault
is not in the lack of an ill-exercised acumen of the critics; their
principle, that nothing in the prophets can relate to any distant
future, even though that future exactly realized the words, is the
mainspring of their confusions. Since the words of Zechariah do relate
to, and find their fulfillment in, events widely separated from each
other, and the theory of the critics requires that they should belong to
some proximate event, either in the present or some near future, they
have to wrest those words from the events to which they relate, some in
this way, some in that; and the most natural interpretations are those
which are least admitted.

Certainly since the descriptions in Zech. 9 suit with the wars of
Alexander and the Maccabees, no one, but for some strong antecedent
exigency, would assume that they related to some expected expedition of
an Assyrian monarch , "which may be conjectured as very probable, but
which, for want of historical data, cannot be indicated more
circumstantially," or to "a plan of the Assyrians which was not then
carried out," or Uzziah's war with the Philistines [Ch2
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#006), and some imagined "attitude of
Jeroboam II against Damascus and Hamath," or "a concealed denunciation
against Persia," against which Zechariah did not wish to prophesy
openly, or to have had no special meaning at all .

It is marvelous, on what slight data this modern school has satisfied
itself that these chapters were written before the captivity. To take
the statement of an epitomator of German pseudo-criticism: "Damascus,
Tyre, and Sidon, Philistia, Javan [Zac
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001), [Zac
9:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#006) Assyria and Egypt [Zac
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#010) are the enemies of Judah." "The
historial stand-point is different from that of Zech. 1-8." Of all
these, Javan, the Greeks, alone are spoken of as enemies of Judah, who
before the captivity were known only as purchasers of Hebrew captives;
the only known wars are those of the Maccabees.

"The two kingdoms of Judah and Israel still exist. Surely the language,
'that I might break the brotherhood between Judah and Israel,' implies
that both kingdoms existed as part of the covenant nation."

Zechariah speaks of Judah and Israel, but not as kingdoms. Before the
captivity, except during the effects of the intermarriage with Athaliah,
there was not brotherhood but enmity. In the reigns of Amaziah and Ahaz
there was war.

"The house of David is spoken of in [Zac
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001)." The "house," not the kingdom.
The house existed after the captivity. Zerubbabel, whom the Persians
made governor, was its representative.

"Idols and false prophets ([Zac 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#002);
[Zac 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#002) etc.) harmonize only with a
time prior to the exile."

Idolatry certainly was not the prevailing national sin, after God had
taught the people through the captivity. It is commonly taken for
granted, that there was "none." But where is the proof? Malachi would
hardly have laid the stress on "marrying the daughters of a strange god"
[Mal 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#011), had there been no danger
that the marriage would lead to idolatry. [Neh
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#026) Nehemiah speaks of the sin, into
which Solomon was seduced by "outlandish women," as likely to recur
through the heathen marriages; but idolatry was that sin. Half of the
children could only speak the language of their mothers [Neh
13:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#023). It were strange, if they had
not imbibed their mothers' idolatry, too. In a battle in the Maccabee
war, it is related "under the coats of every one that was slain they
found things consecrated to the idols of the Jamnites, which is
forbidden the Jews by their law" (2 Macc. 12:40).

The "Teraphim" were, moreover, an unlawful and forbidden means of
attempting to know the future, not any coarse form of idolatry (see
below on [Zac 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#002)); much as people
now, who more or less earnestly have their fortunes told, would be
surprised at being called idolaters. But Zechariah was probably speaking
of sins which had brought on the captivity, not of his own day. The
prediction repeated from an older prophet, that in the true Judah, the
Church, God would cut off even the names and the memory of idols, does
not imply that they existed .

False prophets continued after the captivity. Shemaiah, who "uttered a
prophecy against" Nehemiah, "the prophetess Noadiah," and "the rest of
the prophets," are known to us from Nehemiah's relation [Neh
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#012), [Neh
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#014). Such there were before our Lord
came, of whom He said, that they "were thieves and robbers" [Joh
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#008) : He warned against them, as
"coming in sheep's clothing," but "inwardly they are ravening wolves"
[Mat 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015); He foretold that "many
false prophets shall arise and deceive many" [Mat
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#011), [Mat
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024); [Mar
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#022); the Acts tell us of the "false
prophet [Act 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#006), a Jew, Bar-jesus;"
and "Theudas," and "Judas" of Galilee [Act
5:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#036). John says, "many false
prophets have gone out into the world" [Jo1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001). False prophets aggravated the
resistance to the Romans and the final destruction of Jerusalem .

"The mention of a king or kingdom, in [Zac
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#006); [Zac
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007), does not suit the age of
Zechariah."

Zechariah had already implied that they had no king then, for he had
bidden Zion to rejoice that her king "would come" to her; accordingly
she had none. In [Zac 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#006), God says,
"I will no more pity the land; I will deliver man, every one into the
hand of his king." It is an event, not of the prophet's time, but of the
future; in [Zac 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007), there is no
mention of any king at all.

Such being the entire absence of proof that these chapters were written
before the captivity , the proof that Zech. 11 relates to the time of
Menahem is even absurd. The process with those who maintained this, has
been, assuming as proved, that it was written before the captivity, and
that it contained no prophecy of the future, to ask, to what period
before the captivity does it relate? One verse ([Zac
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#006), compare [Isa
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#020); [Isa
49:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#026); [Jer
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#009).) relates to civil confusion,
such as is foretold also, with the same metaphor, by Isaiah and
Jeremiah. The choice was large, since the kingdom of Israel had the
curse of discord and irreligion entailed upon it, and no king ventured
to cut off the entail by cutting off the central sin, the worship of the
calves, which were to consolidate it by a worship, the rival of that at
Jerusalem. Of the 18 kings between Jeroboam and Hosea, 9, including
Tibni, died violent deaths.

The choice was directed to Menahem, because of the words in Zechariah,
"three shepherds also I cut off in one month," and Shallum murdered
Zachariah the son of Jeroboam; and he himself, after he had "reigned a
full month in Samaria," was murdered by Menahem. Here, then, were two
kings cut off: But the third? Imagination is to supply it. One
conjectures Menahem; but "he" reigned 10 years, and so, he invents a
meaning for the word, that the prophet does not mean "cut off," but
"denied" them, leaving it open whether he meant "removed" or merely "did
not acknowledge them, as Menahem at first certainly found no recognition
with the prophetic order" [Kg2 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#016),
[Kg2 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#019); another imagined "some
third rival of Zachariah and Shallum, of whom there is no mention in the
historical books;" but there is no room for a third king, since Shallum
murdered Zachariah; and Menahem, Shallum; another found in Hebrew words
have signified "before the people publicly assembled together."

The Syro-Hexaplar version by Paul of Tela translates the words, and
introduces "Kebdaam" with Origen's asterism, and so, as not belonging to
the Septuagint The Alexandrian and two other manuscripts (one of
Constantinople cent. x.) also retain the rendering. The singular
"conspired," which excludes "Keblaam" from the place which it commonly
occupies, occurs in 3 manuscripts, the Syro-Hex. Georg. Slav-Ostrog.
Versions and the Complutensian; "and smote him" is also sing. in 3
manuscripts and Compl. The word "Keblaam" was doubtless only the Hebrew
words, written by one, who did not know how to translate them, and is
variously written and placed as if the scribes did not know what to do
with it. Four manuscripts make it the name of a place, "in Ieblaam."
They are retained in the place of the Hebrew words in the Vat.
manuscript, but more commonly are added to "Shallum son of Jabis:" in
some manuscripts and a note in the Syr. Hexapla, they are followed by
"and Selem or Selem his father."

They are written, "Kebdaam, Kebdiam, Kebdam, Kaddaam, Kaibdaam, Keblaam,
Keddaam, Kebdaan, Ieblaam, Iebaan, Iebdaam Bdaam, Beldaam." See the
Septuagint ed. Parsons) which had crept into the Septuagint, an usurper
Kobal-am, of whom he says truly, "we hear nothing;" another conceived of
some usurper after the murder of Zachariah or of Shallum (this is left
free), who about this time "may" have set himself at the head of the
kingdom, but scarcely maintained himself some weeks; another says, "This
refers probably to the Interregnum 784-773, in which many "may" have set
themselves as kings, but none have maintained themselves." Another "An
anti-king "may" at this time have set himself up in other parts of the
kingdom, whom Menahem overthrew as he did that murderer." Others say of
the whole, "The symbolical representation, [Zac
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#003) ff, admits of no detailed
explanation, but can be understood only as a whole. It describes the
evil condition of Judah under Ahaz." Another , equally certain that it
relates to Ahaz, says, "the three shepherds, who peished in one and the
same month, were probably men who, in the long anarchy before Hosea
ascended the throne, contended for the sceptre."

Yet, another is so confident in this interpretation as to the three
kings, Shallum, Zechariah and Menahem, that, whereas the book of Kings
says expressly that Shallum reigned "a full month" [Kg2
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#013) literally, "a month of days,"
the commentator says, "The month cannot have been full ; [Zac
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#008) evidently refers to the three
Kings, Sachariah, Sallum and Menahem," while others will have it that
Zechariah by "one month" means some indefinite space more than a month.
This is indeed required (although not stated) by all these theories,
since Shallum alone reigned "a full month," and, consequently, the other
two kings (if intended at all by the term "shepherds") must have been
cut off at some period, outside of that "one month."

Truly, theory is a very exacting taskmaster, though strangely
fascinating. It is to be one of the triumphs of the neo-criticism to
distinguish between the authorship of Zech. 9-11 and Zech. 12-14. the
point alleged to prove that Zech. 11 belongs to the time of Menahem is
one at variance with history. It is not that the whole is like, while in
one point the likeness is imperfect. It is the point, alleged as the
keystone of the whole, which fails. The words of God by the prophet are,
"'Three shepherds' have I cut off in 'one month.'" It lies on the
surface of the history, that Zachariah, son of Jeroboam, was murdered by
Shallum, after reigning 6 months; and that Shallum, after reigning one
full month, was himself murdered by Menahem [Kg2
15:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#008). The succession of murders was
not so rapid as when Zimri had murdered Elah, Baasha's son, and after
reigning 7 days, committed suicide, lest he should fall into the hands
of Omri [Kg1 16:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#015). Elah and Zimri
were cut off in one month; Zachariah and Shallum, in two. But in neither
case was there any visible result, except a partial retribution of God's
justice. The last executioner of God's justice "slept with his fathers;"
his retribution was after death. He was not cut off. And this is the
proof, which is to supplant the testimony to Jesus. The Apostle's words
come true, as so often beside: "They shall turn away their ears from the
truth and shall be turned unto fables" [Ti2
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#004).

"Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way, yet saidst thou not,
there is no hope" [Isa 57:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#010). One
should have thought that some must have, at times, thought of the old
days, when the prophecy was interpreted of the Good Shepherd and of the
30 pieces of silver which were the price of His Blood, and which were
cast into the house of the Lord [Mat
26:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#014); [Mat
27:3-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#003). But this would have been
fatal to "historical criticism," whose province was to find out events
of the prophet's own day to fill up the words of prophecy.

The human authorship of any books of Holy Scripture, and so of these
chapters of Zechariah is, in itself, a matter which does not concern the
soul. It is an untrue imputation, that the date of books of the Bible is
converted into matter of faith. In this case Jesus has not set His seal
upon it; God the Holy Spirit has not declared it. But, as in other
cases, what lay as the foundation of the theory was the unbelief that
God, in a way above nature, when it seemed good to Him, revealed a
certain future to His creature man. It is the postulate, (or axiom, as
appears to these critics), that there is no superhuman prophecy, which
gives rise to their eagerness, to place these and other prophetic books
or portions of books where they can say to themselves that they do not
involve such prophecy. To believers it has obviously no religious
interest, at what time it pleased Almighty God to send any of His
servants the prophets. Not the dates assigned by any of these
self-devouring theories, but the grounds alleged in support of those
dates, as implying unbelief in God's revelation of Himself, make the
question one of religious interest, namely, to show that these theories
are as unsubstantial as their assumed base is baseless.

It is an infelicity of the modern German mind, that it is acute in
observing detailed differences, rather than comprehensive in grasping
deeper resemblances. It has been more busied in discovering what is new
than in observing the grounds of what is true. It does not, somehow,
acquire the power of balancing evidence, which is habitual to the
practical minds of our own countrymen. To take an instance of criticism,
apart from theology, the genuineness of a work of Plato.

"The genuineness of the Laws," says their recent translator , "is
sufficiently proved by more than 20 citations of them in the writings of
Aristotle (whom Plato designated "the intellect of the school," and who
must have been intimate with him for some 17 years) who was residing at
Athens during the last years of the life of Plato, and who returned to
Athens at the time when he was himself writing his Politics and
Constitutions;

\(2\) by the allusion of Isocrates, writing 346 b.c., a year after the
death of Plato, and not more than 2 or 3 years after the composition of
the Laws:

\(3\) by the reference of the comic poet Alexis, a younger contemporary
of Plato (356 b.c.);

\(4\) by the unanimous voice of later antiquity, and the absence of any
suspicion among ancient writers worth noticing."

Yet, German acuteness has found out reasons why the treatise should not
be Plato's. Those reasons are plausible, as most untrue things are. As
put together carefully by one who still attaches no weight to them, they
look like a parody of the arguments, produced by Germans to tear in
pieces the books of Holy Scripture. Mutatis mutandis, they have such an
absurdly ludicrous resemblance, that it provokes a smile. Some 50 years
ago, there was a tradition at Gottingen, where Heyne had lived, that he
attributed the non-reception of the theories as to Homer in England to
the English Bishops, who "apprehended that the same principle would be
applied to Holy Scripture." Now, for half a century more, both sets of
critics have had full scope. The Classical sceptics seem to me to have
the advantage. Anyone who knew only a little of the uncritical criticism
applied to the sacred books could imagine what a jubilee of triumph it
would have occasioned if such differences as those pointed out between
"the Laws" and other treatises of Plato could have been pointed out to
detach any book of Holy Scripture from its traditional writer. Yet it is
held inadequate by one, of whom an admirer said, that "his pecliar mode
of criticism cut the very sinews of belief." I insert the criticisms ,
(omitting the details of illustration) because their failure may open
the eyes of some to the utter valuelessness of this sort of criticism.
The accuracy of the criticisms is not questioned; the statements are not
said to be exaggerated; yet, they are held invalid. The question then
comes with great force to the conscience; "Why, rejecting arguments so
forcible as to a treatise of Plato, do I accept arguments very inferior,
as to such or such a book of the Old or New Testament, - certain
chapters of Isaiah, or Ecclesiastes, or these chapters of Zechariah, or
the Epistle to the Hebrews, or the Revelation of John - except on
grounds of theology, not of criticism, and how am I true to myself in
rejecting such arguments as to human books, and accepting them as to
divine books?"

A Table of Dates, which in the 19th Century Have Been Assigned to
Zechariah 9-14o After the Date of Zechariah Zech. 9-14 "At the earliest,
in the first half and middle of the fifth century." Vatke "The younger
poet, whose visions were added to those of Zechariah." Geiger Last years
of Darius Hystaspis, or first of Xerxes . Gramberg After the battle of
Issus b.c. 333 Eichhorn After 330 b.c. Bottcher Zech. 14 Antiochus
Epiphanes. "many interpreters " Zech. 9 On Hyrcanus i, as the Messiah
Paulus Zechariah Himself (Beckhaus 1792) Jahn , Koster , Henstenberg ,
Burger , De Wette (edd. 4-6). A. Theiner , Herbst , Umbreit , Havernick
, Keil , Stahelin , von Hoffmann , Ebrard, Schegg, Baumgarten , Neumann
, Kliefoth , Kohler , Sandrock . Dates before the Captivity Zech. 9-14
Uzziah b.c. 772 Hitzig . Rosenmuller Zech. 9-11 Under Ahaz, during war
with Pekah Bertholdt Beginning of Ahaz Credner . Herzfeld Later time of
Hezekiah Baur Between b.c. 771-740, i. e. between the invasion of Pul,
[Kg2 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#019) and the capture of Damascus
by Tiglath-Pileser [Kg2 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#009) i. e.,
between the 40th of Uzziah and the 3rd of Ahaz Knobel Zech. 9-11; [Zac
13:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007) In the first 10 years of Pekah
before the war with Ahaz (i. e. between b.c. 759-749) Ewald Zech. 9-11
"Very probably Uzziah's favorite prophet in his prosperous days."
Stanley Zech. 9-11 Contemporary with Isaiah under Ahaz toward 736 b.c
Bunsen Zech. 9; [Zac 10:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001) Perhaps
contemporary with Zephaniah (in the time of Josiah). DeWette Zech. 11
Might be put in the time of Ahaz Id. Zech. 9 Perhaps out of the time of
Zephaniah. Gesenius Uzziah. Bleek . Forberg [Zac
10:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001) Ahaz, soon after war with
Pekah and Rezin. Bleek [Zac 11:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001)
Invasion of some Assyrian king. [Zac
12:4-17](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#004) Menahem, and the end of
Uzziah. Zech. 9 Between the carrying away of 2 12 tribes and the fall of
Damascus Maurer [Zac 10:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001) Between
739-731 b.c., the 7 years' anarchy between Hosea's murder of Pekah and
his own accession. Zech. 11 In reign of Hosea. Zech. 9 Under Uzziah and
Jeroboam. [Zac 10:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001). The Anarchy
after death of Jeroboam II. (b.c. v. 784-772) Ortenberg . [Zac
11:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001) 716 b.c. [Zac
11:4-17](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#004); [Zac
13:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007) Shortly after the war of Pekah
and Rezin. Zech. 9-10 Not before Jeroboam, nor before Uzziah's
accession, but before the death of Zechariah son of Jeroboam Hitzig
Zech. 11 Beginning of reign of Menahem Hitzig Possibly contemporary with
Hosea Bauer Zech. 9 After capture of Damascus by Tiglath-Pileser Movers
Zech. 12-14 Manasseh, in view of a siege by Esarhaddon Hitzig Between
607-604 b.c. (though falsified) Knobel Soon after Josiah's death, by
Uriah, Jeremiah's contemporary, 607 b.c. or 606 Bunsen Most probably,
while the Chaldees were already before Jerusalem, shortly before
Jerusalem was first conquered (599) Schrader Zech. 12:1-13:6 Under
Joiakim or Jeconiah or Zedekiah in Nebuchadnezzars last expedition (no
objection that it was falsified) Bertholdt [Zac
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007) - end Soon after Josiah's death
Bertholdt Zech. 12:1-13:6 The last years of Jehoiakim, or under
Jehoiachin or Zedekiah Bleek [Zac 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007)
- end "Exceeding probably under Josiah or Jehoiakim." Bleek Zech.
12:1-13:6 Fourth year of Jehoiakim Maurer [Zac
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007) - end Fifth. Zech. 12:1-13:6. The
latter half of 600 b.c. v. Ortenberg . Zech. 14 Later than Zech.
12:1-13:6 Zech. 12-13:6 12 years after Habakkuk (about b.c. 607, Ewald)
shortly before the destruction of Jerusalem Ewald [Zac
13:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007) Same date as Zech. 9; 11 (see
above) Zech. 14 A little later than Zech. 12-13 or, In the first
rebellion against Nebuchadnezzar "by Chananiah, or one of the many
prophets who contradicted Jeremiah." Ewald Zech. 12-13:6; 14 Zedekiah,
"Beginning of revolt." Stanley Zech. 12:1-13:6-7, end "Prophecies of
fanatic contents. which deny all historical explanation, but [Zac
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007) must rather be conceived as
future than 'past,' as Bertholdt." DeWette ed. 2 Zech. 12:1-13:6; 14
After death of Josiah, yet relating to the repentance for the putting
the Messias to death, and so independent of the times in which it is
placed Kahnis

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 1](zac001)

</div>
