<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zephaniah Index](zep)  
  [Previous](zep000)  [Next](zep002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zephaniah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001)

[Zephaniah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zep 1:1</span></span>

The word of the Lord which came unto Zephaniah the son of Cushi, the son
of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hezekiah - It seems likely
that more forefathers of the prophet are named than is the wont of Holy
Scripture, because the last so named was some one remarkable. Nor is it
impossible that Zephaniah should have been the great grandson of the
King Hezekiah, for although Holy Scripture commonly names the one son
only who is in the sacred line, and although there is one generation
more than to Josiah, yet if each had a son early, Zephaniah might have
been contemporary with Josiah. The names seem also mentioned for the
sake of their meaning; at least it is remarkable how the name of God
appears in most. Zephaniah, "whom the Lord hid;" Gedaliah, "whom the
Lord made great;" Amariah, "whom the Lord promised;" Hezekiah, "whom the
Lord strengthened."

[Zephaniah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zep 1:2</span></span>

I will utterly consume all things - Better "all." The word is not
limited to "things" "animate" or "inanimate" or "men;" it is used
severally of each, according to the context; here, without limitation,
of "all." God and all stand over against one another; God and all which
is not of God or in God. God, he says, will utterly consume all from off
the land (earth). The prophet sums up in few words the subject of the
whole chapter, the judgments of God from his own times to the day of
Judgment itself. And this Day Itself he brings the more strongly before
the mind, in that, with wonderful briefness, in two words which he
conforms, in sound also, the one to the other, he expresses the utter
final consumption of all things. He expresses at once the intensity of
action and blends their separate meanings, "Taking away I will make an
end of all;" and with this he unites the words used of the flood, "from
off the face of the earth."

Then he goes through the whole creation as it was made, pairing "man and
beast," which Moses speaks of as created on the sixth day, and the
creation of the fifth day, "the fowls of the heaven and the fishes of
the sea;" and before each he sets the solemn word of God, "I will end,"
as the act of God Himself. The words can have no complete fulfillment,
until "the earth and the works that are therein shall be burned up" [Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010), as the Psalmist too, having gone
through the creation, sums up, "Thou takest away their breath, they die
and return to their dust" [Psa 104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029);
and then speaks of the re-creation, "Thou sendest forth Thy Spirit, they
are created; and Thou renewest the face of the earth" Ps. 104:36, and,
"Of old Thou hast laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are
the work of Thy hands; they shall perish, but Thou shalt endure, yea,
all of them shall wax old like a garment; as a vesture shalt Thou change
them, and they shall be changed" Ps. 103:25.

Local fulfillments there may, in their degree, be. Jerome speaks as if
he knew this to have been. Jerome: "Even the brute animals feel the
wrath of the Lord, and when cities have been wasted and men slain, there
cometh a desolation and scarceness of beasts also and birds and fishes;
witness Illyricum, witness Thrace, witness my native soil," (Stridon, a
city on the confines of Dalmatia and Pannonia) "where, beside sky and
earth and rampant brambles and deep thickets, all has perished." But
although this fact, which he alleges, is borne out by natural history,
it is distinct from the words of the prophet, who speaks of the fish,
not of rivers (as Jerome) but of the sea, which can in no way be
influenced by the absence of man, who is only their destroyer. The use
of the language of the histories of the creation and of the deluge
implies that the prophet has in mind a destruction commensurate with
that creation. Then he foretells the final removal of offences, in the
same words which our Lord uses of the general Judgment. "The Son of Man
shall send forth His Angels and they shall gather out of His kingdom all
things that offend, and them that do iniquity" [Mat
13:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#041).

[Zephaniah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zep 1:3</span></span>

The stumbling-blocks with the wicked - Not only shall the wicked be
utterly brought to an end, or, in the other meaning of the word,
"gathered into bundles to be taken away," but all causes of stumbling
too; everything, through which others can fall, which will not be until
the end of all things. Then, he repeats, yet more emphatically, "I will
cut off the whole race of man from the face of the earth," and then he
closes the verse, like the foregoing, with the solemn words, "saith the
Lord." All this shall be fulfilled in the Day of Judgment, and all other
fulfillments are earnests of the final Judgment. They are witnesses of
the ever-living presence of the Judge of all, that God does take account
of man's deeds. They speak to men's conscience, they attest the
existence of a divine law, and therewith of the future complete
manifestation of that law, of which they are individual sentences. Not
until the prophet has brought this circle of judgments to their close,
does he pass on to the particular judgments on Judah and Jerusalem.

[Zephaniah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zep 1:4</span></span>

I will also stretch out Mine Hand - As before on Egypt . Judah had gone
in the ways of Egypt and learned her sins, and sinned worse than Egypt.
"The mighty Hand and stretched-out Arm" [Jer
2:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010), with which she had been
delivered, shall be again "stretched out," yet, not for her but "upon"
her, "upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem." In this threatened
destruction of all, Judah and Jerusalem are singled out, because
"judgment" shall "begin at the house of God" [Pe1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017); [Jer
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#029). They who have sinned against
the greater grace shall be most signally punished. Yet, the punishment
of those whom God had so chosen and loved is an earnest of the general
judgment. This too is not a partial but a general judgment "upon "all"
the inhabitants of Jerusalem."

And I will cut off the remnant of Baal - that is, to the very last
vestige of it. Isaiah unites "name and residue" [Isa
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#022), as equivalents, together with
the proverbial, posterity and descendant. Zephaniah distributes them in
parallel clauses, "the "residue" of Baal and the "name" of the
Chemarim." Good and evil have each a root, which remains in the ground,
when the trunk has been hewn down. There is "a remnant according to the
election of grace," when "the rest have been blinded" [Rom
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005), [Rom
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#007); and this is a "holy seed" [Isa
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#013) to carry on the line of God. Evil
too has its remnant, which, unless diligently kept down, shoots up
again, after the conversion of peoples or individuals. The "mind of the
flesh" remains in the regenerate also. The prophet foretells the
complete excision of the whole "remnant of Baal," which was fulfilled in
it after the captivity, and shall be fulfilled as to all which it
shadows forth, in the Day of Judgment. "From this place;" for in their
phrensy, they dared to bring the worship of Baal into the very temple of
the Lord [Kg2 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#004). Ribera: "Who would
ever believe that in Jerusalem, the holy city, and in the very temple
idols should be consecrated? Whoso seeth the ways of our times will
readily believe it. For among Christians and in the very temple of God,
the abominations of the pagan are worshiped. Riches, pleasures, honors,
are they not idols which Christians prefer to God Himself?"

And the name of the Chemarim with the priests - Of the "idolatrous
priests" the very name shall be cut off, as God promises by Hosea, that
He will "take away the names of Baalim" [Hos
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#017), and by Zechariah, that He "will
cut off the names of the idols out of the land" [Zac
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#002). Yet this is more. Not the "name"
only "of the Chemarim," but themselves with their name, their posterity,
shall be blotted out; still more, it is God who cuts off all memory of
them, blotting them out of the book of the living and out of His own.

They had but a name before, "that they were living, but were dead" [Rev
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001). Jerome: "The Lord shall take away
names of vain glory, wrongly admired, out of the Church yea, the very
names of the priests with the priests who vainly flatter themselves with
the name of Bishops and the dignity of Presbyters without their deeds.
Whence he markedly says, not, "and the deeds of priests with the
priests," but the "names;" who only bear the false name, of dignities,
and with evil works destroy their own names." The "priests are priests
of the Lord," who live not like priests, corrupt in life and doctrine
and corrupters of God's people (see [Jer
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#008);[Jer
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#031)). The judgment is pronounced
alike on what was intrinsically evil, and on good which had corrupted
itself into evil. The title of priest is no where given to the priest of
a false God, without some mention in the context, implying that they
were idolatrous priests; as the priests of Dagon [Sa1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#005), of the high places as ordained by
Jeroboam [Kg1 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#002), [Kg1
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#033); [Kg2
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#020); [Ch2
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#015), of Baal [Kg2
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#019); [Kg2
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#018); [Ch2
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#017), of Bethel [Amo
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#010), of Ahab [Kg2
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#011), of those who were not gods [Ch2
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#009), of On, where the sun was
worshiped . "The priests" then were God's priests, who in the evil days
of Manasseh had manifoldly corrupted their life or their faith, and who
were still evil.

The "priests" of Judah, with its kings its princes and the people of the
land, were in Jeremiah's inaugural vision enumerated as those, who
"shall," God says, "fight against thee, but shall not prevail against
thee" [Jer 1:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018). "The priests said
not, Where is the Lord? and they that handle the law knew Me not" [Jer
2:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#007). In the general corruption, "A
wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land, the prophets
prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule at their hands" [Jer
5:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#030) : "the children of Israel and
the children of Judah, their kings, their princes, their priests, and
their prophets, and the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
have turned unto Me the back, and not the face" [Jer
32:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#032). Jeremiah speaks specifically
of heavy moral sins. "From the prophet even unto the priest everyone
dealeth falsely" [Jer 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#013); [Jer
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#010); "both prophet and priest are
profane" [Jer 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#011); "for the sins of
her prophets, the iniquities of her" [Lam
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#013). And Isaiah says of her
sensuality; "the priests and the prophets have erred through strong
drink; they are swallowed up of wine; they are out of the way through
strong drink" [Isa 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#007).

[Zephaniah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zep 1:5</span></span>

And them that worship the best of heaven upon the - (flat) housetops
This was fulfilled by Josiah who destroyed "the altars that were on the
top of the upper chamber of Ahaz" [Kg2
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#012). Jeremiah speaks as if this
worship was almost universal, as though well-near every roof had been
profaned by this idolatry. "The houses of Jerusalem, and the houses of
Judah, shall be defiled as the place of Tophet, because of all the
houses upon whose roofs they have burned incense unto all the host of
heaven, and have poured out drink-offerings unto other gods" [Jer
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#013). "The Chaldaeans that fight
against this city, shall come and set fire on this city, and burn it
with the houses, upon whose roofs they have offered incense unto Baal,
and poured out drink-offerings to other gods, to provoke Me to anger"
[Jer 32:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#029). They worshiped on the
house-tops, probably to have a clearer view of that magnificent expanse
of sky, "the moon and stars which" God had "ordained" [Psa
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003); the "queen of heaven," which they
worshiped instead of Himself. There is something so mysterious in that
calm face of the moon, as it "walketh in beauty" [Job
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#026); God seems to have invested it
with such delegated influence over the seasons and the produce of the
earth, that they stopped short in it, and worshiped the creature rather
than the Creator. Much as men now talk of "Nature," admire "Nature,"
speak of its "laws," not as laws imposed upon it, but inherent in it,
laws affecting us and our well-being; only not in their ever-varying
vicissitudes, "doing whatsoever God commandeth them upon the face of the
world in the earth, whether for correction, or for His land or for
mercy!" [Job 37:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#012). The idolaters
"worshiped and served the creature more than the Creator, Who is blessed
forever" [Rom 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025); moderns equally
make this world their object, only they idolize themselves and their
discoveries, and worship their own intellect.

This worship on the house-tops individualized the public idolatry; it
was a rebellion against God, family by family; a sort of family-prayer
of idolatry. "Did we," say the mingled multitude to Jeremiah, "make our
cakes to worship her, and pour out our drink-offerings unto her, without
our men?" [Jer 44:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#019). Its family
character is described in Jeremiah. "The children gather wood, and the
fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead the dough to make cakes to
the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings unto other gods"
[Jer 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#018). The idolatry spread to
other cities. "We will certainly do," they say, "as we have done, we and
our fathers, our kings and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and in
the streets of Jerusalem" [Jer 44:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#017).
The incense went up continually "as a memorial to God" from the altar of
incense in the temple: the "roofs of the houses" were so many altars,
from which, street by street and house by house the incense went up to
her, for whom they dethroned God, "the queen of heaven." It was an
idolatry, with which Judah was especially besotted, believing that they
received all goods of this world from them and not from God. When
punished for their sin, they repented of their partial repentance and
maintained to Jeremiah that they were punished for "leaving off to burn
incense to the queen of heaven" [Jer
44:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#002), [Jer
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#015), [Jer
44:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#018).

And them that worship ... the Lord - but with a divided heart and
service; "that swear by (rather to) the Lord," swear fealty and loyal
allegiance to Him, while they do acts which deny it, in that "they swear
by Malcham," better (it is no appellative although allied to one) "their
king" , most probably, I think, "Moloch."

This idolatry had been their enduring idolatry in the wilderness, after
the calves had been annihilated; it is "the" worship, against which
Israel is warned by name in the law [Lev
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#021); [Lev
20:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#002); then, throughout the history
of the Judges, we hear of the kindred idolatry of Baal , "the" Lord (who
was called also "eternal king" and from whom individuals named
themselves "son of (the) king," "servant of (the) king" ), or the
manifold Baals and Ashtaroth or Astarte. But after these had been
removed on the preaching of Samuel [Sa1
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#006); [Sa1
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#010), this idolatry does not reappear
in Judah until the intermarriage of Jehoram with the house of Ahab [Kg2
8:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#016), [Kg2
8:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#026); [Ch2
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#006), [Ch2
21:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#012); [Ch2
22:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#002).

The kindred and equally horrible worship of "Molech, the abomination of
the children of Ammon" [Kg1 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007), was
brought in by Solomon in his decay, and endured until his high place was
defiled by Josiah [Kg2 23:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#013). It is
probable then that this was "their king" , of whom Zephaniah speaks,
whom Amos and after him Jeremiah, called "their king;" but speaking of
Ammon. Him, the king of Ammon, Judah adopted as "their king." They owned
God as their king in words; Molech they owned by their deeds; "they
worshiped and sware fealty to the Lord" and they "sware by their king;"
his name was familiarly in their mouths; to him they appealed as the
Judge and witness of the truth of their words, his displeasure they
invoked on themselves, if they swore falsely. Cyril: "Those in error
were wont to swear by heaven, and, as matter of reverence to call out,
'By the king and lord Sun.' Those who do so must of set purpose and
willfully depart from the love of God, since the law expressly says,
"Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and serve Him alone, and swear by
His Name" [Deu 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013).

The former class who "worshipped on the roofs" were mere idolaters.
These "worshiped," as they thought, "the Lord," bound themselves
solemnly by oath to Him, but with a reserve, joining a hateful idol to
Him, in that they, by a religious act, owned it too as god. The act
which they did was in direct words, or by implication, forbidden by God.
The command to "swear by the Lord" implied that they were to swear by
none else. It was followed by the prohibition to go after other gods.
([Deu 6:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013); 10:30, compare [Isa
65:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#016); [Jer
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#002)). Contrariwise, to swear by other
gods was forbidden as a part of their service. "Be very courageous to
keep and to do all that is written in the book of the Law of Moses,
neither make mention of the name of their gods, nor cause to swear by
them, neither serve them, but cleave unto the Lord your God" ([Jos
23:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#006); compare [Amo
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#014)). "How shall I pardon thee for
this? Thy children have forsaken Me, and have sworn by those who are no
gods" [Jer 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#007). "They taught My people
to swear by Baal" [Jer 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#016). They
thought perhaps that in that they professed to serve God, did the
greater homage to Him, professed and bound themselves to be His, (such
is the meaning of "swear to the Lord") they might, without renouncing
His service, do certain things, "swear by their king," although in
effect they thereby owned hint also as god. To such Elijah said, "How
long halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow Him; but
if Baal, then follow him" [Kg1 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#021);
and God by Jeremiah rejects with abhorrence such divided service. "Ye
trust in lying words, which will not profit. Will ye steal, murder,
commit adultery, swear falsely, and burn incense unto Baal, and walk
after other gods, and come and stand before Me in this house, which is
called by My name, saying, We are delivered to do all these
abominations" [Jer 7:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#008). And Hosea,
"Neither go ye to Beth-aven, and swear there, The Lord liveth" [Hos
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#015).

Such are Christians, Jerome: "who think that they can serve together the
world and the Lord, and please two masters, God and Mammom; who, "being
soldiers of Jesus Christ" and having sworn fealty to Him, "entangle
themselves with the affairs of this life and offer the same image to God
and to Caesar" [Ti2 2:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#003). To such,
God, whom with their lips they own, is not their God; their idol is, as
the very name says, "their king," whom alone they please, displeasing
and dishonoring God. We must not only fear, love, honor God, but love,
fear, honor all beside for Him Alone.

[Zephaniah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zep 1:6</span></span>

And them that are turned back from - (Literally, have turned themselves
back from following after) the Lord From this half-service, the prophet
goes on to the avowed neglect of God, by such as wholly fall away from
Him, not setting His will or law before them, "but turning away from"
Him. It is their misery that they were set in the right way once, but
themselves "turned themselves back," now no longer "following" God, but
"their own lusts, drawn away and enticed" [Jam
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#014) by them. How much more
Christians, before whose eyes Christ Jesus is set forth, not as a
Redeemer only but as an Example that they should "follow His steps!"
[Pe1 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021).

And those that have not sought the Lord, nor inquired for Him - This is
marked to be a distinct class. "And those who." These did not openly
break with God, or turn away overtly from Him; they kept (as men think)
on good terms with Him, but, like "the slothful servant," rendered Him a
listless heartless service. Both words express diligent search. God is
not found then in a careless way. They who "seek" Him not "diligently"
[Mat 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#008), do not find Him. "Strive,"
our Lord says, "to enter in at the strait gate, for many, I say unto
you, shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able" [Luk
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#024). She who had lost the one piece
of silver, "sought" "diligently" [Luk
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#008), until she had found it.

Thus, he has gone through the whole cycle. First, that most horrible and
cruel worship of Baal, the idolatrous priests and those who had the name
of priests only, mingled with them, yet not openly apostatizing; then
the milder form of idolatry, the star-worshipers; then those who would
unite the worship of God with idols, who held themselves to be
worshipers of God, but whose real king was their idol; then those who
openly abandoned God; and lastly those who held with Him, just to
satisfy their conscience-qualms, but with no heart-service. And so, in
words of Habakkuk and in reminiscence of his awful summons of the whole
world before God, he sums up;

[Zephaniah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zep 1:7</span></span>

Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord God - (Literally, "Hush," in
awe "from the face of God.") In the presence of God, even the righteous
say from their inmost heart, "I am vile, what shall I answer Thee? I
will lay mine hand upon my mouth" [Job
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#004). "Now mine eye seeth Thee,
wherefore I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes" [Job
42:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#005). "Enter not into judgment with
Thy servant, O Lord, for in Thy sight shall no man living be justified"
[Psa 143:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#002). How much more must the
"man without the wedding garment be speechless" [Mat
22:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#011), and every false plea, with
which he deceived himself, melt away before the Face of God! The voice
of God's Judgment echoes in every heart, "we indeed justly" [Luk
23:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#041).

For the Day of the Lord is at hand - Zephaniah, as is his custom,
grounds this summons, which he had renewed from Habakkuk, to hushed
silence before God, on Joel's prophetic warning , to show that it was
not yet exhausted. A day of the Lord, of which Joel warned, had come and
was gone; but it was only the herald of many such days; judgments in
time, heralds and earnests, and, in their degree, pictures of the last
which shall end time.

Dionysius: "All time is God's, since He Alone is the Lord of time; yet
that is specially said to be His time when He doth anything special.
Whence He saith, "My time is not yet come" [Joh
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#006); whereas all time is His." The Day
of the Lord is, in the first instance, Jerome: "the day of captivity and
vengeance on the sinful people," as a forerunner of the Day of Judgment,
or the day of death to each, for this too is near, since, compared to
eternity, all the time of this world is brief.

For the Lord hath prepared a sacrifice - God had rejected sacrifices,
offered amid unrepented sin; they were "an abomination to Him" [Isa
1:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011). When man will not repent and
offer himself as "a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God" [Rom
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001), God, at last, rejects all other
outward oblations, and the sinner himself is the sacrifice and victim of
his own sins. The image was probably suggested by Isaiah's words, "The
Lord hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of
Idumea" [Isa 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#006); and Jeremiah
subsequently uses it of the overthrow of Pharaoh at the Euphrates, "This
is the day of the Lord of Hosts; that He may avenge Him of His
adversaries, for the Lord God hath a sacrifice in the north country by
the river Euphrates" [Jer 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#010). "The
Lord hath made all things for Himself, yea even the wicked for the day
of evil" [Pro 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#004). All must honor
God, either fulfilling the will of God and the end of their own being
and of His love for them, by obeying that loving will with their own
freewill, or, if they repudiate it to the end, by suffering it.

He hath bid His guests - (Literally, sanctified) God had before, by
Isaiah, called the pagan whom He employed to punish Babylon, "My
sanctified ones" [Isa 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#003). Zephaniah,
by giving the title to God's instruments against Judah, declares that
themselves, having become in deeds like the pagan, were as pagan to Him.
The instruments of His displeasure, not they, were so far his chosen,
His called. Jeremiah repeats the saying, "Thus saith the Lord against
the house of the king of Judah;...I have sanctified against thee
destroyers, a man and his weapons" [Jer
22:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#006). That is, so far, a holy war in
the purpose of God, which fulfills His will; from where Nebuchadnezzar
was "His servant" [Jer 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#009), avenging
His wrongs . Cyril: "To be sanctified, here denotes not the laying aside
of iniquity, nor the participation of the Holy Spirit, but, as it were,
to be foreordained and chosen to the fulfillment of this end." That is
in a manner hallowed, which is employed by God for a holy end, though
the instrument, its purposes, its aims, its passions, be in themselves
unholy. There is an awe about "the scourges of God." As with the
lightning and the tornado, there is a certain presence of God with them,
in that through them His Righteousness is seen; although they themselves
have as little of God as the "wind and storm" which "fulfill His word."
Those who were once admitted to make offerings to God make themselves
sacrifices to His wrath; these, still pagan and ungodly and in all
besides reprobate, are His priests, because in this, although without
their will, they do His will.

[Zephaniah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zep 1:8</span></span>

I will punish - (Literally, visit upon). God seems oftentimes to be away
from His own world. People plot, design, say, in word or in deed, "who
is Lord over us?" God is, as it were, a stranger in it, or as a man, who
hath "taken a journey into afar country." God uses our own language to
us. "I will visit," inspecting (so to say), examining, sifting,
reviewing, and when man's sins require it, allowing the weight of His
displeasure to fall upon them.

The princes - The prophet again, in vivid detail (as his characteristic
is), sets forth together sin and punishment. Amid the general
chastisement of all, when all should become one sacrifice, they who
sinned most should be punished most. The evil priests had received their
doom. Here he begins anew with the mighty of the people and so goes
down, first to special spots of the city, then to the whole, man by man.
Josiah being a godly king, no mention is made of him. Thirteen years
before his death, he received the promise of God, "because thine heart
was tender, and thou hast humbled thyself before the Lord - I will
gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou shalt be gathered unto thy grave
in peace, and thou shalt not see all the evil which I will bring upon
this place" [Kg2 22:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#019). In
remarkable contrast to Jeremiah, who had to be, in detail and continual
pleading with his people, a prophet of judgment to come, until these
judgments broke upon them, and so was the reprover of the evil
sovereigns who succeeded Josiah, Zephaniah has to pronounce God's
judgments only on the "princes" and "the king's children."

Jeremiah, in his inaugural vision, was forewarned, that "the kings
Judah, its princes, priests, and the people of the land" [Jer
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018) should war against him, because
he should speak unto them all which God should command him. And
thenceforth, Jeremiah impleads or threatens kings and the princes
together [Jer 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#026); [Jer
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#009); [Jer
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#001); [Jer
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#008); [Jer
32:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#037); [Jer
34:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#021). Zephaniah contrariwise, his
office lying wholly within the reign of Josiah, describes the princes
again as "roaring lions" [Zep 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#003), but
says nothing of the king, as neither does Micah [Mic
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#001), [Mic
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#009), in the reign, it may be, of
Jotham or Hezekiah. Isaiah speaks of princes, as "rebellious and
companions of thieves" [Isa 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#023).
Jeremiah speaks of them as idolaters [Jer
31:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032); [Jer
44:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#021). They appear to have had
considerable influence, which on one occasion they employed in defense
of Jeremiah [Jer 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#016), but mostly for
evil [Jer 37:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#015); [Jer
38:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#004), [Jer
38:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#016). Zedekiah inquired of Jeremiah
secretly for fear of them [Jer 37:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#017);
[Jer 38:14-27](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#014). They brought
destruction upon themselves by what men praise, their resistance to
Nebuchadnezzar, but against the declared mind of God. Nebuchadnezzar
unwittingly fulfilled the prophets' word, when he "slew all the nobles
of Judah, the eunuch who was over the war, and seven men of them that
were near the king's person, and the principal scribe of the host" [Jer
39:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#006); [Jer
52:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#025).

And the king's children - Holy Scripture mentions chief persons only by
name. Isaiah had prophesied the isolated lonely loveless lot of
descendants of Hezekiah who should be "eunuchs in the palace of the king
of Babylon" [Isa 39:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#007), associated only
with those intriguing pests of Eastern courts, a lot in itself worse
than the sword (although to Daniel God overruled it to good) and
Zedekiah's sons were slain before his eyes and his race extinct.
Jehoiakim died a disgraced death, and Jehoiachin was imprisoned more
than half the life of man.

And all such as are clothed with strange apparel - Israel was reminded
by its dress, that it belonged to God. It was no great thing in itself;
"a band of dark blue [Num 15:38](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#038); [Deu
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#012) upon the fringes at the four
corners of their garments." But "the band of dark blue" was upon the
high priest's mitre, with the plate engraved, "Holiness to the Lord"
[Exo 28:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#036), fastened upon it; "with a
band of dark blue" also was the breastplate [Exo
39:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#021) bound to the ephod of the high
priest. So then, simple as it was, it seems to have designated the whole
nation, as "a kingdom of priests, an holy nation" [Exo
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006). It was appointed to them, "that
ye may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of the Lord and
do them, and that ye seek not after your own heart and your own eyes,
after which ye use to go a whoring; that ye may remember and do all My
commandments, and be holy unto your God" [Num
15:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#039). They might say, "it is but
"a band of blue;"" but the "band of blue" was the soldier's badge, which
marked them as devoted to the service of their God; indifference to or
shame of it involved indifference to or shame of the charge given them
therewith, and to their calling as a peculiar people. The choice of the
strange apparel involved the choice to be as the nations of the world;
"we will be as the pagan, as the families of the countries" [Eze
20:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#033).

All luxurious times copy foreign dress, and with it, foreign manners and
luxuries; from where even the pagan Romans were zealous against its use.
It is very probable that with the foreign dress foreign idolatry was
imported . The Babylonian dress was very gorgeous, such as was the
admiration of the simpler Jews. "Her captains and rulers clothed in
perfection, girded with girdles upon their loins, with flowing dyed
attire upon their heads" [Eze 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#012),
[Eze 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#015). Ezekiel had to frame words
to express the Hebrew idea of their beauty. Jehoiakim is reproved among
other things for his luxury [Jer
22:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#014). Outward dress always
betokens the inward mind, and in its turn acts upon it. An estranged
dress betokened an estranged heart, from where it is used as an image of
the whole spiritual mind [Rom 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014);
[Col 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#012); [Eph
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024). Jerome: "The garment of the sons
of the king and the apparel of princes which we receive in Baptism, is
Christ, according to that, "Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ," and "Put
ye on bowels of mercy, goodness, humililty, patience," and the rest.
Wherein, we are commanded to be clothed with the new man from heaven
according to our Creator, and to "lay aside" the clothing of "the old
man with his deeds" [Eph 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022).
Whereas, then we ought to be clothed in such raiment, for mercy we put
on cruelty, for patience, impatience, for righteousness, iniquity; in a
word, for virtues, vices, for Christ, antichrist. Whence it is said of
such an one, "He is clothed with cursing as with a garment" [Psa
109:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#017). These the Lord will visit most
manifestly at His Coming." Rup.: "Thinkest thou that hypocrisy is
"strange apparel?" Of a truth. For what stranger apparel than sheeps'
clothing to ravening wolves? What stranger than for him who "within is
full of iniquity, to appear outwardly righteous before men?" [Mat
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#028).

[Zephaniah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zep 1:9</span></span>

I will punish all those that leap on the threshold - Neither language
nor history nor context allow this to be understood of the idolatrous
custom of Ashdod, not to tread on the threshold of the temple of Dagon.
It had indeed been a strange infatuation of idolatry, that God's people
should adopt an act of superstitious reverence for an idol in the very
instance in which its nothingness and the power of the true God had been
shown. Nothing is indeed too brutish for one who chooses an idol for the
true God, preferring Satan to the good God. Yet, the superstition
belonged apparently to Ashdod alone; the worship of Dagon, although
another form of untrue worship, does not appear, like that of Baal, to
have fascinated the Jews; nor would Zephaniah, to express a rare
superstition, have chosen an idiom, which might more readily express the
contrary, that they "leapt "on" the threshold," not over it.

They are also the same persons, who "leap on the threshold," and who
"fill their masters' houses with violence and deceit." Yet, this
relates, not to superstition, but to plunder and goods unjustly gotten.
As then, before, he had declared God's judgments upon idolatry, so does
he here upon sins against the second table, whether by open violence, or
secret fraud, as do also Habakkuk [Hab
1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#002), and Jeremiah [Jer
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#027). All, whether open or hidden from
man, every wrongful dealing, (for every sin as to a neighbor's goods
falls under these two, violence or fraud) shall be avenged in that day.
Here again all which remains is the sin. They enriched, as they thought,
their masters by art or by force; they schemed, plotted, robbed; they
succeeded to their heart's wish; but, "ill-gotten, ill-spent!" They
"filled their masters' houses" quite full; but wherewith? with violence
and deceit, which witnessed against them, and brought down the judgments
of God upon them.

[Zephaniah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zep 1:10</span></span>

A cry from the fish-gate - "The fish-gate" was probably in the north of
the wall of "the second city." For in Nehemiah's rebuilding, the
restoration began at the sheep-gate [Neh
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001) (so called doubtless, because the
sheep for the sacrifices were brought in by it), which, as being near
the temple, was repaired by the priests; then it ascended northward, by
two towers, the towers of Meah and Hananeel; then two companies repaired
some undescribed part of the wall [Neh
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#002), and then another company built
the fish-gate [Neh 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#003). Four companies
are then mentioned, who repaired, in order, to the old gate, which was
repaired by another company [Neh
3:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#004). Three more companies repaired
beyond these; and they left Jerusalem unto the broad wall [Neh
3:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#007). After three more sections
repaired by individuals, two others repaired a second measured portion,
and the tower of the furnaces [Neh
3:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#009).

This order is reversed in the account of the dedication of the walls.
The people being divided "into two great companies of them that give
thanks" [Neh 12:31-38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#031), some place near
"the tower of the furnaces" was the central point, from which both
parted to encompass the city in opposite directions. In this account, we
have two additional gates mentioned, "the gate of Ephraim" [Neh
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#039), between the "broad wall" and
the "old gate," and "the prison-gate," beyond "the sheep-gate," from
which the repairs had begun. "The gate of Ephraim" had obviously not
been repaired, because, for some reason, it had not been destroyed.
Elsewhere, Nehemiah, who describes the rebuilding of the wall so
minutely, must have mentioned its rebuilding. It was obviously to the
north, as leading to Ephraim. But the tower of Hananeel must have been a
very marked tower. In Zechariah Jerusalem is measured from north to
south, "from the tower of Hananeel unto the king's winepresses" [Zac
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010).

It was then itself at the northeast corner of Jerusalem, where towers
were of most importance to strengthen the wall, and to command the
approach to the wall either way. "The fish-gate" then, lying between it
and "the gate of Ephraim," must have been on the north side of the city,
and so on the side where the Chaldaean invasions came; yet it must have
been much inside the present city, because the city itself was enlarged
by Herod Agrippa on the north, as it was unaccountably contracted on the
south. The then limits of Jerusalem are defined. For Josephus thus
describes "the second wall." (B. J. v. 42): "It took its beginning from
that gate which they called "Gennath," which belonged to the first wall;
it only encompassed the northern quarter of the city and reached as far
as the tower of Antonia." The tower of Antonia was situated at the
northwest angle of the corner of the temple. The other end of the wall,
the Gennath or "garden" gate, must have opened on cultivated land; and
Josephus speaks of the gardens on the north and northwest of the city
which were destroyed by Titus in leveling the ground (B. J. v. 32).

But near the tower of Hippicus, the northwestern extremity of the first
wall, no ancient remains have been discovered by excavation ; but they
have been traced north, from "an ancient Jewish semi-circular arch,
resting on piers 18 feet high, now buried in rubbish."

These old foundations have been traced at three places in a line on the
east of the Holy Sepulchre (which lay consequently outside the city) up
to the judgment gate, but not north of it .

The line from west to east, that is, to the tower of Antonia, is marked
generally by "very large stones, evidently of Jewish work, in the walls
of houses, especially in the lower parts" . They are chiefly in the line
of the Via Dolorosa.

"The fish-gate" had its name probably from a fish-market (markets being
in the open places near the gates (see [Kg2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#001); [Neh
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#016), [Neh
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#019))) the fish being brought either
from the lake of Tiberius or from Joppa. Near it, the wall ended, which
Manasseh, after his restoration from Babylon, "built without the city of
David, on the west side of Gihon, in the valley" [Ch2
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#014). This, being unprotected by its
situation, was the weakest part of the city. : "The most ancient of the
three walls could be considered as impregnable, as much on account of
its extreme thickness, as of the height of the mountain on which it was
built, and the depth of the valleys at its base, and David, Solomon and
the other kings neglected nothing to place it in this state." Where they
had made themselves strong, there God's judgment should find them.

And a howling from the second - city, as it is supplied in Nehemiah, who
mentions the prefect set over it . It was here that Huldah the
prophetess lived , who prophesied the evils to come upon Jerusalem,
after Josiah should be "gathered to" his "grave in peace." It was
probably the lower city, which was enclosed by the second wall. It was a
second or new city, as compared to the original city of David, on Mount
Moriah. On this the enemy who had penetrated by the fish-gate would
first enter; then take the strongest part of the city itself. Gareb [Jer
31:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#039) and Bezetha were outside of the
then town; they would then be already occupied by the enemy before
entering the city.

A great crashing from the hills - These are probably Zion, and Mount
Moriah on which the temple stood, and so the capture is described as
complete. Here should be not a cry or howling only, but an utter
destruction . Mount Moriah was the seat of the worship of God; on Mount
Zion was the state, and the abode of the wealthy. In human sight they
were impregnable. The Jebusites mocked at David's siege, as thinking
their city impregnable [Sa2 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006); but
God was with David and he took it. He and his successors fortified it
yet more, but its true defense was that the Lord was round about His
people" [Psa 125:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#002), and when lie
withdrew His protection, then this natural strength was but their
destruction, tempting them to resist first the Chaldaeans, then the
Romans. Human strength is but a great crash, falling by its own weight
and burying its owner. "This threefold cry , from three parts of the
city, had a fulfillment before the destruction by the Romans. In the
lower part of the city Simon tyrannized, and in the middle John raged,
and "there was a great crashing from the hills," that is, from the
temple and citadel where was Eleazar, who stained the very altar of the
temple with blood, and in the courts of the Lord made a pool of blood of
divers corpses."

Cyril: "In the assaults of an enemy the inhabitants are ever wont to
flee to the tops of the hills, thinking that the difficulty of access
will be a hindrance to him, and will cut off the assaults of the
pursuers. But when God smiteth, and requireth of the despisers the
penalties of their sin, not the most towered city nor impregnable
circuits of walls, not height of hills, or rough rocks, or pathless
difficulty of ground, will avail to the sufferers. Repentance alone
saves, softening the Judge and allaying His wrath, and readily inviting
the Creator in His inherent goodness to His appropriate gentleness.
Better is it, with all our might to implore that we may not offend Him.
But since human nature is prone to evil, and "in many things we all
offend" [Jam 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002), let us at least by
repentance invite to His wonted clemency the Lord of all, Who is by
nature kind."

[Zephaniah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zep 1:11</span></span>

Howl, ye inhabitants of Maktesh - Literally, "Mortar" , "in which,"
Jerome says, "corn is pounded; a hollow vessel, and fit for the use of
medical men, in which properly ptisans are wont to be beaten (or made).
Striking is it, that Scripture saith not, 'who dwell in the valley or in
the alley,' but who "dwell in the mortar," because as corn, when the
pestle striketh, is bruised, so the army of the enemy shall rush down
upon you" (Jerome). The place intended is probably so much of the valley
of the Tyropoeon, which intersected Jerusalem from north to south, as
was enclosed by the second wall, on the north, and the first wall on the
south. The valley "extended as far as the fountain of Siloam," and
united with the valley of Jehoshaphat a little below Ophel. It was "full
of houses," and, from its name as well as from its situation, it was
probably the scene of petty merchandise, where the occasions in which
men could and did break the law and offend God, were the more continual,
because they entered into their daily life, and were a part of it. The
sound of the pestle was continually heard there; another sound should
thereafter be heard, when they should not bruise, but be themselves
bruised. The name "Maktesh" was probably chosen to express how their
false hopes, grounded on the presence of God's temple among them while
by their sins they profaned it, should be turned into true fears. They
had been and thought themselves "Mikdash," "a holy place,. sanctuary;"
they should be Maktesh , wherein all should be utterly bruised in
pieces.

Jerome: "Whoso considereth the calamities of that siege, and how the
city was pressed and hemmed in, will feel how aptly he calls them "the
inhabitants of a mortar;" for, as grains of corn are brought together
into a mortar, to the end that, when the pestle descendeth, being unable
to fly off, they may be bruised, so the people flowing together, out of
all the countries of Judaea, was narrowed in by a sudden siege, and
through the savage cruelty of the above leaders of the sedition, was
unutterably tortured from within, more than by the enemy without."

For all the merchant people are cut down - (Literally, "the people of
Canaan") that is Ch.: "they who in deeds are like the people of Canaan,"
according to that , "Thou art of Canaan and not of Judah," and, "Thy
father is an Amorite and thy mother a Hittite" . So our Lord says to the
reprobate Jews, "Ye are of your father the devil" [Joh
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044).

All they that bear silver are cut off - (Literally, "all laden with").
The silver, wherewith they lade themselves, being gotten amiss, is a
load upon them, weighing them down until they are destroyed.

[Zephaniah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zep 1:12</span></span>

I will search - (Literally, "diligently"). The word is always used of a
minute diligent search, whereby places, persons, things, are searched
and sifted one by one in every corner, until it be found whether a thing
be there or no . Hence, also of the searching out of every thought of
the heart, either by God [Pro 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#027),
or in repentance by the light of God [Lam
3:40](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#040).

Jerusalem with candles - so that there should be no corner, no
lurking-place so dark, but that the guilty should be brought to light.
The same diligence, which Eternal Wisdom used, to "seek and to save that
which was lost [Luk 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#008), lighting a
candle and searching diligently," until it find each lost piece of
silver, the same shall Almighty God use that no hardened sinner shall
escape. Cyril: "What the enemy would do, using unmingled phrensy against
the conquered, that God fitteth to His own Person, not as being Himself
the Doer of things so foreign, but rather permitting that what comes
from anger should proceed in judgment against the ungodly." It was an
image of this, when, at the taking of Jerusalem by the Romans, they
"dragged out of common sewers and holes and caves and tombs, princes and
great men and priests, who for fear of death had hid themselves."

How much more in that Day when "the secrets of all hearts shalt be
revealed" by Him who "searcheth the hearts and reins, and to Whose Eyes"
[Psa 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#009); [Psa
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#002); [Jer
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#020); [Jer
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#010); [Jer
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#012); [Rev
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#023), "which are like flashing Fire,
all things are naked and open!" [Rev
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014). The candles wherewith God
searcheth the heart, are men's own consciences [Pro
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#027), His Own revealed word [Psa
119:104](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#104); [Pro
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#023); [Pe2
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019), the lives of true Christians
[Phi 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015). Those, through the Holy
Spirit in each, may enlighten the heart of man, or, if he takes not
heed, will rise in judgment against him, and show the falsehood of all
vain excuses. : "One way of escape only there is. If we judge ourselves,
we shall not be judged. I will "search out my" own "ways" and my
desires, that He who "shall search out Jerusalem with candles," may find
nothing in me, unsought and unsifted. For He will not twice judge the
same thing. Would that I might so follow and track out all my offences,
that in none I need fear His piercing Eyes, in none be ashamed at the
light of His candles! Now I am seen, but I see not. At hand is that Eye,
to whom all things are open, although Itself is not open. Once "I shall
know, even as I am known" [Co1 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012).
Now "I know in part," but I am not known in part, but wholly."

The men that are settled on their lees - Stiffened and contracted . The
image is from wine which becomes harsh, if allowed to remain upon the
lees, unremoved. It is drawn out by Jeremiah, "Moab hath been at ease
from his youth, and he hath settled on his lees, and hath not been
emptied from vessel to vessel, neither hath he gone into captivity;
therefore his taste remained in him, and his scent is not changed" [Jer
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#011). So they upon whom "no changes
come, fear not God (see [Psa 55:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#019)).
The lees are the refuse of the wine, yet stored up (so the word means)
with it, and the wine rests, as it were, upon them. So do men of ease
rest in things defiled and defiling, their riches or their pleasure,
which they hoard up, on which they are bent, so that they, Dionysius:
"lift not their mind to things above, but, darkened with foulest
desires, are hardened and stiffened in sin."

That say in their heart - Not openly scoffing, perhaps thinking that
they believe; but people "do" believe as they love. Their most inward
belief, the belief of their heart and affections, what they wish, and
the hidden spring of their actions, is, "The Lord will not do good,
neither will He do evil." They act as believing so, and by acting inure
themselves to believe it. They think of God as far away, "Is not God in
the height of heaven? And behold the height of the stars, how high they
are! And thou sayest, How doth God know? Can He judge through the dark
cloud? Thick goads are a covering to Him, that He seeth not; and He
walketh in the circuit of heaven" [Job
22:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#012), "The ungodly in the pride of
his heart" (thinketh); "He will not inquire; all his devices" (speak),
"There is no God. Strong are his ways at all times; on high are Thy
judgments out of his sight" [Psa
10:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#004). "They slay the widow and the
stranger, and murder the fatherless, and they say, The Lord shall not
see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it" [Psa
94:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#005).

"Such things they did imagine and were deceived, for their own
wickedness blinded them. As for the mysteries of God, they knew them
not" (Wisd. 2:21-22). "Faith without works is dead" [Jam
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#020). Faith which acts not dies out,
and there comes in its stead this other persuasion, that God will not
repay. There are more Atheists than believe themselves to be such. These
act as if there were no Judge of their deeds, and at last come,
themselves to believe that God will not punish [Isa
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#019); [Mal
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#017). What else is the thought of all
worldlings, of all who make idols to themselves of any pleasure or gain
or ambition, but "God will not punish?" "God cannot punish the
(wrongful, selfish,) indulgence of the nature which He has made." "God
will not be so precise." "God will not punish with everlasting severance
from Him, the sins of this short life." And they see not that they
ascribe to God, what He attributes to idols that is, not-gods. "Do good
or do evil, that we may be dismayed and behold it together" . "Be not
afraid of them, for they cannot do evil, neither also is it in them to
do good" [Jer 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#005). These think not
that God does good, for they ascribe their success to their own
diligence, wisdom, strength, and thank not God for it. They think not
that He sends them evil. For they defy Him and His laws, and think that
they shall go unpunished. What remains but that He should be as dumb an
idol as those of the pagan?

[Zephaniah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zep 1:13</span></span>

Therefore their goods - Literally, "And their strength." It is the
simple sequel in God's Providence. It is a continued narrative. God will
visit those who say, that God does not interfere in man's affairs, and,
it shall be seen [Jer 44:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#028) whose
words shall stand, God's or their's. All which God had threatened in the
law shall be fulfilled. God, in the fulfillment of the punishment, which
He had foretold in the law [Lev
26:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#032); Deut. 28, would vindicate
not only His present Providence, but His continual government of His own
world. All which is strength to man, shall the rather fail, because it
is strength, and they presume on it and it deceives them. Its one end is
to "become a prey" of devils. Riches, learning, rule, influence, power,
bodily strength, genius, eloquence, popular favor, shall all fail a man,
and he, when stripped of them, shall be the more bared because he
gathered them around him. "Wealth is ever a runaway and has no
stability, but rather intoxicates and inclines to revolt and has
unsteady feet. Exceeding folly is it to think much of it. For it will
not rescue those lying under the divine displeasure, nor will it free
any from guilt, when God decreeth punishment, and bringeth the judgment
befitting on the transgressors. How utterly useless this eagerness after
wealth is to the ungodly, he teacheth, saying, that "their strength
shall be a prey" to the Chaldaean."

And their houses a desolation - Cyril: "For they are, of whom it may be
said very truly, "This is the man that took not God for his strength,
but trusted unto the multitude of his riches, and strengthened himself
in his wickedness" [Psa 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#007). But if
indeed their houses are adorned in a costly manner, they shall not be
theirs, for they shall be burned, and themselves go into captivity,
leaving all in their house, and deprived of all which would gladden. And
this God said clearly to the king of Judah by Jeremiah, "Thou hast
builded thyself a large house and wide chambers, ceiled with cedar, and
painted with vermilion. Shalt thou reign because thou closest thyself
with cedar!" [Jer 22:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#014). Gregory
(Mor. viii. 14): "As the house of the body is the bodily dwelling, so to
each mind its house is that, wherein through desire it is wont to
dwell," and "desolate" shall they be, being severed forever from the
things they desired, and forever deserted by God. "They shall also build
houses but not inhabit them," as the rich man said to his soul, "Soul,
thou hast much goods laid up for many years .... Thou fool, this night
thy soul shall be required of thee; then whose shall those things be,
which thou hast provided?" [Luk
12:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#019). Before the siege by the
Romans, Jerusalem and the temple had been greatly beautified, only to be
destroyed. "And they shall plant vineyards, but not drink the wine
thereof." This is the woe, first pronounced in the law [Deu
28:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#039), often repeated and ever found
true. Wickedness makes joy its end, yet never finds it, seeking it where
it is not, out of God.

[Zephaniah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zep 1:14</span></span>

The great Day of the Lord is near - The prophet again expands the words
of Joel, accumulating words expressive of the terrors of that Day,
showing that though "the great and very terrible Day of the Lord" [Joe
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#031), (Joel had said) "a day of
darkness and gloominess, of clouds and of thick darkness" [Joe
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#002), "which was then coming and nigh
at hand" [Joe 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001), had come and was
gone, it was only a forerunner of others; none of them final; but each,
because it "was" a judgment and an instance of the justice of God, an
earnest and forerunner of other judgments to the end. Again, "a great
Day of the Lord was near." This Day had itself, so to speak, many hours
and divisions of the day. But each hour tolleth the same knell of
approaching doom. Each calamity in the miserable reigns of the sons of
Josiah was one stroke in the passing-bell, until the de struction of
Jerusalem by the Chaldaeans, for the time closed it.

The judgment was complete. The completeness of that excision made it the
more an image of every other like day until the final destruction of all
which, although around or near to Christ, shall in the Great Day be
found not to be His, but to have rejected Him. Jerome: "Truly was
vengeance required, 'from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of
Zechariah, whom they slew between the temple and the altar' [Mat
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035), and at last when they said of
the Son of God, "His blood be upon us and upon our children" [Mat
27:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#025), they experienced a bitter day,
because they had provoked the Lord to bitterness; a Day, appointed by
the Lord, in which not the weak only but the mighty shall be bowed down,
and wrath shall come upon them to the end. For often before they endured
the wrath of the Lord, but that wrath was not to the uttermost. What
need now to describe how great calamities they endured in both
captivities, and how they who rejected the light of the Lord, walked in
darkness and thick darkness, and they who would not hear the trumpet of
the solemn feast-days, heard the shout of the enemy.

But of the "fenced cities" and "lofty corner-towers" of Judaea, which
are until now destroyed even to the ground, the eyes, I deem, can judge
better than the ears. We especially, now living in that province, can
see, can prove what is written. We scarcely discern slight traces of
ruins of what once were great cities. At Shiloh, where was the
tabernacle and ark of the testament of the Lord, scarcely the
foundations of the altar are shown. Rama and Bethoron and the other
noble cities built by Solomon, are shown to be little villages. Let us
read Joseplius and the prophecy of Zephaniah; we shall see his history
before our eyes. And this must be said not only of the captivity, but
even to the present day. The treacherous farmers, having slain the
servants, and, at last, the Son of God, are prevented from entering
Jerusalem, except to wail, and they purchase at a price leave to weep
the ruin of their city, so that they who once bought the Blood of
Christ, buy their tears; not even their tears are costless.

You may see on the day that Jerusalem was taken and destroyed by the
Romans, a people in mourning come, decrepit old women and old men, in
aged and ragged wretchedness, showing in their bodies and in their guise
the wrath of the Lord. The hapless crowd is gathered, and amid the
gleaming of the Cross of Christ, and the radiant glory of His
Resurrection, the standard also of the Cross shining from Mount Olivet,
you may see the people, piteous but unpitied, bewail the ruins of their
temple, tears still on their cheeks, their arms livid and their hair
disheveled, and the soldier asketh a guerdon, that they may be allowed
to weep longer. And doth any, when he seeth this, doubt of the "day of
trouble and distress, the day of darkness and gloominess, the day of
clouds and thick darkness, the day of the trumpet and alarm?" For they
have also trumpets in their sorrow, and, according to the prophecy, the
voice of "the solemn feast-day is turned into mourning." They wail over
the ashes of the sanctuary and the altar destroyed, and over cities once
fenced, and over the high towers of the temple, from which they once
cast headlong James the brother of the Lord."

But referring the Day of the Lord to the end of the world or the close
of the life of each, it too is near; near, the prophet adds to impress
the more its nearness, for it is at hand to each; and when eternity
shall come, all time shall seem like a moment, "A thousand years, when
past, are like a watch in the night" [Psa
90:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#004); one fourth part of one night.

And hasteth greatly - For time whirls on more rapidly to each, year by
year, and when God's judgments draw near, the tokens of them thicken,
and troubles sweep one over the other, events jostle against each other.
The voice of the day of the Lord. That Day, when it cometh, shall leave
no one in doubt what it meaneth; it shall give no uncertain sound, but
shall, trumpet-tongued, proclaim the holiness and justice of Almighty
God; its voice shall be the Voice of Christ, which "all that are in the
graves shall hear and come forth; they that have done good, unto the
resurrection of life; and they that have done evil unto the resurrection
of damnation" [Joh 5:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028).

"The mighty men shall cry there bitterly, for "bitter is the remembrance
of death to a man that liveth at rest in his possessions, unto the man
that hath nothing to vex him, and that hath prosperity in all things"
(Ecclesiasticus 41:1); and, "There is no mighty man that hath power over
the spirit to retain the spirit; neither hath he power in the day of
death; and there is no discharge in that war; neither shall wickedness
deliver those that are given to it" [Ecc
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#008). Rather, wrath shall come upon
"the kings" of the earth, "and the great men and the rich men and the
mighty men, and" they shall will to "hide" themselves "from the Face of
Him that sitteth on the Throne and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the
great Day of His wrath is come: and who shall be able to stand?" [Rev
6:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#015).

The mighty men shall cry there bitterly - The prophet has spoken of
time, "the day of the Lord." He points out the more vividly the unseen
sight and place, "there;" so David says, "There they feared a fear" [Psa
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#005). He sees the place; he hears the
bitter cry. So near is it in fact; so close the connection of cause and
effect, of sin and punishment. There shall be a great and bitter cry,
when there shall be no place for repentance. It shall be a mighty cry,
but mighty in the bitterness of its distress. "Mighty men shall be
mightily tormented" (Wisd. 6:6), that is, those who have been mighty
against God, weak against Satan, and shall have used their might in his
service.

[Zephaniah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zep 1:15</span></span>

A day of wrath - In which all the wrath of Almighty God, which evil
angels and evil men have treasured to them for that day, shall be poured
out: "the" day of wrath, because then they shall be brought face to face
before the presence of God, but thenceforth they shall be cast out of it
forever.

A day of trouble and distress - Both words express, how anguish shall
narrow and hem them in; so that there shall be no escape; above them,
God displeased; below, the flames of Hell; around, devils to drag them
away, and Angels casting them forth "in bundles to burn them;" without,
"the books" which shall be opened;" and within, conscience leaving them
no escape.

A day of wasteness and desolation - In which all things shall return to
their primeval void, before "the Spirit of God brooded upon the face of
the waters," His presence being altogether withdrawn.

A day of darkness and gloominess - For sun and moon shall lose their
brightness, and no brightness from the Lamb shall shine upon the wicked,
but they shall be driven into "outer darkness."

A day of clouds and thick darkness - Hiding from them the Face of the
Sun of Righteousness, and covering Him, so that their "prayers should
not pass through" [Lam 3:44](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#044).

[Zephaniah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">zep 1:16</span></span>

A day of the trumpet and alarm - o that is, of the loud blast of the
trumpet, which sounds alarm and causes it. The word is especially the
shrill loud noise of the trumpet (for sacred purposes in Israel itself,
as ruling all the movements of the tabernacle and accompanying their
feasts); then also of the "battle cry." They had not listened to the
voice of the trumpet, as it called them to holy service; now they shall
hear "the voice of the Archangel and the trump of God" [Th1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016).

Against the high towers - Literally, "corners" , and so "corner-towers."
This peculiarity describes Jerusalem, whose walls "were made
artificially standing in a line curved inwards, so that the flanks of
assailants might be exposed." By this same name [Jdg
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#002); [Sa1
14:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#038); [Isa
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#013); [Zac
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#004) are called the mighty men and
chiefs of the people, who, humanly speaking, hold it together and
support it; on these chiefs in rebellion against God, whether devils or
evil men, shall punishment greatly fall.

[Zephaniah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">zep 1:17</span></span>

I will bring distress upon men - I will hem them in, in anguish on all
sides. God Himself shall meet them with His terrors, wherever they turn.
"I will hem them in, that they may find it so" .

That they shall walk like blind men - Utterly bereft of counsel, seeing
no more than the blind which way to turn, grasping blindly and franticly
at anything, and going on headlong to their own destruction. So God
forewarned them in the law; "Thou shalt grope at noon day, as the blind
gropeth in darkness" Jer. 10:29; and Job, of the wicked generally, "They
meet with the darkness in the day-time, and grope in the noon-day as in
the night" [Job 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#014); and, "They grope
in the dark without light, and He maketh them to stagger like a drunken
man" [Job 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#025); and Isaiah
foretelling of those times, "We grope for the wall, as the blind; and we
grope, as if we had no eyes; we stumble in the noon-day as in the night.
Because they have sinned against the Lord" [Isa
59:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#010), and so He hath turned their
wisdom into foolishness, and since they have despised Him, He hath made
them objects of contempt. "Their blood shall be poured out like dust"
[Sa1 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030), as abundant and as
valueless; utterly disregarded by Him, as Asaph complains, "their blood
have they shed like water" [Psa 79:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#003);
contemptible and disgusting as what is vilest; "their flesh as the
dung," refuse, decayed, putrefied, offensive, enriching by its decay the
land, which had been the scene of their luxuries and oppressions. Yet,
the most offensive disgusting physical corruption is but a faint image
of the defilement of sin. This punishment, in which the carrion remains
should be entombed only in the bowels of vultures and dogs, was
especially threatened to Jehoiakim; "He shall be buried with the burial
of an ass, dragged and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem" [Jer
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#019).

[Zephaniah 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">zep 1:18</span></span>

Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the
day of the Lord's wrath - Gain unjustly gotten was the cause of their
destruction. For, as Ezekiel closes the like description; "They shall
cast their silver into the streets, and their gold shall be removed;
their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day
of the wrath of the Lord; they shall not satisfy their souls nor fill
their bowels: "because it is the stumbling-block of their iniquity" [Eze
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#019). Much less shall any possession,
outward or inward, be of avail in the Great Day; since in death the rich
man's "pomp shall not follow him" [Psa
49:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#017), and every gift which he has
misused, whether of mind or spirit, even the knowledge of God without
doing His will, shall but increase damnation. "Sinners will then have
nothing but their sins."

Here the prophet uses images belonging more to the immediate
destruction; at the close the words again widen, and belong, in their
fullest literal sense, to the Day of Judgment. "The whole land," rather,
as at the beginning, "the whole earth shall be devoured by the fire of
His jelousy; for He shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that
dwell in the land:" rather, "He shall make an utter, yea altogether a
terriffic destruction of all the dwellers of the earth." What Nahum had
foretold of Nineveh , "He shall make the place thereof an utter
consumption," that Zephaniah foretells of all the inhabitants of the
world. For what is this, "the whole earth shall be devoured by the fire
of His jealousy," but what Peter says, "the earth also and the works
that are therein shall be burned up?" [Pe2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#013). And what is that he says, "He
shall make all the dwellers of the earth an utter, yea altogether a
hasty destruction," but a general judgment of all, who belong to the
world, whose home, citizenship, whose whole mind is in the world, not as
true Christians, who are strangers and pilgrims here, and their
"citizenship is in heaven?" [Heb
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013); [Phi
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020).

These God shall make an utter, terrific, speedy destruction, a living
death, so that they shall at once both be and not be; be, as continued
in being; not be, as having no life of God, but only a continued death
in misery. And this shall be through the jealousy of Almighty God, that
divine quality in Him, whereby He loves and wills to be loved, and
endures not those who give to others the love for which He gave so much
and which is so wholly due to Himself Alone. Augustine, Conf. i. 5. p.
3, Oxford Translation: "Thou demandest my love, and if I give it not,
art wroth with me, and threatenest me with grievous woes. Is it then a
slight woe to love Thee not?" What will be that anger, which is Infinite
Love, but which becomes, through man's sin, Hate?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zephaniah Chapter 2](zep002)

</div>
