[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Theosophy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Next](iu001) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### <span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

## THE VEIL OF ISIS.

### PART ONE.--SCIENCE.

### CHAPTER I.

> "Ego sum qui sum."--
>
> An axiom of Hermetic Philosophy.

> "We commenced research where modern conjecture closes its faithless
> wings. And with us, those were the common elements of science which
> the sages of to-day disdain as wild chimeras, or despair of as
> unfathomable mysteries."--**B**ULWER'S "**Z**ANONI."

THERE exists somewhere in this wide world an old Book--so very old that
our modern antiquarians might ponder over its pages an indefinite time,
and still not quite agree as to the nature of the fabric upon which it
is written. It is the only original copy now in existence. The most
ancient Hebrew document on occult learning--the *Siphra Dzeniouta--*was
compiled from it, and that at a time when the former was already
considered in the light of a literary relic. One of its illustrations
represents the Divine Essence emanating from **A**DAM <span
id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0) like a luminous arc proceeding to form a
circle; and then, having attained the highest point of its
circumference, the ineffable Glory bends back again, and returns to
earth, bringing a higher type of humanity in its vortex. As it
approaches nearer and nearer to our planet, the Emanation becomes more
and more shadowy, until upon touching the ground it is as black as
night.

A conviction, founded upon *seventy* thousand years of experience, <span
id="fr_1"></span>[\*\*](#fn_1) as they allege, has been entertained by
hermetic philosophers of all periods that matter has in time become,
through sin, more gross and dense than it was at man's first formation;
that, at the beginning, the

###### <span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

human body was of a half-ethereal nature; and that, before the fall,
mankind communed freely with the now unseen universes. But since that
time matter has become the formidable barrier between us and the world
of spirits. The oldest esoteric traditions also teach that, before the
mystic Adam, many races of human beings lived and died out, each giving
place in its turn to another. Were these precedent types more perfect?
Did any of them belong to the *winged* race of men mentioned by Plato in
*Phaedrus?* It is the special province of science to solve the problem.
The caves of France and the relics of the stone age afford a point at
which to begin.

As the cycle proceeded, man's eyes were more and more opened, until he
came to know "good and evil" as well as the Elohim themselves. Having
reached its summit, the cycle began to go downward. When the arc
attained a certain point which brought it parallel with the fixed line
of our terrestrial plane, the man was furnished by nature with "coats of
*skin,*" and the Lord God "clothed them."

This same belief in the pre-existence of a far more spiritual race than
the one to which we now belong can be traced back to the earliest
traditions of nearly every people. In the ancient Quiche manuscript,
published by Brasseur de Bourbourg--the *Popol Vuh--*the first men are
mentioned as a race that could reason and speak, whose sight was
unlimited, and who knew all things at once. According to Philo Judaeus,
the air is filled with an invisible host of spirits, some of whom are
free from evil and immortal, and others are pernicious and mortal. "From
the sons of **E**L we are descended, and sons of **E**L must we become
again." And the unequivocal statement of the anonymous Gnostic who wrote
*The Gospel according to John,* that "as many as received Him," *i.e.*,
who followed practically the esoteric doctrine of Jesus, would "become
the sons of God," points to the same belief. (i., 12.) "Know ye not, ye
are *gods?*" exclaimed the Master. Plato describes admirably in
*Phaedrus* the state in which man once was, and what he will become
again: before, and after the "loss of his wings"; when "he lived among
the gods, a god himself in the airy world." From the remotest periods
religious philosophies taught that the whole universe was filled with
divine and spiritual beings of divers races. From one of these evolved,
in the course of time, **A**DAM, the primitive man.

The Kalmucks and some tribes of Siberia also describe in their legends
earlier creations than our present race. These beings, they say, were
possessed of almost boundless knowledge, and in their audacity even
threatened rebellion against the Great Chief Spirit. To punish their
presumption and humble them, he imprisoned them *in bodies,* and

###### <span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

so shut in their senses. From these they can escape but through long
repentance, self-purification, and development. Their *Shamans,* they
think, occasionally enjoy the divine powers originally possessed by all
human beings.

The Astor Library of New York has recently been enriched by a facsimile
of an Egyptian Medical Treatise, written in the sixteenth century B.C.
(or, more precisely, 1552 B.C.), which, according to the commonly
received chronology, is the time when Moses was just twenty-one years of
age. The original is written upon the inner bark of *Cyperus papyrus,*
and has been pronounced by Professor Schenk, of Leipsig, not only
genuine, but also the most perfect ever seen. It consists of a single
sheet of yellow-brown papyrus of finest quality, three-tenths of a metre
wide, more than twenty metres long, and forming one roll divided into
one hundred and ten pages, all carefully numbered. It was purchased in
Egypt, in 1872-3, by the archaeologist Ebers, of "a well-to-do Arab from
Luxor." The New York *Tribune*, commenting upon the circumstance, says:
The papyrus "bears internal evidence of being one of the six *Hermetic
Books on Medicine,* named by Clement of Alexandria."

The editor further says: "At the time of Iamblichus, A.D. 363, the
priests of Egypt showed forty-two books which they attributed to Hermes
(Thuti). Of these, according to that author, thirty-six contained the
history of all human knowledge; the last six treated of anatomy, of
pathology, of affections of the eye, instruments of surgery, and of
medicines. <span id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2) The *Papyrus Ebers* is
indisputably one of these ancient Hermetic works."

If so clear a ray of light has been thrown upon ancient Egyptian
science, by the accidental (?) encounter of the German archaeologist
with one "well-to-do Arab" from Luxor, how can we know what sunshine may
be let in upon the dark crypts of history by an equally accidental
meeting between some other prosperous Egyptian and another enterprising
student of antiquity!

The discoveries of modern science do not disagree with the oldest
traditions which claim an incredible antiquity for our race. Within the
last few years geology, which previously had only conceded that man
could be traced as far back as the tertiary period, has found
unanswerable proofs that human existence antedates the last glaciation
of Europe--over 250,000 years! A hard nut, this, for Patristic Theology
to crack; but an accepted fact with the ancient philosophers.

###### <span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

Moreover, fossil implements have been exhumed together with human
remains, which show that man hunted in those remote times, and knew how
to build a fire. But the forward step has not yet been taken in this
search for the origin of the race; science comes to a dead stop, and
waits for future proofs. Unfortunately, anthropology and psychology
possess no Cuvier; neither geologists nor archaeologists are able to
construct, from the fragmentary bits hitherto discovered, the perfect
skeleton of the triple man--physical, intellectual, and spiritual.
Because the fossil implements of man are found to become more rough and
uncouth as geology penetrates deeper into the bowels of the earth, it
seems a proof to science that the closer we come to the origin of man,
the more savage and brute-like he must be. Strange logic! Does the
finding of the remains in the cave of Devon prove that there were no
contemporary races then who were highly civilized? When the present
population of the earth have disappeared, and some archaeologist
belonging to the "coming race" of the distant future shall excavate the
domestic implements of one of our Indian or Andaman Island tribes, will
he be justified in concluding that mankind in the nineteenth century was
"just emerging from the Stone Age"?

It has lately been the fashion to speak of "the untenable conceptions of
an uncultivated past." *As though it were possible to hide behind an
epigram the intellectual quarries out of which the reputations of so
many modern philosophers have been carved!* Just as Tyndall is ever
ready to disparage ancient philosophers--for a dressing-up of whose
ideas more than one distinguished scientist has derived honor and
credit--so the geologists seem more and more inclined to take for
granted that all of the archaic races were contemporaneously in a state
of dense barbarism. But not all of our best authorities agree in this
opinion. Some of the most eminent maintain exactly the reverse. Max
Muller, for instance, says: "Many things are still unintelligible to us,
and the hieroglyphic language of antiquity records but half of the
mind's unconscious intentions. Yet more and more the image of man, in
whatever clime we meet him, rises before us, noble and pure from the
very beginning; even his errors we learn to understand, even his dreams
we begin to interpret. As far as we can trace back the footsteps of man,
even on the lowest strata of history, we see the divine gift of a sound
and sober intellect belonging to him from the very first, and the idea
of a humanity emerging slowly from the depths of an animal brutality can
never be maintained again." <span id="fr_3"></span>[\*](#fn_3)

###### <span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

As it is claimed to be unphilosophical to inquire into first causes,
scientists now occupy themselves with considering their physical
effects. The field of scientific investigation is therefore bounded by
physical nature. When once its limits are reached, enquiry must stop,
and their work be recommenced. With all due respect to our learned men,
they are like the squirrel upon its revolving wheel, for they are doomed
to turn their "matter" over and over again. Science is a mighty potency,
and it is not for us pigmies to question her. But the "*scientists*" are
not themselves science embodied any more than the men of our planet are
the planet itself. We have neither the right to demand, nor power to
compel our "modern-day philosopher" to accept without challenge a
geographical description of the dark side of the moon. But, if in some
lunar cataclysm one of her inhabitants should be hurled thence into the
attraction of our atmosphere, and land, safe and sound, at Dr.
Carpenter's door, he would be indictable as recreant to professional
duty if he should fail to set the physical problem at rest.

For a man of science to refuse an opportunity to investigate any new
phenomenon, whether it comes to him in the shape of a man from the moon,
or a ghost from the Eddy homestead, is alike reprehensible.

Whether arrived at by the method of Aristotle, or that of Plato, we need
not stop to inquire; but it is a fact that both the inner and outer
natures of man are claimed to have been thoroughly understood by the
ancient andrologists. Notwithstanding the superficial hypotheses of
geologists, we are beginning to have almost daily proofs in
corroboration of the assertions of those philosophers.

They divided the interminable periods of human existence on this planet
into cycles, during each of which mankind gradually reached the
culminating point of highest civilization and gradually relapsed into
abject barbarism. To what eminence the race in its progress had several
times arrived may be feebly surmised by the wonderful monuments of old,
still visible, and the descriptions given by Herodotus of other marvels
of which no traces now remain. Even in his days the gigantic structures
of many pyramids and world-famous temples were but masses of ruins.
Scattered by the unrelenting hand of time, they are described by the
Father of History as "these venerable witnesses of the long bygone glory
of departed ancestors." He "shrinks from speaking of divine things," and
gives to posterity but an imperfect description from hearsay of some
marvellous subterranean chambers of the Labyrinth, where lay--and now
lie--concealed, the sacred remains of the King-Initiates.

We can judge, moreover, of the lofty civilization reached in some

###### <span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

periods of antiquity by the historical descriptions of the ages of the
Ptolemies, yet in that epoch the arts and sciences were considered to be
degenerating, and the secret of a number of the former had been already
lost. In the recent excavations of Mariette-Bey, at the foot of the
Pyramids, statues of wood and other relics have been exhumed, which show
that long before the period of the first dynasties the Egyptians had
attained to a refinement and perfection which is calculated to excite
the wonder of even the most ardent admirers of Grecian art. Bayard
Taylor describes these statues in one of his lectures, and tells us that
the beauty of the heads, ornamented with eyes of precious stones and
copper eyelids, is unsurpassed. Far below the stratum of sand in which
lay the remains gathered into the collections of Lepsius, Abbott, and
the British Museum, were found buried the tangible proofs of the
hermetic doctrine of cycles which has been already explained.

Dr. Schliemann, the enthusiastic Hellenist, has recently found, in his
excavations in the Troad, abundant evidences of the same gradual change
from barbarism to civilization, and from civilization to barbarism
again. Why then should we feel so reluctant to admit the possibility
that, if the antediluvians were so much better versed than ourselves in
certain sciences as to have been perfectly acquainted with important
arts, which we now term *lost,* they might have equally excelled in
psychological knowledge? Such a hypothesis must be considered as
reasonable as any other until some countervailing evidence shall be
discovered to destroy it.

Every true *savant* admits that in many respects human knowledge is yet
in its infancy. Can it be that our cycle began in ages comparatively
recent? *These cycles,* according to the Chaldean philosophy, *do not
embrace all mankind at one and the same time.* Professor Draper
partially corroborates this view by saying that the periods into which
geology has "found it convenient to divide the progress of man in
civilization are not abrupt epochs which hold good simultaneously for
the whole human race"; giving as an instance the "wandering Indians of
America," who "are only at the present moment emerging from the stone
age." Thus more than once scientific men have unwittingly confirmed the
testimony of the ancients.

Any Kabalist well acquainted with the Pythagorean system of numerals and
geometry can demonstrate that the metaphysical views of Plato were based
upon the strictest mathematical principles. "True mathematics," says the
*Magicon,* "is something with which all higher sciences are connected;
common mathematics is but a deceitful phantasmagoria, whose much-praised
infallibility only arises from this--that

###### <span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

materials, conditions, and references are made its foundation."
Scientists who believe they have adopted the Aristotelian method only
because they creep when they do not run from demonstrated particulars to
universals, glorify this method of inductive philosophy, and reject that
of Plato, which they treat as unsubstantial. Professor Draper laments
that such speculative mystics as Ammonius Saccas and Plotinus should
have taken the place "of the severe geometers of the old museum." <span
id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_4) He forgets that geometry, of all sciences
the only one which proceeds from universals to particulars, was
precisely the method employed by Plato in his philosophy. As long as
exact science confines its observations to physical conditions and
proceeds Aristotle-like, it certainly cannot fail. But notwithstanding
that the world of matter is boundless for us, it still is finite; and
thus materialism will turn forever in this vitiated circle, unable to
soar higher than the circumference will permit. The cosmological theory
of numerals which Pythagoras learned from the Egyptian hierophants, is
alone able to reconcile the two units, matter and spirit, and cause each
to demonstrate the other mathematically.

The sacred numbers of the universe in their esoteric combination solve
the great problem and explain the theory of radiation and the cycle of
the emanations. The lower orders before they develop into higher ones
must emanate from the higher spiritual ones, and when arrived at the
turning-point, be reabsorbed again into the infinite.

Physiology, like everything else in this world of constant evolution, is
subject to the cyclic revolution. As it now seems to be hardly emerging
from the shadows of the lower arc, so it may be one day proved to have
been at the highest point of the circumference of the circle far earlier
than the days of Pythagoras.

Mochus, the Sidonian, the physiologist and teacher of the science of
anatomy, flourished long before the Sage of Samos; and the latter
received the sacred instructions from his disciples and descendants.
Pythagoras, the pure philosopher, the deeply-versed in the profounder
phenomena of nature, the noble inheritor of the ancient lore, whose
great aim was to free the soul from the fetters of sense and force it to
realize its powers, must live eternally in human memory.

The impenetrable veil of arcane secrecy was thrown over the sciences
taught in the sanctuary. This is the cause of the modern depreciating of
the ancient philosophies. Even Plato and Philo Judaeus have been accused
by many a commentator of absurd inconsistencies, whereas the

###### <span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

design which underlies the maze of metaphysical contradictions so
perplexing to the reader of the *Timaeus,* is but too evident. But has
Plato ever been read understandingly by one of the expounders of the
classics? This is a question warranted by the criticisms to be found in
such authors as Stalbaum, Schleirmacher, Ficinus (Latin translation),
Heindorf, Sydenham, Buttmann, Taylor and Burges, to say nothing of
lesser authorities. The covert allusions of the Greek philosopher to
esoteric things have manifestly baffled these commentators to the last
degree. They not only with unblushing coolness suggest as to certain
difficult passages that another phraseology was evidently intended, but
they audaciously make the changes! The Orphic line:

> "Of the song, the order of the *sixth race* close" --

which can only be interpreted as a reference to the *sixth* race evolved
in the consecutive evolution of the spheres, <span
id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5) Burges says: ". . . was evidently taken
from a cosmogony *where man was feigned to be created the last.*" <span
id="fr_6"></span>[\*\*](#fn_6)*--*Ought not one who undertakes to edit
another's works at least understand what his author means?

Indeed, the ancient philosophers seem to be generally held, even by the
least prejudiced of our modern critics, to have lacked that profundity
and thorough knowledge in the exact sciences of which our century is so
boastful. It is even questioned whether they understood that basic
scientific principle: *ex nihilo nihil fit.* If they suspected the
indestructibility of matter at all,--say these commentators--it was not
in consequence of a firmly-established formula but only through an
intuitional reasoning and by analogy.

We hold to the contrary opinion. The speculations of these philosophers
upon matter were open to public criticism: but their teachings in regard
to spiritual things were profoundly esoteric. Being thus sworn to
secrecy and religious silence upon abstruse subjects involving the
relations of spirit and matter, they rivalled each other in their
ingenious methods for concealing their real opinions.

The doctrine of *Metempsychosis* has been abundantly ridiculed by men of
science and rejected by theologians, yet if it had been properly
understood in its application to the indestructibility of matter and the
immortality of spirit, it would have been perceived that it is a sublime
conception. Should we not first regard the subject from the stand-point

###### <span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

of the ancients before venturing to disparage its teachers? The solution
of the great problem of *eternity* belongs neither to religious
superstition nor to gross materialism. The harmony and mathematical
equiformity of the double evolution--spiritual and physical--are
elucidated only in the universal numerals of Pythagoras, who built his
system entirely upon the so-called "metrical speech" of the Hindu
*Vedas.* It is but lately that one of the most zealous Sanskrit
scholars, Martin Haug, undertook the translation of the *Aitareya
Brahmana* of the *Rig-Veda.* It had been till that time entirely
unknown; these explanations indicate beyond dispute the identity of the
Pythagorean and Brahmanical systems. In both, the esoteric significance
is derived from the number: in the former, from the mystic relation of
every number to everything intelligible to the human mind; in the
latter, from the number of syllables of which each verse in the
*Mantras* consists. Plato, the ardent disciple of Pythagoras, realized
it so fully as to maintain that the Dodecahedron was the geometrical
figure employed by the *Demiurgus* in constructing the universe. Some of
these figures had a peculiarly solemn significance. For instance *four,*
of which the Dodecahedron is the trine, was held sacred by the
Pythagoreans. It is the perfect square, and neither of the bounding
lines exceeds the other in length, by a single point. It is the emblem
of moral justice and divine equity geometrically expressed. All the
powers and great symphonies of physical and spiritual nature lie
inscribed within the perfect square; and the ineffable name of Him,
which name otherwise, would remain unutterable, was replaced by this
sacred number **4** the most binding and solemn oath with the ancient
mystics--the

Tetractys.

If the Pythagorean metempsychosis should be thoroughly explained and
compared with the modern theory of evolution, it would be found to
supply every "missing link" in the chain of the latter. But who of our
scientists would consent to lose his precious time over the vagaries of
the ancients. Notwithstanding proofs to the contrary, they not only deny
that the nations of the archaic periods, but even the ancient
philosophers had any positive knowledge of the Heliocentric system. The
"Venerable Bedes," the Augustines and Lactantii appear to have
smothered, with their dogmatic ignorance, all faith in the more ancient
theologists of the pre-Christian centuries. But now philology and a
closer acquaintance with Sanskrit literature have partially enabled us
to vindicate them from these unmerited imputations. In the *Vedas,* for
instance, we find positive proof that so long ago as 2000 B.C., the
Hindu sages and scholars must have been acquainted with the rotundity of
our globe and the Heliocentric system. Hence, Pythagoras and Plato knew
well this astronomical truth; for Pythagoras obtained his knowledge

###### <span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

in India, or from men who had been there, and Plato faithfully echoed
his teachings. We will quote two passages from the

Aitareya Brahmana:

In the "*Serpent-Mantra,*" <span id="fr_7"></span>[\*](#fn_7) the
*Brahmana* declares as follows: that this *Mantra* is that one which was
seen by the Queen of the Serpents, *Sarpa-rajni;* because the earth
(*iyam*) is the Queen of the Serpents, as she is the mother and queen of
all that moves (*sarpat*)*.* In the beginning she (the earth) was but
one head (round), without hair (*bald*)*, i.e.*, without vegetation. She
then perceived this *Mantra* which confers upon him who knows it, the
power of assuming any form which he might desire. She "pronounced the
*Mantra,*" *i.e.,* sacrificed to the gods; and, in consequence,
immediately obtained a motley appearance; she became variegated, and
able to produce any form she might like, *changing one form into
another.* This *Mantra* begins with the words: "*Ayam gauh pris'nir
akramit*" (x., 189).

The description of the earth in the shape of a *round* and *bald* head,
which was *soft* at first, and became hard only from being breathed upon
by the god Vayu, the lord of the air, forcibly suggests the idea that
the authors of the sacred Vedic books knew the earth to be *round* or
spherical; moreover, that it had been a *gelatinous* mass at first,
which gradually cooled off under the influence of the air and time. So
much for their knowledge about our globe's sphericity; and now we will
present the testimony upon which we base our assertion, that the Hindus
were perfectly acquainted with the Heliocentric system, at least 2000
years B.C.

In the same treatise the *Hotar,* (priest)*,* is taught how the
*Shastras* should be repeated, and how the phenomena of sunrise and
sunset are to be explained. It says: "The Agnishtoma is that one (that
god) who burns. The sun *never sets nor rises.* When people think the
sun is setting, it is *not so;* they are mistaken. For after having
arrived at the end of the day, it produces two opposite effects, making
night to what is below, and day to what is on the other side. When they
(the people) believe it rises in the morning, the sun only does thus:
having reached the end of the night, it makes itself produce two
opposite effects, making day to what is below, and night to what is on
the other side. In fact the sun never sets; nor does it set for him who
has such a knowledge. . . ." <span id="fr_8"></span>[\*\*](#fn_8)

This sentence is so conclusive, that even the translator of the
*Rig-Veda,* Dr. Haug, was forced to remark it. He says this passage
contains "the *denial* of the existence of sunrise and sunset," and that
the author supposes the sun "to remain always in its high
position." <span id="fr_9"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_9)

###### <span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

In one of the earliest *Nivids,* Rishi Kutsa, a Hindu sage of the
remotest antiquity, explains the allegory of the first laws given to the
celestial bodies. For doing "what she ought not to do," Anahit (Anaitis
or Nana, the Persian Venus), representing the earth in the legend, is
sentenced to turn round the sun. The *Sattras,* or sacrificial
sessions <span id="fr_10"></span>[\*](#fn_10) prove undoubtedly that so
early as in the eighteenth or twentieth century B.C., the Hindus had
made considerable progress in astronomical science. The *Sattras* lasted
one year, and were "nothing but an imitation of the sun's yearly course.
They were divided, says Haug, into two distinct parts, each consisting
of six months of thirty days each; in the midst of both was the
*Vishuvan* (equator or central day), cutting the whole *Sattras* into
two halves, etc." <span id="fr_11"></span>[\*\*](#fn_11) This scholar,
although he ascribes the composition of the bulk of the *Brahmanas* to
the period 1400-1200 B.C., is of opinion that the oldest of the hymns
may be placed at the very commencement of Vedic literature, between the
years 2400-2000, B.C. He finds no reason for considering the *Vedas*
less ancient than the sacred books of the Chinese. As the *Shu-King* or
*Book of History,* and the sacrificial songs of the *Shi-King,* or *Book
of Odes,* have been proved to have an antiquity as early as 2200, B.C.,
our philologists may yet be compelled before long to acknowledge, that
in astronomical knowledge, the antediluvian Hindus were their masters.

At all events, there are facts which prove that certain astronomical
calculations were as correct with the Chaldeans in the days of Julius
Caesar as they are now. When the calendar was reformed by the Conqueror,
the civil year was found to correspond so little with the seasons, that
summer had merged into the autumn months, and the autumn months into
full winter. It was Sosigenes, the Chaldean astronomer, who restored
order into the confusion, by putting back the 25th of March ninety days,
thus making it correspond with the vernal equinox; and it was Sosigenes,
again, who fixed the lengths of the months

as they now remain.

In America, it was found by the Montezuman army, that the calendar of
the Aztecs gave an equal number of days and weeks to each month. The
extreme accuracy of their astronomical calculations was so great, that
*no error* has been discovered in their reckoning by subsequent
verifications; while the Europeans, who landed in Mexico in 1519, were,
by the Julian calendar, nearly eleven days in advance of the exact time.

It is to the priceless and accurate translations of the Vedic Books, and
to the personal researches of Dr. Haug, that we are indebted for the

###### <span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

corroboration of the claims of the hermetic philosophers. That the
period of Zarathustra Spitama (Zoroaster) was of untold antiquity, can
be easily proved. The *Brahmanas,* to which Haug ascribes four thousand
years, describe the religious contest between the ancient Hindus, who
lived in the pre-Vedic period, and the Iranians. The battles between the
*Devas* and the *Asuras--*the former representing the *Hindus* and the
latter the Iranians--are described at length in the sacred books. As the
Iranian prophet was the first to raise himself against what he called
the "idolatry" of the Brahmans, and to designate them as the *Devas*
(devils), how far back must then have been this religious crisis?

"This contest," answers Dr. Haug, "must have appeared to the authors of
the *Brahmanas* as old as the feats of King Arthur appear to English
writers of the nineteenth century."

There was not a philosopher of any notoriety who did not hold to this
doctrine of metempsychosis, as taught by the Brahmans, Buddhists, and
later by the Pythagoreans, in its esoteric sense, whether he expressed
it more or less intelligibly. Origen and Clemens Alexandrinus, Synesius
and Chalcidius, all believed in it; and the Gnostics, who are
unhesitatingly proclaimed by history as a body of the most refined,
learned, and enlightened men, <span id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12) were
all believers in metempsychosis. Socrates entertained opinions identical
with those of Pythagoras; and both, as the penalty of their divine
philosophy, were put to a violent death. The rabble has been the same in
all ages. Materialism has been, and will ever be blind to spiritual
truths. These philosophers held, with the Hindus, that God had infused
into matter a portion of his own Divine Spirit, which animates and moves
every particle. They taught that men have *two souls,* of separate and
quite different natures: the one perishable--the Astral Soul, or the
inner, fluidic body--the other incorruptible and immortal--the
*Augoeides,* or portion of the Divine Spirit; that the mortal or Astral
Soul perishes at each gradual change at the threshold of every new
sphere, becoming with every transmigration more purified. The astral
man, intangible and invisible as he might be to our mortal, earthly
senses, is still constituted of matter, though sublimated. Aristotle,
notwithstanding that for political reasons of his own he maintained a
prudent silence as to certain esoteric matters, expressed very clearly
his opinion on the subject. It was his belief that human souls are
emanations of God, that are finally re-absorbed into Divinity. Zeno, the
founder of the Stoics, taught that there are "two eternal qualities
throughout nature: the one active, or male; the other passive, or
female: that the

###### <span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

former is pure, subtile ether, or Divine Spirit; the other entirely
inert in itself till united with the active principle. That the Divine
Spirit acting upon matter produced fire, water, earth, and air; and that
it is the sole efficient principle by which all nature is moved. The
Stoics, like the Hindu sages, believed in the final absorption. St.
Justin believed in the emanation of these souls from Divinity, and
Tatian, the Assyrian, his disciple, declared that "man was as immortal
as God himself." <span id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13)

That profoundly significant verse of the *Genesis,* "And to every beast
of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to everything that
creepeth upon the earth, I gave *a living soul,* . . . ." should arrest
the attention of every Hebrew scholar capable of reading the Scripture
in its original, instead of following the erroneous translation, in
which the phrase reads, "wherein *there is life*." <span
id="fr_14"></span>[\*\*](#fn_14)

From the first to the last chapters, the translators of the Jewish
Sacred Books misconstrued this meaning. They have even changed the
spelling of the name of God, as Sir W. Drummond proves. Thus *El*, if
written correctly, would read *Al*, for it stands in the original
אל--Al, and, according to Higgins, this word means the god Mithra, the
*Sun,* the preserver and savior. Sir W. Drummond shows that *Beth-El*
means the House of the *Sun* in its literal translation, and not of God.
"*El*, in the composition of these Canaanite names, does not signify
*Deus,* but *Sol*." <span id="fr_15"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_15) Thus
Theology has disfigured ancient Theosophy, and Science ancient
Philosophy. <span id="fr_16"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_16)

For lack of comprehension of this great philosophical principle, the
methods of modern science, however exact, must end in nullity. In no one
branch can it demonstrate the origin and ultimate of things. Instead of
tracing the effect from its primal source, its progress is the reverse.
Its higher types, as it teaches, are all evolved from antecedent lower
ones. It starts from the bottom of the cycle, led on step by step in the
great labyrinth of nature by a thread of matter. As soon as this breaks
and the clue is lost, it recoils in affright from the Incomprehensible,
and

###### <span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

confesses itself *powerless.* Not so did Plato and his disciples. With
him *the lower types were but the concrete images of the higher abstract
ones.* The soul, which is immortal, has an arithmetical, as the body has
a geometrical, beginning. This beginning, as the reflection of the great
universal **A**RCHÆUS, is self-moving, and from the centre diffuses
itself over the whole body of the microcosm.

It was the sad perception of this truth that made Tyndall confess how
powerless is science, even over the world of matter. "The first
marshalling of the atoms, on which all subsequent action depends,
baffles a keener power than that of the microscope." "Through pure
excess of complexity, and long before observation can have any voice in
the matter, the most highly trained intellect, the most refined and
disciplined imagination, *retires in bewilderment from the contemplation
of the problem*. We are struck dumb by an astonishment which no
microscope can relieve, doubting not only the power of our instrument,
but even whether we ourselves possess the intellectual elements which
will ever enable us to grapple with the ultimate structural energies of
nature."

The fundamental geometrical figure of the Kabala--that figure which
tradition and the esoteric doctrines tell us was given by the Deity
itself to Moses on Mount Sinai <span
id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_17)--contains in its grandiose, because
simple combination, the key to the universal problem. This figure
contains in itself all the others. For those who are able to master it,
there is no need to exercise imagination. No earthly microscope can be
compared with the keenness of the spiritual perception.

And even for those who are unacquainted with the GREAT SCIENCE, the
description given by a well-trained child-psychometer of the genesis of
a grain, a fragment of crystal, or any other object--is worth all the
telescopes and microscopes of "exact science."

There may be more truth in the adventurous pangenesis of Darwin--whom
Tyndall calls a "soaring speculator"--than in the cautious, line-bound
hypothesis of the latter; who, in common with other thinkers of his
class, surrounds his imagination "by the firm frontiers of reason." The
theory of a microscopic germ which contains in itself "a world of minor
germs," soars in one sense at least into the infinite. It oversteps the
world of matter, and begins unconsciously busying itself in the world of
spirit.

If we accept Darwin's theory of the development of species, we find that
his starting-point is placed in front of an open door. We are at liberty
with him, to either remain within, or cross the threshold, beyond

###### <span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

which lies the limitless and the incomprehensible, or rather the
*Unutterable.* If our mortal language is inadequate to express what our
spirit dimly foresees in the great "*Beyond*"*--*while on this earth--it
*must* realize it at some point in the timeless Eternity.

Not so with Professor Huxley's theory of the "Physical Basis of Life."
Regardless of the formidable majority of "nays" from his German
brother-scientists, he creates a universal *protoplasm* and appoints its
cells to become henceforth the sacred founts of the principle of all
*life.* By making the latter identical in living man, "dead mutton," a
nettle-sting, and a lobster; by shutting in, in the molecular cell of
the protoplasm, the life-principle, and by shutting out from it the
divine influx which comes with subsequent evolution, he closes every
door against any possible escape. Like an able tactician he converts his
"*laws* and *facts*" into sentries whom he causes to mount guard over
every issue. The standard under which he rallies them is inscribed with
the word "necessity"; but hardly is it unfurled when he mocks the legend
and calls it "an empty shadow of my own imagination." <span
id="fr_18"></span>[\*](#fn_18)

The fundamental doctrines of spiritualism, he says, "lie outside the
limits of philosophical inquiry." We will be bold enough to contradict
this assertion, and say that they lie a great deal more within such
inquiry than Mr. Huxley's protoplasm. Insomuch that they present evident
and palpable facts of the existence of *spirit,* and the protoplasmic
cells, *once dead*, present none whatever of being the originators or
the bases of life, as this one of the few "foremost thinkers of the day"
wants us to believe. <span id="fr_19"></span>[\*\*](#fn_19)

The ancient Kabalist rested upon no hypothesis till he could lay its
basis upon the firm rock of recorded experiment.

But the too great dependence upon physical facts led to a growth of
materialism and a decadence of spirituality and faith. At the time of
Aristotle, this was the prevailing tendency of thought. And though the
Delphic commandment was not as yet completely eliminated from Grecian
thought; and some philosophers still held that "in order to know what
man *is,* we ought to know what man *was*"--still materialism had
already begun to gnaw at the root of faith. The Mysteries themselves had
degenerated in a very great degree into mere priestly speculations and
religious fraud. Few were the true adepts and initiates, the heirs and
descendants of those who had been dispersed by the conquering swords of
various invaders of Old Egypt.

The time predicted by the great Hermes in his dialogue with
&Ælig;sculapius

###### <span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

had indeed come; the time when impious foreigners would accuse Egypt of
adoring monsters, and naught but the letters engraved in stone upon her
monuments would survive--enigmas incredible to posterity. Their sacred
scribes and hierophants were wanderers upon the face of the earth.
Obliged from fear of a profanation of the sacred mysteries to seek
refuge among the Hermetic fraternities--known later as the
*Essenes--*their esoteric knowledge was buried deeper than ever. The
triumphant brand of Aristotle's pupil swept away from his path of
conquest every vestige of a once pure religion, and Aristotle himself,
the type and child of his epoch, though instructed in the secret science
of the Egyptians, knew but little of this crowning result of millenniums
of esoteric studies.

As well as those who lived in the days of the Psammetics, our
present-day philosophers "lift the Veil of Isis"--for Isis is but the
symbol of nature. But, they see only her physical forms. The soul within
escapes their view; and the Divine Mother has no answer for them. There
are anatomists, who, uncovering to sight no indwelling spirit under the
layers of muscles, the network of nerves, or the cineritious matter,
which they lift with the point of the scalpel, assert that man has no
soul. Such are as purblind in sophistry as the student, who, confining
his research to the cold letter of the Kabala, dares say it has no
vivifying spirit. To see the true man who once inhabited the subject
which lies before him, on the dissecting table, the surgeon must use
other eyes than those of his body. So, the glorious truth covered up in
the hieratic writings of the ancient papyri can be revealed only to him
who possesses the faculty of intuition--which, if we call reason the eye
of the mind, may be defined as the eye of the soul.

Our modern science acknowledges a Supreme Power, an Invisible Principle,
but denies a Supreme Being, or Personal God. <span
id="fr_20"></span>[\*](#fn_20) Logically, the difference between the two
might be questioned; for in this case *the* *Power and the Being are
identical.* Human reason can hardly imagine to itself an Intelligent
Supreme Power without associating it with the idea of an Intelligent
Being. The masses can never be expected to have a clear conception of
the omnipotence and omnipresence of a supreme God, without investing
with those attributes a gigantic projection of their own personality.
But the kabalists have never looked upon the invisible **E**N-**S**OPH
otherwise than as a

Power.

So far our modern positivists have been anticipated by thousands of
ages, in their cautious philosophy. What the hermetic adept claims to
demonstrate is, that simple common sense precludes the possibility that

###### <span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

the universe is the result of mere chance. Such an idea appears to him
more absurd than to think that the problems of Euclid were unconsciously
formed by a monkey playing with geometrical figures.

Very few Christians understand, if indeed they know anything at all, of
the Jewish Theology. The *Talmud* is the darkest of enigmas even for
most Jews, while those Hebrew scholars who do comprehend it do not boast
of their knowledge. Their kabalistic books are still less understood by
them; for in our days more Christian than Jewish students are engrossed
in the elimination of their great truths. How much less is definitely
known of the Oriental, or the universal Kabala! Its adepts are few; but
these heirs elect of the sages who first discovered "the starry truths
which shone on the great Shemaia of the Chaldean lore" <span
id="fr_21"></span>[\*](#fn_21) have solved the "absolute" and are now
resting from their grand labor. They cannot go beyond that which is
given to mortals of this earth to know; and no one, not even these
elect, can trespass beyond the line drawn by the finger of the Divinity
itself. Travellers have met these adepts on the shores of the sacred
Ganges, brushed against them in the silent ruins of Thebes, and in the
mysterious deserted chambers of Luxor. Within the halls upon whose blue
and golden vaults the weird signs attract attention, but whose secret
meaning is never penetrated by the idle gazers, they have been seen but
seldom recognized. Historical memoirs have recorded their presence in
the brilliantly illuminated *salons* of European aristocracy. They have
been encountered again on the arid and desolate plains of the Great
Sahara, as in the caves of Elephanta. They may be found everywhere, but
make themselves known only to those who have devoted their lives to
unselfish study, and are not likely to turn back.

Maimonides, the great Jewish theologian and historian, who at one time
was almost deified by his countrymen and afterward treated as a heretic,
remarks, that the more absurd and void of sense the *Talmud* seems the
more sublime is the secret meaning. This learned man has successfully
demonstrated that the Chaldean Magic, the science of Moses and other
learned thaumaturgists was wholly based on an extensive knowledge of the
various and now forgotten branches of natural science. Thoroughly
acquainted with all the resources of the vegetable, animal, and mineral
kingdoms, experts in occult chemistry and physics, psychologists as well
as physiologists, why wonder that the graduates or adepts instructed in
the mysterious sanctuaries of the temples, could perform wonders, which
even in our days of enlightenment would appear supernatural?

###### <span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

It is an insult to human nature to brand magic and the occult science
with the name of imposture. To believe that for so many thousands of
years, one-half of mankind practiced deception and fraud on the other
half, is equivalent to saying that the human race was composed only of
knaves and incurable idiots. Where is the country in which magic was not
practised? At what age was it wholly forgotten?

In the oldest documents now in our possession--the *Vedas* and the older
laws of Manu--we find many magical rites practiced and permitted by the
Brahmans. <span id="fr_22"></span>[\*](#fn_22) Thibet, Japan and China
teach in the present age that which was taught by the oldest Chaldeans.
The clergy of these respective countries, prove moreover what they
teach, namely: that the practice of moral and physical purity, and of
certain austerities, developes the vital soulpower of self-illumination.
Affording to man the control over his own immortal spirit, it gives him
truly magical powers over the elementary spirits inferior to himself. In
the West we find magic of as high an antiquity as in the East. The
Druids of Great Britain practised it in the silent crypts of their deep
caves; and Pliny devotes many a chapter to the "wisdom" <span
id="fr_23"></span>[\*\*](#fn_23) of the leaders of the Celts. The
Semothees,--the Druids of the Gauls, expounded the physical as well as
the spiritual sciences. They taught the secrets of the universe, the
harmonious progress of the heavenly bodies, the formation of the earth,
and above all--the immortality of the soul. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_24) Into their sacred groves--natural
academies built by the hand of the Invisible Architect--the initiates
assembled at the still hour of midnight to learn about what man once was
and what he will be. <span id="fr_25"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_25) They
needed no artificial illumination, nor life-drawing gas, to light up
their temples, for the chaste goddess of night beamed her most silvery
rays on their oak-crowned heads; and their white-robed sacred bards knew
how to converse with the solitary queen of the starry vault. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_26)

On the dead soil of the long by-gone past stand their sacred oaks, now
dried up and stripped of their spiritual meaning by the venomous breath
of materialism. But for the student of occult learning, their vegetation
is still as verdant and luxuriant, and as full of deep and sacred
truths, as at that hour when the arch-druid performed his magical cures,
and waving the branch of mistletoe, severed with his golden sickle the
green bough from its mother oak-tree. *Magic is as old as man.* It is

###### <span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

as impossible to name the time when it sprang into existence as to
indicate on what day the first man himself was born. Whenever a writer
has started with the idea of connecting its first foundation in a
country with some historical character, further research has proved his
views groundless. Odin, the Scandinavian priest and monarch, was thought
by many to have originated the practice of magic some seventy years B.C.
But it was easily demonstrated that the mysterious rites of the
priestesses called *Voilers, Valas,* were greatly anterior to his
age. <span id="fr_27"></span>[\*](#fn_27) Some modern authors were bent
on proving that Zoroaster was the founder of magic, because he was the
founder of the Magian religion. Ammianus Marcellinus, Arnobius, Pliny,
and other ancient historians demonstrated conclusively that he was but a
reformer of Magic as practiced by the Chaldeans and Egyptians. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[\*\*](#fn_28)

The greatest teachers of divinity agree that nearly all ancient books
were written symbolically and in a language intelligible only to the
initiated. The biographical sketch of Apollonius of Tyana affords an
example. As every Kabalist knows, it embraces the whole of the Hermetic
philosophy, being a counterpart in many respects of the traditions left
us of King Solomon. It reads like a fairy story, but, as in the case of
the latter, sometimes facts and historical events are presented to the
world under the colors of a fiction. The journey to India represents
allegorically the trials of a neophyte. His long discourses with the
Brahmans, their sage advice, and the dialogues with the Corinthian
Menippus would, if interpreted, give the esoteric catechism. His visit
to the empire of the wise men, and interview with their king Hiarchas,
the oracle of Amphiaraus, explain symbolically many of the secret dogmas
of Hermes. They would disclose, if understood, some of the most
important secrets of nature. Eliphas Levi points out the great
resemblance which exists between King Hiarchas and the fabulous Hiram,
of whom Solomon procured the cedars of Lebanon and the gold of Ophir. We
would like to know whether modern Masons, even "Grand Lecturers" and the
most intelligent craftsmen belonging to important lodges, understand who
the *Hiram* is whose death they combine together to avenge?

Putting aside the purely metaphysical teachings of the *Kabala,* if one
would devote himself but to physical occultism, to the so-called branch
of therapeutics, the results might benefit some of our modern sciences;
such as chemistry and medicine. Says Professor Draper: "Sometimes, not

###### <span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

without surprise, we meet with ideas *which we flatter ourselves
originated in our own times.*" This remark, uttered in relation to the
scientific writings of the Saracens, would apply still better to the
more secret *Treatises* of the ancients. Modern medicine, while it has
gained largely in anatomy, physiology, and pathology, and even in
therapeutics, has lost immensely by its narrowness of spirit, its rigid
materialism, its sectarian dogmatism. One school in its purblindness
sternly ignores whatever is developed by other schools; and all unite in
ignoring every grand conception of man or nature, developed by
Mesmerism, or by American experiments on the brain--every principle
which does not conform to a stolid materialism. It would require a
convocation of the hostile physicians of the several different schools
to bring together what is now known of medical science, and it too often
happens that after the best practitioners have vainly exhausted their
art upon a patient, a mesmerist or a "healing medium" will effect a
cure! The explorers of old medical literature, from the time of
Hippocrates to that of Paracelsus and Van Helmont, will find a vast
number of well-attested physiological and psychological facts and of
measures or medicines for healing the sick which modern physicians
superciliously refuse to employ. <span id="fr_29"></span>[\*](#fn_29)
Even with respect to surgery, modern practitioners have humbly and
publicly confessed the total impossibility of their approximating to
anything like the marvellous skill displayed in the art of bandaging by
ancient Egyptians. The many hundred yards of ligature enveloping a mummy
from its ears down to every separate toe, were studied by the chief
surgical operators in Paris, and, notwithstanding that the models were
before their eyes, they were unable to accomplish anything like it.

In the Abbott Egyptological collection, in New York City, may be seen
numerous evidences of the skill of the ancients in various handicrafts;
among others the art of lace-making; and, as it could hardly be expected
but that the signs of woman's vanity should go side by side with

###### <span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

those of man's strength, there are also specimens of artificial hair,
and gold ornaments of different kinds. The New York *Tribune*, reviewing
the contents of the *Ebers Papyrus,* says:--"Verily, there is no new
thing under the sun. . . . Chapters 65, 66, 79, and 89 show that hair
invigorators, hair dyes, pain-killers, and flea-powders were desiderata
3,400 years ago."

How few of our recent alleged discoveries are in reality new, and how
many belong to the ancients, is again most fairly and eloquently though
but in part stated by our eminent philosophical writer, Professor John
W. Draper. His *Conflict between Religion and Science--*a great book
with a very bad title--swarms with such facts. At page 13, he cites a
few of the achievements of ancient philosophers, which excited the
admiration of Greece. In Babylon was a series of Chaldean astronomical
observations, ranging back through nineteen hundred and three years,
which Callisthenes sent to Aristotle. Ptolemy, the Egyptian
king-astronomer possessed a Babylonian record of eclipses going back
seven hundred and forty-seven years before our era. As Prof. Draper
truly remarks: "Long-continued and close observations were necessary
before some of these astronomical results that have reached our times
could have been ascertained. Thus, the Babylonians had fixed the length
of a tropical year within twenty-five seconds of the truth; their
estimate of the sidereal year was barely two minutes in excess. They had
detected the precession of the equinoxes. They knew the causes of
eclipses, and, by the aid of their cycle, called *saros,* could predict
them. Their estimate of the value of that cycle, which is more than
6,585 days, was within nineteen and a half minutes of the truth."

"Such facts furnish incontrovertible proof of the patience and skill
with which astronomy had been cultivated in Mesopotamia, and that, with
very inadequate instrumental means, it had reached no inconsiderable
perfection. These old observers had made a catalogue of the stars, had
divided the zodiac into twelve signs; they had parted the day into
twelve hours, the night into twelve. They had, as Aristotle says, for a
long time devoted themselves to observations of star-occultations by the
moon. They had correct views of the structure of the solar system, and
knew the order of emplacement of the planets. They constructed sundials,
clepsydras, astrolabes, gnomons."

Speaking of the world of eternal truths that lies "within the world of
transient delusions and unrealities," Professor Draper says: "That world
is not to be discovered through the vain traditions that have brought
down to us the opinion of men who lived in the morning of civilization,
nor in the *dreams of mystics* who thought that they were inspired. It
is to be

###### <span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

discovered by the investigations *of geometry, and by the practical
interrogations of nature.*"

Precisely. The issue could not be better stated. This eloquent writer
tells us a profound truth. He does not, however, tell us *the whole*
truth, because he does not know it. He has not described the nature or
extent of the knowledge imparted in the Mysteries. No subsequent people
has been so proficient in geometry as the builders of the Pyramids and
other Titanic monuments, antediluvian and postdiluvian. On the other
hand, none has ever equalled them in the practical interrogation of
nature.

An undeniable proof of this is the significance of their countless
symbols. *Every one of these symbols is an embodied idea,--combining the
conception of the Divine Invisible with the earthly and visible.* The
former is derived from the latter strictly through analogy according to
the hermetic formula--"as below, so it is above." Their symbols show
great knowledge of natural sciences and a practical study of cosmical
power.

As to practical results to be obtained by "the investigations of
geometry," very fortunately for students who are coming upon the stage
of action, we are no longer forced to content ourselves with mere
conjectures. In our own times, an American, Mr. George H. Felt, of New
York, who, if he continues as he has begun, may one day be recognized as
the greatest geometer of the age, has been enabled, by the sole help of
the premises established by the ancient Egyptians, to arrive at results
which we will give in his own language. "Firstly," says Mr. Felt, "the
fundamental diagram to which all science of elementary geometry, both
plane and solid, is referable; to produce arithmetical systems of
proportion in a geometrical manner; to identify this figure with all the
remains of architecture and sculpture, in all which it had been followed
in a marvellously exact manner; to determine that the Egyptians had used
it as the basis of all their astronomical calculations, on which their
religious symbolism was almost entirely founded; to find its traces
among all the remnants of art and architecture of the Greeks; to
discover its traces so strongly among the Jewish sacred records, as to
prove conclusively that it was founded thereon; to find that the whole
system had been discovered by the Egyptians after researches of tens of
thousands of years into the laws of nature, and that it might truly be
called the science of the Universe." Further it enabled him "to
determine with precision problems in physiology heretofore only
surmised; to first develop such a Masonic philosophy as showed it to be
conclusively the first science and religion, as it will be the last";
and we may add, lastly, to prove by ocular demonstrations that the
Egyptian sculptors and architects obtained

###### <span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

the models for the quaint figures which adorn the facades and vestibules
of their temples, not in the disordered fantasies of their own brains,
but from the "viewless races of the air," and other kingdoms of nature,
whom he, like them, *claims* to make visible by resort to their own
chemical and kabalistical processes.

Schweigger proves that the symbols of all the mythologies have a
scientific foundation and substance. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[\*](#fn_30) It is only through recent discoveries of
the physical electro-magnetical powers of nature that such experts in
Mesmerism as Ennemoser, Schweigger and Bart, in Germany, Baron Du Potet
and Regazzoni, in France and Italy, were enabled to trace with almost
faultless accuracy the true relation which each *Theomythos* bore to
some one of these powers. The Idaeic finger, which had such importance
in the magic art of healing, means an iron finger, which is attracted
and repulsed in turn by magnetic, natural forces. It produced, in
Samothrace, wonders of healing by restoring affected organs to their
normal condition.

Bart goes deeper than Schweigger into the significations of the old
myths, and studies the subject from both its spiritual and physical
aspects. He treats at length of the Phrygian Dactyls, those "magicians
and exorcists of sickness," and of the Cabeirian Theurgists. He says:
"While we treat of the close union of the Dactyls and magnetic forces,
we are not necessarily confined to the magnetic stone, and our views of
nature but take a glance at magnetism in its whole meaning. Then it is
clear how the initiated, who called themselves *Dactyls,* created
astonishment in the people through their magic arts, working as they
did, miracles of a healing nature. To this united themselves many other
things which the priesthood of antiquity was wont to practice; the
cultivation of the land and of morals, the advancement of art and
science, mysteries, and secret consecrations. All this was done by the
priestly Cabeirians, and *wherefore not guided and supported by the
mysterious spirits of nature*?" <span id="fr_31"></span>[\*\*](#fn_31)
Schweigger is of the same opinion, and demonstrates that the phenomena
of ancient Theurgy were produced by magnetic powers "under the guidance
of spirits."

Despite their apparent Polytheism, the ancients--those of the educated
class at all events--were entirely monotheistical; and this, too, ages
upon ages before the days of Moses. In the *Ebers Papyrus* this fact is
shown conclusively in the following words, translated from the first
four lines of Plate I.: "I came from Heliopolis with the great ones from

###### <span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

Het-aat, the Lords of Protection, the masters of eternity and salvation.
I came from Sais with the Mother-goddesses, who extended to me
protection. *The Lord of the Universe* told me how to free the gods from
all murderous diseases." *Eminent men were called gods by the ancients.*
The deification of mortal men and supposititious gods is no more a proof
against their monotheism than the monument-building of modern
Christians, who erect statues to their heroes, is proof of their
polytheism. Americans of the present century would consider it absurd in
their posterity 3,000 years hence to classify them as idolaters for
having built statues to their god Washington. So shrouded in mystery was
the Hermetic Philosophy that Volney asserted that the ancient peoples
worshipped their gross material symbols as divine in themselves; whereas
these were only considered as representing esoteric principles. Dupuis,
also, after devoting many years of study to the problem, mistook the
symbolic circle, and attributed their religion solely to astronomy.
Eberhart (*Berliner Monatschrift*) and many other German writers of the
last and present centuries, dispose of magic most unceremoniously, and
think it due to the Platonic mythos of the *Timaeus.* But how, without
possessing a knowledge of the mysteries, was it possible for these men
or any others not endowed with the finer intuition of a Champollion, to
discover the esoteric half of that which was concealed, behind the veil
of Isis, from all except the adepts?

The merit of Champollion as an Egyptologist none will question. He
declares that everything demonstrates the ancient Egyptians to have been
profoundly monotheistical. The accuracy of the writings of the
mysterious Hermes Trismegistus, whose antiquity runs back into the night
of time, is corroborated by him to their minutest details. Ennemoser
also says: "Into Egypt and the East went Herodotus, Thales, Parmenides,
Empedocles, Orpheus, and Pythagoras, to instruct themselves in Natural
Philosophy and Theology." There, too, Moses acquired his wisdom, and
Jesus passed the earlier years of his life.

Thither gathered the students of all countries before Alexandria was
founded. "How comes it," Ennemoser goes on to say, "that so little has
become known of these mysteries? through so many ages and amongst so
many different times and people? The answer is that it is owing to the
universally strict silence of the initiated. Another cause may be found
in the destruction and total loss of all the written memorials of the
secret knowledge of the remotest antiquity." Numa's books, described by
Livy, consisting of treatises upon natural philosophy, were found in his
tomb; but they were not allowed to be made known, lest they should
reveal the most secret mysteries of the state religion. The

###### <span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

senate and the tribune of the people determined that the books
themselves should be burned, which was done in public. <span
id="fr_32"></span>[\*](#fn_32)

Magic was considered a divine science which led to a participation in
the attributes of Divinity itself. "It unveils the operations of
nature," says Philo Judaeus, "and leads to the contemplation of
celestial powers." <span id="fr_33"></span>[\*\*](#fn_33) In later
periods its abuse and degeneration into sorcery made it an object of
general abhorrence. We must therefore deal with it only as it was in the
remote past, during those ages when every true religion was based on a
knowledge of the occult powers of nature. It was not the sacerdotal
class in ancient Persia that established magic, as it is commonly
thought, but the Magi, who derive their name from it. The Mobeds,
priests of the Parsis--the ancient Ghebers--are named, even at the
present day, *Magoi,* in the dialect of the Pehlvi. <span
id="fr_34"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_34) *Magic appeared in the world with the
earlier races of men.* Cassien mentions a treatise, well-known in the
fourth and fifth centuries, which was accredited to Ham, the son of
Noah, who in his turn was reputed to have received it from Jared, the
fourth generation from Seth, the son of Adam. <span
id="fr_35"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_35)

Moses was indebted for his knowledge to the mother of the Egyptian
princess, Thermuthis, who saved him from the waters of the Nile. The
wife of Pharaoh, <span id="fr_36"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_36) Batria,
was an initiate herself, and the Jews owe to her the possession of their
prophet, "learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and mighty in
words and deeds." <span id="fr_37"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_37) Justin
Martyr, giving as his authority Trogus Pompeius, shows Joseph as having
acquired a great knowledge in magical arts with the high priests of
Egypt. <span id="fr_38"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_38)

The ancients knew more concerning certain sciences than our modern
savants have yet discovered. Reluctant as many are to confess as much,
it has been acknowledged by more than one scientist. "The degree of
scientific knowledge existing in an early period of society was much
greater than the moderns are willing to admit"; says Dr. A. Todd
Thomson, the editor of *Occult Sciences,* by Salverte; "but," he adds,
"it was confined to the temples, carefully veiled from the eyes of the
people and opposed only to the priesthood." Speaking of the *Kabala,*
the learned Franz von Baader remarks that "not only our salvation and
wisdom, but our science itself came to us from the Jews." But why not
complete the sentence and tell the reader from whom the Jews got their
wisdom?

Origen, who had belonged to the Alexandrian school of Platonists,

###### <span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

declares that Moses, besides the teachings of the covenant, communicated
some very important secrets "from the hidden depths of the law" to the
seventy elders. These he enjoined them to impart only to persons whom
they found worthy.

St. Jerome names the Jews of Tiberias and Lydda as the only teachers of
the mystical manner of interpretation. Finally, Ennemoser expresses a
strong opinion that "the writings of Dionysius Areopagita have palpably
been grounded on the Jewish *Kabala.*" When we take in consideration
that the Gnostics, or early Christians, were but the followers of the
old Essenes under a new name, this fact is nothing to be wondered at.
Professor Molitor gives the *Kabala* its just due. He says:

"The age of inconsequence and shallowness, in theology as well as in
sciences, is past, and since that revolutionary rationalism has left
nothing behind but its own emptiness, after having destroyed everything
positive, it seems now to be the time to direct our attention anew to
that mysterious revelation which is the living spring whence our
salvation must come . . . the Mysteries of ancient Israel, which contain
all secrets of modern Israel, would be particularly calculated to . . .
found the fabric of theology upon its deepest theosophical principles,
and to gain *a firm basis* to all ideal sciences. It would open a new
path . . . to the obscure labyrinth of the myths, mysteries and
constitutions of primitive nations. . . . In these traditions alone are
contained the system of the schools of the prophets, which the prophet
Samuel did not found, *but only restored,* whose end was no other than
to lead the scholars to wisdom and the highest knowledge, and when they
had been found worthy, to induct them *into deeper mysteries.* Classed
with these mysteries was *magic,* which was of a double nature--divine
magic, and evil magic, or the black art. Each of these is again
divisible into two kinds, the active and seeing; in the first, man
endeavors to place himself *en* *rapport* with the world to learn hidden
things; in the latter he endeavors to gain power over spirits; in the
former, to perform *good* *and beneficial* acts; in the latter to do all
kinds of diabolical and unnatural deeds." <span
id="fr_39"></span>[\*](#fn_39)

The clergy of the three most prominent Christian bodies, the Greek,
Roman Catholic, and Protestant, discountenance every spiritual
phenomenon manifesting itself through the so-called "mediums." A very
brief period, indeed, has elapsed since both the two latter
ecclesiastical corporations burned, hanged, and otherwise murdered every
helpless victim through whose organism spirits--and sometimes blind and
as yet unexplained

###### <span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

forces of nature--manifested themselves. At the head of these three
churches, pre-eminent stands the Church of Rome. Her hands are scarlet
with the innocent blood of countless victims shed in the name of the
Moloch-like divinity at the head of her creed. She is ready and eager to
begin again. But she is bound hand and foot by that nineteenth century
spirit of progress and religious freedom which she reviles and
blasphemes daily. The Graeco-Russian Church is the most amiable and
Christ-like in her primitive, simple, though blind faith. Despite the
fact that there has been no practical union between the Greek and Latin
Churches, and that the two parted company long centuries ago, the Roman
Pontiffs seem to invariably ignore the fact. They have in the most
impudent manner possible arrogated to themselves jurisdiction not only
over the countries within the Greek communion but also over all
Protestants as well. "The Church insists," says Professor Draper, "that
the state has no rights over any thing which it declares to be within
its domain, and that Protestantism being a mere rebellion, has no rights
at all; that even in Protestant communities the Catholic bishop *is the
only lawful* spiritual pastor." <span id="fr_40"></span>[\*](#fn_40)
Decrees unheeded, encyclical letters unread, invitations to ecumenical
councils unnoticed, excommunications laughed at--all these have seemed
to make no difference. Their persistence has only been matched by their
effrontery. In 1864, the culmination of absurdity was attained when Pius
**IX**. excommunicated and fulminated publicly his anathemas against the
Russian Emperor, as a "*schismatic* cast out from the bosom of the Holy
Mother Church." <span id="fr_41"></span>[\*\*](#fn_41) Neither he nor
his ancestors, nor Russia since it was Christianized, a thousand years
ago, have ever consented to join the Roman Catholics. Why not claim
ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the Buddhists of Thibet, or the shadows
of the ancient Hyk-Sos?

The mediumistic phenomena have manifested themselves at all times in
Russia as well as in other countries. This force ignores religious
differences; it laughs at nationalities; and invades unasked any
individuality, whether of a crowned head or a poor beggar.

Not even the present Vice-God, Pius **IX**., himself, could avoid the
unwelcome guest. For the last fifty years his Holiness has been known to
be subject to very extraordinary fits. Inside the Vatican they are
termed *Divine visions;* outside, physicians call them epileptic fits;
and popular rumor attributes them to an obsession by the ghosts of
Peruggia, Castelfidardo, and Mentana!

###### <span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

> "The lights burn blue: it is now dead midnight,  
> Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh,  
> Methought the souls of all that I caused to be murdered  
> Came. . . ." <span id="fr_42"></span>[\*](#fn_42)

The Prince of Hohenlohe, so famous during the first quarter of our
century for his healing powers, was himself a great medium. Indeed,
these phenomena and powers belong to no particular age or country. They
form a portion of the psychological attributes of man--the Microcosmos.

For centuries have the *Klikouchy, <span
id="fr_43"></span>[\*\*](#fn_43)* the *Yourodevoy, <span
id="fr_44"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_44)* and other miserable creatures been
afflicted with strange disorders, which the Russian clergy and the
populace attribute to possession by the devil. They throng the entrances
of the cathedrals, without daring to trust themselves inside, lest their
self-willed controlling demons might fling them on the ground. Voroneg,
Kiew, Kazan, and all cities which possess the thaumaturgical relics of
canonized saints, abound with such unconscious mediums. One can always
find numbers of them, congregating in hideous groups, and hanging about
the gates and porches. At certain stages of the celebration of the mass
by the officiating clergy, such as the appearance of the sacraments, or
the beginning of the prayer and chorus, "*Ejey Cherouvim,*" these
half-maniacs, half-mediums, begin crowing like cocks, barking, bellowing
and braying, and, finally, fall down in fearful convulsions. "The
*unclean one* cannot bear the holy prayer," is the pious explanation.
Moved by pity, some charitable souls administer restoratives to the
"afflicted ones," and distribute alms among them. Occasionally, a priest
is invited to exorcise, in which event he either performs the ceremony
for the sake of love and charity, or the alluring prospect of a
twenty-copeck silver bit, according to his Christian impulses. But these
miserable creatures--who are mediums, for they prophesy and see visions
sometimes, when the fit is genuine <span
id="fr_45"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_45)--are never molested because of
their misfortune. Why should the clergy persecute them, or people hate
and denounce them as damnable witches or wizards? Common sense and
justice surely suggest that if any are to be punished it is certainly
not the victims who cannot help themselves, but the demon who is alleged
to control their actions. The worst that happens to the patient is, that
the priest inundates him or her with holy water, and causes the poor
creature to catch cold. This failing in efficacy, the *Klikoucha* is
left to the will

###### <span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

of God, and taken care of in love and pity. Superstitious and blind as
it is, a faith conducted on such principles certainly deserves some
respect, and can never be offensive, either to man or the *true* God.
Not so with that of the Roman Catholics; and hence, it is they, and
secondarily, the Protestant clergy--with the exception of some foremost
thinkers among them--that we purpose questioning in this work. We want
to know upon what grounds they base their right to treat Hindus and
Chinese spiritualists and kabalists in the way they do; denouncing them,
in company with the infidels--creatures of their own making--as so many
convicts sentenced to the inextinguishable fires of hell.

Far from us be the thought of the slightest irreverence--let alone
blasphemy--toward the Divine Power which called into being all things,
visible and invisible. Of its majesty and boundless perfection we dare
not even think. It is enough for us to know that *It* exists and that
*It* is all wise. Enough that in common with our fellow creatures we
possess a spark of *Its* essence. The supreme power whom we revere is
the boundless and endless one--the grand "**C**ENTRAL **S**PIRITUAL
**S**UN" by whose attributes and the visible effects of whose inaudible
WILL we are surrounded--the God of the ancient and the God of modern
seers. His nature can be studied only in the worlds called forth by his
mighty FIAT. His revelation is traced with his own finger in
imperishable figures of universal harmony upon the face of the Cosmos.
It is the only INFALLIBLE gospel we recognize.

Speaking of ancient geographers, Plutarch remarks in *Theseus,* that
they "crowd into the edges of their maps parts of the world which they
do not know about, adding notes in the margin to the effect that beyond
this lies nothing but sandy deserts *full of wild beasts* and
*unapproachable bogs.*" Do not our theologians and scientists do the
same? While the former people the invisible world with either angels or
devils, our philosophers try to persuade their disciples that where
there is no *matter* there is

nothing.

How many of our inveterate skeptics belong, notwithstanding their
materialism, to Masonic Lodges? The brothers of the Rosie-Cross,
mysterious practitioners of the mediaeval ages, still live--but in name
only. They may "shed tears at the grave of their respectable Master,
Hiram Abiff "; but vainly will they search for the true locality, "where
the sprig of myrtle was placed." The dead letter remains alone, the
spirit has fled. They are like the English or German chorus of the
Italian opera, who descend in the fourth act of *Ernani* into the crypt
of Charlemagne, singing their conspiracy in a tongue utterly unknown to
them. So, our modern knights of the Sacred Arch may descend every night
if they choose

###### <span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

"through the nine arches into the bowels of the earth,"--they "will
never discover the sacred Delta of Enoch." The "Sir Knights in the South
Valley" and those in "the North Valley" may try to assure themselves
that "enlightenment dawns upon their minds," and that as they progress
in Masonry "the veil of superstition, despotism, tyranny" and so on, no
longer obscures the visions of their minds. But these are all empty
words so long as they neglect their mother Magic, and turn their backs
upon its twin sister, Spiritualism. Verily, "Sir Knights of the Orient,"
you may "leave your stations and sit upon the floor in attitudes of
grief, with your heads resting upon your hands," for you have cause to
bewail and mourn your fate. Since Philippe le Bel destroyed the
Knights-Templars, not one has appeared to clear up your doubts
notwithstanding all claims to the contrary. Truly, you are "wanderers
from Jerusalem, seeking the lost treasure of the holy place." Have you
found it? Alas, no! for the holy place is profaned; the pillars of
wisdom, strength and beauty are destroyed. Henceforth, "you must wander
in darkness," and "travel in humility," among the woods and mountains in
search of the "lost word." "Pass on!"--you will never find it so long as
you limit your journeys to *seven* or even seven times seven; because
you are "travelling in darkness," and this darkness can only be
dispelled by the light of the blazing torch of truth which alone the
right descendants of Ormasd carry. They alone can teach you the true
pronunciation of the name revealed to Enoch, Jacob and Moses. "Pass on!
Till your R. S. W. shall learn to multiply 333, and *strike* instead
666--the number of the Apocalyptic Beast, you may just as well observe
prudence and act "*sub rosa.*"

In order to demonstrate that the notions which the ancients entertained
about dividing human history into cycles were not utterly devoid of a
philosophical basis, we will close this chapter by introducing to the
reader one of the oldest traditions of antiquity as to the evolution of
our planet.

At the close of each "great year," called by Aristotle--according to
Censorinus--the *greatest,* and which consists of six *sars <span
id="fr_46"></span>[\*](#fn_46)* our planet is subjected to a thorough
physical revolution. The polar and equatorial climates gradually
exchange places; the former moving slowly toward the Line, and the
tropical zone, with its exuberant vegetation and swarming animal life,
replacing the forbidding wastes of the icy poles. This

###### <span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

change of climate is necessarily attended by cataclysms, earthquakes,
and other cosmical throes. <span id="fr_47"></span>[\*](#fn_47) As the
beds of the ocean are displaced, at the end of every decimillennium and
about one neros, a semi-universal deluge like the legendary Noachian
flood is brought about. This year was called the *Heliacal* by the
Greeks; but no one outside the sanctuary knew anything certain either as
to its duration or particulars. The winter of this year was called the
Cataclysm or the Deluge,--the Summer, the Ecpyrosis. The popular
traditions taught that at these alternate seasons the world was in turn
burned and deluged. This is what we learn at least from the
*Astronomical Fragments* of Censorinus and Seneca. So uncertain were the
commentators about the length of this year, that none except Herodotus
and Linus, who assigned to it, the former 10,800, and the latter 13,984,
came near the truth. <span id="fr_48"></span>[\*\*](#fn_48) According to
the claims of the Babylonian priests, corroborated by Eupolemus, <span
id="fr_49"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_49) "the city of Babylon, owes its
foundation to those who were saved from the catastrophe of the deluge;
*they were the giants* and they built the tower which is noticed in
history." <span id="fr_50"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_50) These giants who
were great astrologers and had received moreover from their fathers,
"the sons of God," every instruction pertaining to secret matters,
instructed the priests in their turn, and left in the temples all the
records of the periodical cataclysm that they had witnessed themselves.
This is how the high priests came by the knowledge of the *great* years.
When we remember, moreover, that Plato in the *Timaeus* cites the old
Egyptian priest rebuking Solon for his ignorance of the fact that there
were several such deluges as the great one of Ogyges, we can easily
ascertain that this belief in the *Heliakos* was a doctrine held by the
initiated priests the world over.

The Neroses, the Vrihaspati, or the periods called yugas or kalpas, are
life-problems to solve. The Satya-yug and Buddhistic cycles of
chronology would make a mathematician stand aghast at the array of
ciphers. The Maha-kalpa embraces an untold number of periods far

###### <span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

back in the antediluvian ages. Their system comprises a kalpa or grand
period of 4,320,000,000 years, which they divide into four lesser yugas,
running as follows:

> 1st.--Satya yug--1,728,000 years.  
> 2d.--Tretya yug--1,296,000 years.  
> 3d.--Dvapa yug ---- 864,000 years.  
> 4th.--Kali yug ------ 432,000 years.  
> Total -------------- 4,320,000 years.

which make one divine age or Maha-yug; seventy-one Maha-yugs make
306,720,000 years, to which is added a sandhi (or the time when day and
night border on each other, morning and evening twilight), equal to a
Satya-yug, 1,728,000, make a manwantara of 308,448,000 years; <span
id="fr_51"></span>[\*](#fn_51) fourteen manwantaras make 4,318,272,000
years; to which must be added a sandhi to begin the kalpa, 1,728,000
years, making the kalpa or grand period of 4,320,000,000 of years. As we
are now only in the Kali-yug of the twenty-eighth age of the seventh
manwantara of 308,448,000 years, we have yet sufficient time before us
to wait before we reach even half of the time allotted to the world.

These ciphers are not fanciful, but founded upon actual astronomical
calculations, as has been demonstrated by S. Davis. <span
id="fr_52"></span>[\*\*](#fn_52) Many a scientist, Higgins among others,
notwithstanding their researches, has been utterly perplexed as to which
of these was the *secret* cycle. Bunsen has demonstrated that the
Egyptian priests, who made the cyclic notations, kept them always in the
profoundest mystery. <span id="fr_53"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_53) Perhaps
their difficulty arose from the fact that the calculations of the
ancients applied equally to the spiritual progress of humanity as to the
physical. It will not be difficult to understand the close
correspondence drawn by the ancients between the cycles of nature and of
mankind, if we keep in mind their belief in the constant and all-potent
influences of the planets upon the fortunes of humanity. Higgins justly
believed that the cycle of the Indian system, of 432,000, is the true
key of the secret cycle. But his failure in trying to decipher it was
made apparent; for as it pertained to the mystery of the creation, this
cycle was the most inviolable of all. It was repeated in symbolic
figures only in the Chaldean *Book of Numbers,* the original of which,
if

###### <span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

now extant, is certainly not to be found in libraries, as it formed one
of the most ancient Books of Hermes, <span
id="fr_54"></span>[\*](#fn_54) the number of which is at present
undetermined.

Calculating by the secret period of the Great Neros and the Hindu
Kalpas, some kabalists, mathematicians and archeologists who knew naught
of the secret computations made the above number of 21,000 years to be
24,000 years, for the length of the great year, as it was to the renewal
only of our globe that they thought the last period of 6,000 years
applied. Higgins gives as a reason for it, that it was anciently thought
that the equinoxes preceded only after the rate of 2,000, not 2,160,
years in a sign; for thus it would allow for the length of the great
year four times 6,000 or 24,000 years. "Hence," he says, "might arise
their immensely-lengthened cycles; because, it would be the same with
this great year as with the common year, till it travelled round an
immensely-lengthened circle, when it would come to the old point again."
He therefore accounts for the 24,000 in the following manner: "If the
angle which the plane of the ecliptic makes with the plane of the
equator had decreased gradually and regularly, as it was till very
lately supposed to do, the two planes would have coincided in about ten
ages, 6,000 years;

###### <span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

in ten ages, 6,000 years more, the sun would have been situated
relatively to the Southern Hemisphere as he is now to the Northern; in
ten ages, 6,000 years more, the two planes would coincide again; and, in
ten ages, 6,000 years more, he would be situated as he is now, after a
lapse of about twenty-four or twenty-five thousand years in all. When
the sun arrived at the equator, the ten ages or six thousand years would
end, and the world would be destroyed *by fire;* when he arrived at the
southern point, it would be destroyed by water. And thus, it would be
destroyed at the end of every 6,000 years, or ten neroses." <span
id="fr_55"></span>[\*](#fn_55)

This method of calculating by the *neroses,* without allowing any
consideration for the secrecy in which the ancient philosophers, who
were exclusively of the sacerdotal order, held their knowledge, gave
rise to the greatest errors. It led the Jews, as well as some of the
Christian Platonists, to maintain that the world would be destroyed at
the end of six thousand years. Gale shows how firmly this belief was
rooted in the Jews. It has also led modern scientists to discredit
entirely the hypothesis of the ancients. It has given rise to the
formation of different religious sects, which, like the Adventists of
our century, are always living in the expectation of the approaching
destruction of the world.

As our planet revolves once every year around the sun and at the same
time turns once in every twenty-four hours upon its own axis, thus
traversing minor circles within a larger one, so is the work of the
smaller cyclic periods accomplished and recommenced, within the Great
Saros.

The revolution of the physical world, according to the ancient doctrine,
is attended by a like revolution in the world of intellect--the
spiritual evolution of the world proceeding in cycles, like the physical
one.

Thus we see in history a regular alternation of ebb and flow in the tide
of human progress. The great kingdoms and empires of the world, after
reaching the culmination of their greatness, descend again, in
accordance with the same law by which they ascended; till, having
reached the lowest point, humanity reasserts itself and mounts up once
more, the height of its attainment being, by this law of ascending
progression by cycles, somewhat higher than the point from which it had
before descended.

The division of the history of mankind into Golden, Silver, Copper and
Iron Ages, is not a fiction. We see the same thing in the literature of
peoples. An age of great inspiration and unconscious productiveness is
invariably followed by an age of criticism and consciousness. The one
affords material for the analyzing and critical intellect of the other.

Thus, all those great characters who tower like giants in the history of
mankind, like Buddha-Siddartha, and Jesus, in the realm of spiritual,
and

###### <span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

Alexander the Macedonian and Napoleon the Great, in the realm of
physical conquests, were but reflexed images of human types which had
existed ten thousand years before, in the preceding decimillennium,
reproduced by the mysterious powers controlling the destinies of our
world. There is no prominent character in all the annals of sacred or
profane history whose prototype we cannot find in the half-fictitious
and half-real traditions of bygone religions and mythologies. As the
star, glimmering at an immeasurable distance above our heads, in the
boundless immensity of the sky, reflects itself in the smooth waters of
a lake, so does the imagery of men of the antediluvian ages reflect
itself in the periods we can embrace in an historical retrospect.

"*As above, so it is below. That which has been, will return again. As
in heaven, so on earth.*"

The world is always ungrateful to its great men. Florence has built a
statue to Galileo, but hardly even mentions Pythagoras. The former had a
ready guide in the treatises of Copernicus, who had been obliged to
contend against the universally established Ptolemaic system. But
neither Galileo nor modern astronomy discovered the emplacement of the
planetary bodies. Thousands of ages before, it was taught by the sages
of Middle Asia, and brought thence by Pythagoras, not as a speculation,
but as a demonstrated science. "The numerals of Pythagoras," says
Porphyry, "were hieroglyphical symbols, by means whereof he explained
all ideas concerning the nature of *all* things." <span
id="fr_56"></span>[\*](#fn_56)

Verily, then, to antiquity alone have we to look for the origin of all
things. How well Hargrave Jennings expresses himself when speaking of
Pyramids, and how true are his words when he asks: "Is it at all
reasonable to conclude, at a period when knowledge was at the highest,
and when the human powers were, in comparison with ours at the present
time, prodigious, that all these indomitable, *scarcely believable*
physical effects--that such achievements as those of the Egyptians--were
devoted to a mistake? that the myriads of the Nile were fools laboring
in the dark, and that all the magic of their great men was forgery, and
that we, in despising that which we call their superstition and wasted
power, are alone the wise? No! there is much more in these old religions
than probably--in the audacity of modern denial, in the confidence of
these superficial-science times, and in the derision of these days
without faith--is in the least degree supposed. We do not understand the
old time. . . . . Thus we see how classic practice and heathen teaching
may be made to reconcile--how even the Gentile and the Hebrew, the
mytho-

###### <span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

logical and the Christian doctrine harmonize in the general faith
founded on Magic. That Magic is indeed possible is the moral of this
book." <span id="fr_57"></span>[\*](#fn_57)

It is possible. Thirty years ago, when the first rappings of Rochester
awakened slumbering attention to the reality of an invisible world; when
the gentle shower of raps gradually became a torrent which overflowed
the whole globe, spiritualists had to contend but against two
potencies--theology and science. But the theosophists have, in addition
to these, to meet the world at large and the spiritualists first of all.

"There is a *personal* God, and there is a *personal* Devil!" thunders
the Christian preacher. "Let him be anathema who dares say nay!" "There
is no personal God, except the gray matter in our brain," contemptuously
replies the materialist. "And there is no Devil. Let him be considered
thrice an idiot who says aye." Meanwhile the occultists and *true*
philosophers heed neither of the two combatants, but keep perseveringly
at their work. None of them believe in the absurd, passionate, and
fickle God of superstition, but all of them believe in good and evil.
Our human reason, the emanation of our finite mind, is certainly
incapable of comprehending a divine intelligence, an endless and
infinite entity; and, according to strict logic, that which transcends
our understanding and would remain thoroughly incomprehensible to our
senses cannot exist for us; hence, it does *not* exist. So far finite
reason agrees with science, and says: "There is no God." But, on the
other hand, our *Ego,* that which lives and thinks and feels
independently of us in our mortal casket, does more than believe. It
*knows* that there exists a God in nature, for the sole and invincible
Artificer of all lives in us as we live in Him. No dogmatic faith or
exact science is able to uproot that intuitional feeling inherent in
man, when he has once fully realized it in himself.

Human nature is like universal nature in its abhorrence of a vacuum. It
feels an intuitional yearning for a Supreme Power. Without a God, the
cosmos would seem to it but like a soulless corpse. Being forbidden to
search for Him where alone His traces would be found, man filled the
aching void with the personal God whom his spiritual teachers built up
for him from the crumbling ruins of heathen myths and hoary philosophies
of old. How otherwise explain the mushroom growth of new sects, some of
them absurd beyond degree? Mankind have one innate, irrepressible
craving, that *must* be satisfied in any religion that would supplant
the dogmatic, undemonstrated and undemonstrable theology of our
Christian ages. This is the yearning after the proofs of immortality. As
Sir Thomas Browne has expressed it: . . . . "it is the heaviest stone
that

###### <span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

melancholy can throw at a man, to tell him that he is at the end of his
nature, or that there is no future state to come, unto which this seems
progressive, and otherwise made in vain." Let any religion offer itself
that can supply these proofs in the shape of scientific facts, and the
established system will be driven to the alternative of fortifying its
dogmas with such facts, or of passing out of the reverence and affection
of Christendom. Many a Christian divine has been forced to acknowledge
that there is *no authentic* source whence the assurance of a future
state could have been derived by man. How could then such a belief have
stood for countless ages, were it not that among all nations, whether
civilized or savage, man *has been* allowed the demonstrative proof? Is
not the very existence of such a belief an evidence that thinking
philosopher and unreasoning savage have both been compelled to
acknowledge the testimony of their senses? That if, in isolated
instances, spectral illusion may have resulted from physical causes, on
the other hand, in thousands of instances, apparitions of persons have
held converse with several individuals at once, who saw and heard them
collectively, and could not all have been diseased in mind?

The greatest thinkers of Greece and Rome regarded such matters as
demonstrated facts. They distinguished the apparitions by the names of
*manes, anima* and *umbra*: the *manes* descending after the decease of
the individual into the Underworld; the *anima*, or pure spirit,
ascending to heaven; and the restless *umbra* (earth-bound spirit),
hovering about its tomb, because the attraction of matter and love of
its earthly body prevailed in it and prevented its ascension to higher
regions.

> "Terra legit *carnem* tumulum circumvolet *umbra*,  
> Orcus habet *manes, spiritus* astra petit,"

says Ovid, speaking of the threefold constituents of souls.

But all such definitions must be subjected to the careful analysis of
philosophy. Too many of our thinkers do not consider that the numerous
changes in language, the allegorical phraseology and evident
secretiveness of old Mystic writers, who were generally under an
obligation never to divulge the solemn secrets of the sanctuary, might
have sadly misled translators and commentators. The phrases of the
mediaeval alchemist they read literally; and even the veiled symbolology
of Plato is commonly misunderstood by the modern scholar. One day they
may learn to know better, and so become aware that the method of extreme
necessarianism was practiced in ancient as well as in modern philosophy;
that from the first ages of man, the fundamental truths of all that we
are permitted to know on earth was in the safe keeping of the adepts of
the sanctuary;

###### <span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

that the difference in creeds and religious practice was only external;
and that those guardians of the primitive divine revelation, who had
solved every problem that is within the grasp of human intellect, were
bound together by a universal freemasonry of science and philosophy,
which formed one unbroken chain around the globe. It is for philology
and psychology to find the end of the thread. That done, it will then be
ascertained that, by relaxing one single loop of the old religious
systems, the chain of mystery may be disentangled.

The neglect and withholding of these proofs have driven such eminent
minds as Hare and Wallace, and other men of power, into the fold of
modern spiritualism. At the same time it has forced others, congenitally
devoid of spiritual intuitions, into a gross materialism that figures
under various names.

But we see no utility in prosecuting the subject further. For, though in
the opinion of most of our contemporaries, there has been but one day of
learning, in whose twilight stood the older philosophers, and whose
noontide brightness is all our own; and though the testimony of scores
of ancient and mediaeval thinkers has proved valueless to modern
experimenters, as though the world dated from A.D. 1, and all knowledge
were of recent growth, we will not lose hope or courage. The moment is
more opportune than ever for the review of old philosophies.
Archaeologists, philologists, astronomers, chemists and physicists are
getting nearer and nearer to the point where they will be forced to
consider them. Physical science has already reached its limits of
exploration; dogmatic theology sees the springs of its inspiration dry.
Unless we mistake the signs, the day is approaching when the world will
receive the proofs that only ancient religions were in harmony with
nature, and ancient science embraced all that can be known. Secrets long
kept may be revealed; books long forgotten and arts long time lost may
be brought out to light again; papyri and parchments of inestimable
importance will turn up in the hands of men who pretend to have unrolled
them from mummies, or stumbled upon them in buried crypts; tablets and
pillars, whose sculptured revelations will stagger theologians and
confound scientists, may yet be excavated and interpreted. Who knows the
possibilities of the future? An era of disenchantment and rebuilding
will soon begin--nay, has already begun. The cycle has almost run its
course; a new one is about to begin, and the future pages of history may
contain full evidence, and convey full proof that

> "If ancestry can be in aught believed,  
> Descending spirits have conversed with man,  
> And told him secrets of the world unknown."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:\*](#fr_0) The name is used in the sense of
the Greek word ανθροπος.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1:\*\*](#fr_1) The traditions of the Oriental
Kabalists claim their science to be older than that. Modern scientists
may doubt and reject the assertion. They *cannot* prove it false.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3:\*](#fr_2) Clement of Alexandria asserted that
in his day the Egyptian priests possessed forty-two Canonical Books.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4:\*](#fr_3) "Chips from a German Work-shop,"
vol. ii., p. 7. "Comparative Mythology."

<span id="fn_4"></span>[7:\*](#fr_4) "Conflict between Religion and
Science," ch. i.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[8:\*](#fr_5) In another place, we explain with
some minuteness the Hermetic philosophy of the evolution of the spheres
and their several races.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[8:\*\*](#fr_6) J. Burges: "The Works of Plato,"
p. 207, note.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[10:\*](#fr_7) From the Sanskrit text of the
Aitareya Brahmanam. Rig-Veda, v., ch. ii., verse 23.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[10:\*\*](#fr_8) Aitareya Brahmanam, book iii.,
c. v., 44.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10:\*\*\*](#fr_9) Ait. Brahm., vol. ii., p. 242.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11:\*](#fr_10) Ait. Brahm., book iv.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[11:\*\*](#fr_11) Septenary Institutions; "Stone
him to Death," p. 20.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[12:\*](#fr_12) See Gibbon's "Decline and Fall
of the Roman Empire."

<span id="fn_13"></span>[13:\*](#fr_13) See Turner; also G. Higgins's
"Anacalypsis."

<span id="fn_14"></span>[13:\*\*](#fr_14) Genesis, i, 30.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[13:\*\*\*](#fr_15) Sir William Drummond:
"Œdipus Judicus," p. 250.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[13:\*\*\*\*](#fr_16) The absolute necessity for
the perpetration of such pious frauds by the early fathers and later
theologians becomes apparent, if we consider that if they had allowed
the word *Al* to remain as in the original, it would have become but too
evident--except for the initiated--that the *Jehovah* of Moses and the
sun were identical. The multitudes, which ignore that the ancient
hierophant considered our *visible* sun but as an emblem of the central,
invisible, and spiritual Sun, would have accused Moses--as many of our
modern commentators have already done--of worshipping the planetary
bodies; in short, of actual Zabaism.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[14:\*](#fr_17) Exodus, xxv., 40.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[15:\*](#fr_18) "The Physical Basis of Life." A
Lecture by T. H. Huxley.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[15:\*\*](#fr_19) Huxley: "Physical Basis of
Life."

<span id="fn_20"></span>[16:\*](#fr_20) Prof. J. W. Draper: "Conflict
Between Religion and Science."

<span id="fn_21"></span>[17:\*](#fr_21) Bulwer's "Zanoni."

<span id="fn_22"></span>[18:\*](#fr_22) See the Code published by Sir
William Jones, chap. ix., p. 11.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[18:\*\*](#fr_23) Pliny: "Hist. Nat.," xxx. I:
Ib., xvi., 14; xxv., 9, etc.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[18:\*\*\*](#fr_24) Pomponius ascribes to them
the knowledge of the highest sciences.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[18:\*\*\*\*](#fr_25) Caesar, iii., 14.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[18:\*\*\*\*\*](#fr_26) Pliny, xxx.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[19:\*](#fr_27) Munter, on the most ancient
religion of the North before the time of Odin. Memoires de la Societe
des Antiquaires de France. Tome ii., p. 230.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[19:\*\*](#fr_28) Ammianus Marcellinus, xxvi.,
6.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[20:\*](#fr_29) In some respects our modern
philosophers, who think they make new discoveries can be compared to
"the very clever, learned, and civil gentleman" whom Hippocrates having
met at Samos one day, describes very good-naturedly. "He informed me,"
the Father of Medicine proceeds to say, "that he had lately discovered
an herb never before known in Europe or Asia, and that no disease,
however malignant or chronic, could resist its marvellous properties.
Wishing to be civil in turn, I permitted myself to be persuaded to
accompany him to the conservatory in which he had transplanted the
wonderful specific. What I found was one of the commonest plants in
Greece, namely, garlic--the plant which above all others has least
pretensions to healing virtues." Hippocrates: "De optima praedicandi
ratione item judicii operum magni." I.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[23:\*](#fr_30) Schweigger: "Introduction to
Mythology through Natural History."

<span id="fn_31"></span>[23:\*\*](#fr_31) Ennemoser: "History of Magic,"
i, 3.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[25:\*](#fr_32) "Hist. of Magic," vol. i, p. 3.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[25:\*\*](#fr_33) Philo Jud.: "De Specialibus
Legibus."

<span id="fn_34"></span>[25:\*\*\*](#fr_34) Zend-Avesta, vol. ii., p.
506.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[25:\*\*\*\*](#fr_35) Cassian: "Conference," i.,
21.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[25:\*\*\*\*\*](#fr_36) "De Vita et Morte
Mosis," p. 199.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[25:\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fr_37) Acts of the Apostles,
vii., 22.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[25:\*\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fr_38) Justin, xxxvi., 2.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[26:\*](#fr_39) Molitor: "Philosophy of History
and Traditions," Howitt's Translation, p. 285.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[27:\*](#fr_40) "Conflict between Religion and
Science," p. 329.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[27:\*\*](#fr_41) See "Gazette du Midi," and "Le
Monde," of 3 May, 1864.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[28:\*](#fr_42) Shakespere: "Richard **III**."

<span id="fn_43"></span>[28:\*\*](#fr_43) Literally, the *screaming* or
the howling ones.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[28:\*\*\*](#fr_44) The half-demented, the
*idiots*.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[28:\*\*\*\*](#fr_45) But such is not always the
case, for some among these beggars make a regular and profitable trade
of it.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[30:\*](#fr_46) Webster declares very
erroneously that the Chaldeans called *saros,* the cycle of eclipses, a
period of about 6,586 years, "the time of revolution of the moon's
node." Berosus, himself a Chaldean astrologer, at the Temple of Belus,
at Babylon, gives the duration of the sar, or sarus, 3,600 years; a
neros 600; and a sossus 60. (See, Berosus from Abydenus, "Of the
Chaldaean Kings and the Deluge." See also Eusebius, and Cory's *MS.* Ex.
Cod. reg. gall. gr. No. 2360, fol. 154.)

<span id="fn_47"></span>[31:\*](#fr_47) Before scientists reject such a
theory--traditional as it is--it would be in order for them to
demonstrate why, at the end of the tertiary period, the Northern
Hemisphere had undergone such a reduction of temperature as to utterly
change the torrid zone to a Siberian climate? Let us bear in mind that
the *heliocentric system came to us from upper India;* and that the
germs of all great astronomical truths were brought thence by
Pythagoras. So long as we lack a mathematically correct demonstration,
one hypothesis is as good as another.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[31:\*\*](#fr_48) Censorinus: "De Natal Die."
Seneca: "Nat. Quaest.," iii., 29.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[31:\*\*\*](#fr_49) Euseb.: "Praep. Evan." Of
the Tower of Babel and Abraham.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[31:\*\*\*\*](#fr_50) This is in flat
contradiction of the Bible narrative, which tells us that the deluge was
sent for the special destruction of these *giants*. The Babylon priests
had *no* object to invent lies.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[32:\*](#fr_51) Coleman, who makes this
calculation, allowed a serious error to escape the proofreader; the
length of the manwantara is given at 368,448,000, which is just sixty
million years too much.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[32:\*\*](#fr_52) S. Davis: "Essay in the
Asiatic Researches"; and Higgins's "Anacalypsis"; also see Coleman's
"Mythology of the Hindus." Preface, p. xiii.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[32:\*\*\*](#fr_53) Bunsen: "Egypte," vol. i.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[33:\*](#fr_54) The forty-two Sacred Books of
the Egyptians mentioned by Clement of Alexandria as having existed in
his time, were but a portion of the Books of Hermes. Iamblichus, on the
authority of the Egyptian priest Abammon, attributes 1200 of such books
to Hermes, and Manetho 36,000. But the testimony of Iamblichus as a
neo-Platonist and theurgist is of course rejected by modern critics.
Manetho, who is held by Bunsen in the highest consideration as a "purely
historical personage" . . . with whom "none of the later native
historians can be compared . . . ." (See "Egypte," i, p. 97), suddenly
becomes a Pseudo-Manetho, as soon as the ideas propounded by him clash
with the scientific prejudices against magic and the occult knowledge
claimed by the ancient priests. However, none of the archeologists doubt
for a moment the almost incredible antiquity of the Hermetic books.
Champollion shows the greatest regard for their authenticity and great
truthfulness, corroborated as it is by many of the oldest monuments. And
Bunsen brings irrefutable proofs of their age. From his researches, for
instance, we learn that there was a line of sixty-one kings before the
days of Moses, who preceded the Mosaic period by a clearly-traceable
civilization of several thousand years. Thus we are warranted in
believing that the works of Hermes Trismegistus were extant many ages
before the birth of the Jewish law-giver. "Styli and inkstands were
found on monuments of the fourth Dynasty, the oldest in the world," says
Bunsen. If the eminent Egyptologist rejects the period of 48,863 years
before Alexander, to which Diogenes Laertius carries back the records of
the priests, he is evidently more embarrassed with the ten thousand of
astronomical observations, and remarks that "if they were actual
observations, they *must have* extended over 10,000 years" (p. 14). "We
learn, however," he adds, "from one of their own old chronological works
. . . that the genuine Egyptian traditions concerning the mythological
period, treated of *myriads* of years." ("Egypte," i, p. 15).

<span id="fn_55"></span>[34:\*](#fr_55) Higgins: "Anacalypsis."

<span id="fn_56"></span>[35:\*](#fr_56) "De Vite Pythag."

<span id="fn_57"></span>[36:\*](#fr_57) "The Rosicrucians," etc., by
Hargrave Jennings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](iu001)
