[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Theosophy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](iu007)  [Next](iu009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### <span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

### CHAPTER IX.

> "Thou can'st not call that madness of which thou art proved to know
> nothing."--**T**ERTULLIAN:
>
> Apology.

> "This is not a matter of to-day,  
> Or yesterday, but hath been from all times;  
> And none hath told us whence it came or how!"--**S**OPHOCLES.

> "Belief in the supernatural is a fact natural, primitive, universal,
> and constant in the life and history of the human race. Unbelief in
> the supernatural begets materialism; materialism, sensuality;
> sensuality, social convulsions, amid whose storms man again learns to
> believe and pray."--**G**UIEOT.

> "If any one think these things incredible, let him keep his opinions
> to himself, and not contradict those who, by such events, are incited
> to the study of virtue."--**J**OSEPHUS.

FROM the Platonic and Pythagorean views of matter and force, we will now
turn to the kabalistic philosophy of the origin of man, and compare it
with the theory of natural selection enunciated by Darwin and Wallace.
It may be that we shall find as much reason to credit the ancients with
originality in this direction as in that which we have been considering.
To our mind, no stronger proof of the theory of cyclical progression
need be required than the comparative enlightenment of former ages and
that of the Patristic Church, as regards the form of the earth, and the
movements of the planetary system. Even were other evidence wanting, the
ignorance of Augustine and Lactantius, misleading the whole of
Christendom upon these questions until the period of Galileo, would mark
the eclipses through which human knowledge passes from age to age.

The "coats of skin," mentioned in the third chapter of *Genesis* as
given to Adam and Eve, are explained by certain ancient philosophers to
mean the fleshy bodies with which, in the progress of the cycles, the
progenitors of the race became clothed. They maintained that the
god-like physical form became grosser and grosser, until the bottom of
what may be termed the last spiritual cycle was reached, and mankind
entered upon the ascending arc of the first human cycle. Then began an
uninterrupted series of cycles or *yugas;* the precise number of years
of which each of them consisted remaining an inviolable mystery within
the precincts of the sanctuaries and disclosed only to the initiates. As
soon as humanity entered upon a new one, the stone age, with which the
preceding cycle had closed, began to gradually merge into the following
and next higher age. With each successive age, or epoch, men grew more
refined, until

###### <span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

the acme of perfection possible in that particular cycle had been
reached. Then the receding wave of time carried back with it the
vestiges of human, social, and intellectual progress. Cycle succeeded
cycle, by imperceptible transitions; highly-civilized flourishing
nations, waxed in power, attained the climax of development, waned, and
became extinct; and mankind, when the end of the lower cyclic arc was
reached, was replunged into barbarism as at the start. Kingdoms have
crumbled and nation succeeded nation from the beginning until our day,
the races alternately mounting to the highest and descending to the
lowest points of development. Draper observes that there is no reason to
suppose that any one cycle applied to the whole human race. On the
contrary, while man in one portion of the planet was in a condition of
retrogression, in another he might be progressing in enlightenment and
civilization.

How analogous this theory is to the law of planetary motion, which
causes the individual orbs to rotate on their axes; the several systems
to move around their respective suns; and the whole stellar host to
follow a common path around a common centre! Life and death, light and
darkness, day and night on the planet, as it turns about its axis and
traverses the zodiacal circle representing the lesser and the greater
cycles. <span id="fr_435"></span>[\*](#fn_434) Remember the Hermetic
axiom:--"As above, so below; as in heaven, so on earth."

Mr. Alfred R. Wallace argues with sound logic, that the development of
man has been more marked in his mental organization than in his external
form. Man, he conceives to differ from the animal, by being able to
undergo great changes of conditions and of his entire environment,
without very marked alterations in bodily form and structure. The
changes of climate he meets with a corresponding alteration in his
clothing, shelter, weapons, and implements of husbandry. His body may
become less hairy, more erect, and of a different color and proportions;
"the head and face is immediately connected with the organ of the mind,
and as being the medium, expressing the most refined motions of his
nature," alone change with the development of his intellect. There was a
time when "he had not yet acquired that wonderfully-developed brain, the
organ of the mind, which now, even in his lowest examples, raises him
far above the highest brutes, at a period when he had the form, but
hardly the nature of man, when he neither possessed human speech nor
sympathetic and moral feelings." Further, Mr. Wallace says that "Man may
have been--indeed, I believe *must have been,* once a homogeneous

###### <span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

race . . . in man, the hairy covering of the body has almost entirely
disappeared." Of the cave men of Les Eyzies, Mr. Wallace remarks further
" . . . the great breadth of the face, the enormous development of the
ascending ramus of the lower jaw . . . indicate enormous muscular power
and the habits of a savage and brutal race."

Such are the glimpses which anthropology affords us of men, either
arrived at the bottom of a cycle or starting in a new one. Let us see
how far they are corroborated by clairvoyant psychometry. Professor
Denton submitted a fragment of fossilized bone to his wife's
examination, without giving Mrs. Denton any hint as to what the article
was. It immediately called up to her pictures of people and scenes which
he thinks belonged to the stone age. She saw men closely resembling
monkeys, with a body very hairy, and "as if the natural hair answered
the purpose of clothing." "I question whether he can stand perfectly
upright; his hip-joints appear to be so formed, he cannot," she added.
"Occasionally I see part of the body of one of those beings that looks
comparatively smooth. I can see the skin, which is lighter colored . . .
I do not know whether he belongs to the same period. . . . At a distance
the face seems flat; the lower part of it is heavy; they have what I
suppose would be called prognathous jaws. The frontal region of the head
is low, and the lower portion of it is very prominent, forming a round
ridge across the forehead, immediately above the eyebrows. . . . Now I
see a face that looks like that of a human being, though there is a
monkey-like appearance about it. All these seem of that kind, having
long arms and hairy bodies." <span id="fr_436"></span>[\*](#fn_435)

Whether or not the men of science are willing to concede the correctness
of the Hermetic theory of the physical evolution of man from higher and
more spiritual natures, they themselves show us how the race has
progressed from the lowest observed point to its present development.
And, as all nature seems to be made up of analogies, is it unreasonable
to affirm that the same progressive development of individual forms has
prevailed among the inhabitants of the *unseen* universe? If such
marvellous effects have been caused by evolution upon our little
insignificant planet, producing reasoning and intuitive men from some
higher type of the ape family, why suppose that the boundless realms of
space are inhabited only by disembodied *angelic* forms? Why not give
place in that vast domain to the spiritual duplicates of these hairy,
long-armed and half-reasoning ancestors, their predecessors, and all
their successors, down to our time? Of course, the spiritual parts of
such primeval members of the human family would be as uncouth and
undeveloped as were

###### <span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

their physical bodies. While they made no attempt to calculate the
duration of the "grand cycle," the Hermetic philosophers yet maintained
that, according to the cyclic law, the living human race must inevitably
and collectively return one day to that point of departure, where man
was first clothed with "coats of skin"; or, to express it more clearly,
the human race must, in accordance with the law of evolution, be finally
*physically* spiritualized. Unless Messrs. Darwin and Huxley are
prepared to prove that the man of our century has attained, as a
physical and moral animal, the acme of perfection, and evolution, having
reached its apex, must stop all further progress with the modern genus
*Homo,* we do not see how they can possibly confute such a logical
deduction.

In his lecture on *The Action of Natural Selection on Man,* Mr. Alfred
R. Wallace concludes his demonstrations as to the development of human
races under that law of selection by saying that, if his conclusions are
just, "it must inevitably follow that the higher--the more intellectual
and moral--must displace the lower and more degraded races; and the
power of 'natural selection,' still acting on his mental organization,
must ever lead to the more perfect adaptation of man's higher faculties
to the condition of surrounding nature, and to the exigencies of the
social state. While his external form will probably ever remain
unchanged, except in the development of that perfect beauty . . .
refined and ennobled by the highest intellectual faculties and
sympathetic emotions, his mental constitution may continue to advance
and improve, till the world is again inhabited by a single, nearly
homogeneous race, no individual of which will be inferior *to the
noblest specimens of existing humanity.*" Sober, scientific methods and
cautiousness in hypothetical possibilities have evidently their share in
this expression of the opinions of the great anthropologist. Still, what
he says above clashes in no way with our kabalistic assertions. Allow to
ever-progressing nature, to the great law of the "survival of the
fittest," one step beyond Mr. Wallace's deductions, and we have in
future the possibility--nay, the assurance of a race, which, like the
Vril-ya of Bulwer-Lytton's *Coming Race,* will be but one remove from
the primitive "Sons of God."

It will be observed that this philosophy of cycles, which was
allegorized by the Egyptian Hierophants in the "circle of necessity,"
explains at the same time the allegory of the "Fall of man." According
to the Arabian descriptions, each of the seven chambers of the
Pyramids--those grandest of all cosmic symbols--was known by the name of
a planet. The peculiar architecture of the Pyramids shows in itself the
drift of the metaphysical thought of their builders. The apex is lost in
the clear blue sky of the land of the Pharaohs, and typifies the
primordial

###### <span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

point lost in the unseen universe from whence started the first race of
the spiritual prototypes of man. Each mummy, from the moment that it was
embalmed, lost its physical individuality in one sense; it symbolized
the human race. Placed in such a way as was best calculated to aid the
exit of the "soul," the latter had to pass through the seven planetary
chambers before it made its exit through the symbolical apex. Each
chamber typified, at the same time, one of the seven spheres, and one of
the seven higher types of physico-spiritual humanity alleged to be above
our own. Every 3,000 years, the soul, representative of its race, had to
return to its primal point of departure before it underwent another
evolution into a more perfected spiritual and physical transformation.
We must go deep indeed into the abstruse metaphysics of Oriental
mysticism before we can realize fully the infinitude of the subjects
that were embraced at one sweep by the majestic thought of its
exponents.

Starting as a pure and perfect spiritual being, the Adam of the second
chapter of *Genesis,* not satisfied with the position allotted to him by
the Demiurgus (who is the eldest first-begotten, the Adam-Kadmon), Adam
the second, the "man of dust," strives in his pride to become Creator in
his turn. Evolved out of the androgynous Kadmon, this Adam is himself an
androgyn; for, according to the oldest beliefs presented allegorically
in Plato's *Timaeus,* the prototypes of our races were all enclosed in
the microcosmic tree which grew and developed within and under the great
mundane or macrocosmic tree. Divine spirit being considered a unity,
however numerous the rays of the great spiritual sun, man has still had
his origin like all other forms, whether organic or otherwise, in this
one Fount of Eternal Light. Were we even to reject the hypothesis of an
androgynous man, in connection with physical evolution, the significance
of the allegory in its spiritual sense, would remain unimpaired. So long
as the first god-man, symbolizing the two first principles of creation,
the dual male and female element, had no thought of good and evil he
could not hypostasize "woman," for she was in him as he was in her. It
was only when, as a result of the evil hints of the serpent, *matter,*
the latter condensed itself and cooled on the spiritual man in its
contact with the elements, that the fruits of the man-tree--who is
himself that tree of knowledge--appeared to his view. From this moment
the androgynal union ceased, man evolved out of himself the woman as a
separate entity. They have broken the thread between pure spirit and
pure matter. Henceforth they will create no more *spiritually,* and by
the sole power of their will; man has become a physical creator, and the
kingdom of spirit can be won only by a long imprisonment in matter. The
meaning of Gogard, the Hellenic tree of life, the sacred oak among

###### <span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

whose luxuriant branches a serpent dwells, and *cannot* be
dislodged, <span id="fr_437"></span>[\*](#fn_436) thus becomes apparent.
Creeping out from the primordial *ilus*, the mundane snake grows more
material and waxes in strength and power with every new evolution.

The Adam Primus, or Kadmon, the Logos of the Jewish mystics, is the same
as the Grecian Prometheus, who seeks to rival with the divine wisdom; he
is also the Pymander of Hermes, or the **P**OWER OF THE THOUGHT
**D**IVINE, in its most spiritual aspect, for he was less hypostasized
by the Egyptians than the two former. These all create men, but fail in
their final object. Desiring to endow man with an immortal spirit, in
order that by linking the trinity in one, he might gradually return to
his primal spiritual state without losing his individuality, Prometheus
fails in his attempt to steal the *divine* fire, and is sentenced to
expiate his crime on Mount Kazbeck. Prometheus is also the *Logos* of
the ancient Greeks, as well as Herakles. In the *Codex Nazaraeus* <span
id="fr_438"></span>[\*\*](#fn_437) we see Bahak-Zivo deserting the
heaven of his father, confessing that though he is the father of the
genii, he is unable to "construct creatures," for he is equally
unacquainted with Orcus as with "the consuming fire which is wanting in
light." And Fetahil, one of the "powers," sits in the "mud" (matter) and
wonders why the living fire is so changed.

All of these *Logoi* strove to endow man with the immortal spirit,
failed, and nearly all are represented as being punished for the attempt
by severe sentences. Those of the early Christian Fathers who like
Origen and Clemens Alexandrinus, were well versed in Pagan symbology,
having begun their careers as philosophers, felt very much embarrassed.
They could not deny the anticipation of their doctrines in the oldest
myths. The latest *Logos,* according to their teachings, had also
appeared in order to show mankind the way to immortality; and in his
desire to endow the world with eternal life through the Pentecostal
fire, had lost his life agreeably to the traditional programme. Thus was
originated the very awkward explanation of which our modern clergy
freely avail themselves, that all these mythic types show the prophetic
spirit which, through the Lord's mercy, was afforded even to the heathen
idolaters! The Pagans, they assert, had presented in their imagery the
great drama of Calvary --hence the resemblance. On the other hand, the
philosophers maintained, with unassailable logic, that the pious fathers
had simply helped themselves to a ready-made groundwork, either finding
it easier than to exert their own imagination, or because of the greater
number of ignorant proselytes who were attracted to the new doctrine

###### <span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

by such an extraordinary resemblance with their mythologies, at least as
far as the outward form of the most fundamental doctrines goes.

The allegory of the Fall of man and the fire of Prometheus is also
another version of the myth of the rebellion of the proud Lucifer,
hurled down to the bottomless pit--Orcus. In the religion of the
Brahmans, Moisasure, the Hindu Lucifer, becomes envious of the Creator's
resplendent light, and at the head of a legion of inferior spirits
rebels against Brahma, and declares war against him. Like Hercules, the
faithful Titan, who helps Jupiter and restores to him his throne, Siva,
the third person of the Hindu trinity, hurls them all from the celestial
abode in Honderah, the region of eternal darkness. But here the fallen
angels are made to repent of their evil deed, and in the Hindu doctrine
they are all afforded the opportunity to progress. In the Greek fiction,
Hercules, the Sun-god, descends to Hades to deliver the victims from
their tortures; and the Christian Church also makes her incarnate god
descend to the dreary Plutonic regions and overcome the rebellious
ex-archangel. In their turn the kabalists explain the allegory in a
semi-scientific way. Adam the second, or the first-created race which
Plato calls gods, and the Bible the Elohim, was not triple in his nature
like the earthly man: *i.e*., he was not composed of soul, spirit, and
body, but was a compound of sublimated astral elements into which the
"Father" had breathed an immortal, divine spirit. The latter, by reason
of its godlike essence, was ever struggling to liberate itself from the
bonds of even that flimsy prison; hence the "sons of God," in their
imprudent efforts, were the first to trace a future model for the cyclic
law. But, man must not be "like one of us," says the Creative Deity, one
of the Elohim "intrusted with the fabrication of the lower
animal." <span id="fr_439"></span>[\*](#fn_438) And thus it was, when
the men of the first race had reached the summit of the first cycle,
they lost their balance, and their second envelope, the grosser clothing
(astral body), dragged them down the opposite arc.

This kabalistic version of the sons of God (or of light) is given in the
*Codex Nazaraeus.* Bahak-Zivo, the "father of genii, is ordered to
'construct creatures.' " But, as he is "ignorant of Orcus," he fails to
do so and calls in Fetahil a still purer spirit to his aid, who fails
still worse.

Then steps on the stage of creation the "spirit" <span
id="fr_440"></span>[\*\*](#fn_439) (which properly ought to be
translated "soul," for it is the *anima mundi,* and which

###### <span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

with the Nazarenes and the Gnostics was *feminine*)*,* and perceiving
that for Fetahil, <span id="fr_441"></span>[\*](#fn_440) the *newest
man* (the latest), the splendor was "changed," and that for splendor
existed "decrease and damage," awakes Karabtanos, <span
id="fr_442"></span>[\*\*](#fn_441) "who was frantic and *without sense
and judgment,*" and says to him: "Arise; see, the splendor (light) of
the *newest* man (Fetahil) has failed (to produce or create men), the
decrease of this splendor is visible. Rise up, come with thy **MOTHER**
(the *spiritus*) and free thee from limits by which thou art held, and
those more ample than the whole world." After which follows the union of
the frantic and blind matter, guided by the insinuations of the spirit
(not the *Divine* breath, but the *Astral* spirit, which by its double
essence is already tainted with matter) and the offer of the MOTHER
being accepted the Spiritus conceives "Seven Figures," which Irenaeus is
disposed to take for the seven *stellars* (planets) but which represent
the seven *capital sins,* the progeny of an astral soul separated from
its divine source (spirit) and *matter,* the blind demon of
concupiscence. Seeing this, Fetahil extends his hand toward the abyss of
matter, and says: "Let the earth exist, just as the abode of the powers
has existed." Dipping his hand in the chaos, which he condenses, he
creates our planet. <span id="fr_443"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_442)

Then the *Codex* proceeds to tell how Bahak-Zivo was separated from the
Spiritus, and the genii, or angels, from the rebels. <span
id="fr_444"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_443) Then Mano <span
id="fr_445"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_444) (the greatest), who dwells with
the *greatest* **F**ERHO, calls Kebar-Zivo (known also by the name of
Nebat-Iavar bar Iufin-Ifafin), Helm and *Vine* of the food of life <span
id="fr_446"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_445) he being the *third life,*
and, commiserating the rebellious and foolish genii, on account of the
magnitude of their ambition, says: "Lord of the genii <span
id="fr_447"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_446) (Æons), see what the genii,
the rebellious angels do, and about what they are consulting. <span
id="fr_448"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_447) They say, "Let us call
forth the world, and let us call the 'powers' into existence. The genii
are the *Principes,* the 'sons of Light,' but thou art the '*Messenger
of Life.*' " <span id="fr_449"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_448)

###### <span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

And in order to counteract the influence of the seven "badly disposed"
principles, the progeny of *Spiritus,* **C**ABAR **Z**IO, the mighty
Lord of Splendor, procreates *seven other lives* (the cardinal virtues)
who shine in their own form and light "from on high" <span
id="fr_450"></span>[\*](#fn_449) and thus reestablishes the balance
between good and evil, light and darkness.

But this creation of beings, without the requisite influx of divine pure
breath in them, which was known among the kabalists as the "Living
Fire," produced but creatures of matter and astral light. <span
id="fr_451"></span>[\*\*](#fn_450) Thus were generated the animals which
preceded man on this earth. The spiritual beings, the "sons of light,"
those who remained faithful to the great *Ferho* (the First Cause of
all), constitute the celestial or angelic hierarchy, the Adonim, and the
legions of the *never-embodied* spiritual men. The followers of the
rebellious and foolish genii, and the descendants of the "witless" seven
spirits begotten by "Karabtanos" and the "spiritus," became, in course
of time, the "men of our planet," <span
id="fr_452"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_451) after having previously passed
through every "creation" of every one of the elements. From this stage
of life they have been traced by Darwin, who shows us how our *highest*
forms have been evolved out of the *lowest.* Anthropology dares not
follow the kabalist in his metaphysical flights *beyond* this planet,
and it is doubtful if its teachers have the courage to search for the
*missing link* in the old kabalistic manuscripts.

Thus was set in motion the *first cycle,* which in its rotations
*downward*, brought an infinitesimal part of the created *lives* to our
planet of *mud*. Arrived at the lowest point of the arc of the cycle
which directly preceded life on this earth, the pure divine spark still
lingering in the Adam made an effort to separate itself from the astral
spirit, for "man was falling gradually into generation," and the fleshy
coat was becoming with every action more and more dense.

And now comes a mystery, a *Sod*; <span
id="fr_453"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_452) a secret which Rabbi

###### <span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

Simeon <span id="fr_454"></span>[\*](#fn_453) imparted but to very few
initiates. It was enacted once every seven years during the Mysteries of
Samothrace, and the records of it are found self-printed on the leaves
of the Thibetan sacred tree, the mysterious **K**OUNBOUM, in the
Lamasery of the holy adepts. <span id="fr_455"></span>[\*\*](#fn_454)

In the shoreless ocean of space radiates the central, spiritual, and
*Invisible* sun. The universe is his body, spirit and soul; and after
this ideal model are framed ALL THINGS. These three emanations are the
three lives, the three degrees of the gnostic *Pleroma,* the three
"Kabalistic Faces," for the **A**NCIENT of the ancient, the holy of the
aged, the great En-Soph, "has a form and then he has no form." The
invisible "assumed a form when he called the universe into
existence," <span id="fr_456"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_455) says the *Sohar,*
the Book of splendor. The *first* light is His soul, the Infinite,
Boundless, and Immortal breath; under the efflux of which the universe
heaves its mighty bosom, infusing *Intelligent* life throughout
creation. The *second* emanation condenses cometary matter and produces
forms within the cosmic circle; sets the countless worlds floating in
the electric space, and infuses *the unintelligent,* blind
life-principle into every form. The third, produces the whole universe
of physical matter; and as it keeps gradually receding from the Central
Divine Light its brightness wanes and it becomes **D**ARKNESS and the
**B**AD--pure matter, the "gross purgations of the celestial fire" of
the Hermetists.

When the Central Invisible (the Lord Ferho) saw the efforts of the
divine *Scintilla,* unwilling to be dragged lower down into the
degradation of matter, to liberate itself, he permitted it to shoot out
from itself a *monad,* over which, attached to it as by the finest
thread, the Divine Scintilla (the soul) had to watch during its
ceaseless peregrinations from one form to another. Thus the monad was
shot down into the first form of matter and became encased in stone;
then, in course of time, through the combined efforts of *living fire*
and *living water,* both of which shone their *reflection* upon the
stone, the monad crept out of its prison to sunlight as a lichen. From
change to change it went higher and higher; the monad, with every new
transformation borrowing more of the radiance of its parent,
*Scintilla,* which approached it nearer at every transmigration. For
"the First Cause, had willed it to proceed in this order" and destined
it to creep on higher until its physical form became once more the Adam
*of dust,* shaped in the image of the Adam Kadmon. Before undergoing its
last earthly transformation, the external covering of the monad, from
the moment of its conception as an embryo, passes in turn, once more,
through the phases of the several kingdoms. In

###### <span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

its fluidic prison it assumes a vague resemblance at various periods of
the gestation to plant, reptile, bird, and animal, until it becomes a
human embryo. <span id="fr_457"></span>[\*](#fn_456) At the birth of the
future man, the monad, radiating with all the glory of its immortal
parent which watches it from the seventh sphere, becomes
*senseless*. <span id="fr_458"></span>[\*\*](#fn_457) It loses all
recollection of the past, and returns to consciousness but gradually,
when the instinct of childhood gives way to reason and intelligence.
After the separation between the life-principle (astral spirit) and the
body takes place, the liberated soul--Monad, exultingly rejoins the
mother and father spirit, the radiant Augoeides, and the two, merged
into one, forever form, with a glory proportioned to the spiritual
purity of the past earth-life, the Adam who has completed the circle of
necessity, and is freed from the last vestige of his physical
encasement. Henceforth, growing more and more radiant at each step of
his upward progress, he mounts the shining path that ends at the point
from which he started around the **GRAND CYCLE**.

The whole Darwinian theory of natural selection is included in the first
six chapters of the Book of *Genesis.* The "Man" of chapter i. is
radically different from the "Adam" of chapter ii., for the former was
created "male and female"--that is, bi-sexed--and in the image of God;
while the latter, according to verse seven, was formed of the dust of
the ground, and became "a living soul," after the Lord God "breathed
into his nostrils the breath of life." Moreover, *this Adam* was a male
being, and in verse twenty we are told that "there was not found a
helpmeet for him." The Adonai, being pure spiritual entities, had no
sex, or rather had both sexes united in themselves, like their Creator;
and the ancients understood this so well that they represented many of
their deities as of dual sex. The Biblical student must either accept
this interpretation, or make the passages in the two chapters alluded to
absurdly contradict each other. It was such literal acceptance of
passages that warranted the atheists in covering the Mosaic account with
ridicule, and it is the dead letter of the old text that begets the
materialism of our age. Not only are these two races of beings thus
clearly indicated in *Genesis,* but even a third and a fourth one are
ushered before the reader in chapter iv., where the "sons of God" and
the race of "giants" are spoken of.

As we write, there appears in an American paper, *The Kansas City
Times,* an account of important discoveries of the remains of a
prehistorical *race of giants,* which corroborates the statements of the
kabalists and the Bible allegories at the same time. It is worth
preserving:

###### <span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

"In his researches among the forests of Western Missouri, Judge E. P.
West has discovered a number of conical-shaped mounds, similar in
construction to those found in Ohio and Kentucky. These mounds are found
upon the high bluffs overlooking the Missouri River, the largest and
more prominent being found in Tennessee, Mississippi, and Louisiana.
Until about three weeks ago it was not suspected that the mound builders
had made this region their home in the prehistoric days; but now it is
discovered that this strange and extinct race once occupied this land,
and have left an extensive graveyard in a number of high mounds upon the
Clay County bluffs.

"As yet, only one of these mounds has been opened. Judge West discovered
a skeleton about two weeks ago, and made a report to other members of
the society. They accompanied him to the mound, and not far from the
surface excavated and took out the remains of two skeletons. The bones
are very large--so large, in fact, when compared with an ordinary
skeleton of modern date, they appear to have formed part of a giant. The
head bones, such as have not rotted away, are monstrous in size. The
lower jaw of one skeleton is in a state of preservation, and is double
the size of the jaw of a civilized person. The teeth in this jawbone are
large, and appear to have been ground down and worn away by contact with
roots and carnivorous food. The jaw-bone indicates immense muscular
strength. The thigh-bone, when compared with that of an ordinary modern
skeleton, looks like that of a horse. The length, thickness, and
muscular development are remarkable. But the most peculiar part about
the skeleton is the frontal bone. It is very low, and differs radically
from any ever seen in this section before. It forms one thick ridge of
bone about one inch wide, extending across the eyes. It is a narrow but
rather heavy ridge of bone which, instead of extending upward, as it
does now in these days of civilization, receded back from the eyebrows,
forming a flat head, and thus indicates a very low order of mankind. It
is the opinion of the scientific gentlemen who are making these
discoveries that these bones are the remains of a prehistoric race of
men. They do not resemble the present existing race of Indians, nor are
the mounds constructed upon any pattern or model known to have been in
use by any race of men now in existence in America. The bodies are
discovered in a sitting posture in the mounds, and among the bones are
found stone weapons, such as flint knives, flint scrapers, and all of
them different in shape to the arrow-heads, war-hatchets, and other
stone tools and weapons known to have been in use by the aboriginal
Indians of this land when discovered by the whites. The gentlemen who
have these curious bones in charge have deposited them with Dr. Foe, on
Main street. It is their intention to make further and closer researches
in the mounds on

###### <span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

the bluffs opposite this city. They will make a report of their labors
at the next meeting of the Academy of Science, by which time they expect
to be able to make some definite report as to their opinions. It is
pretty definitely settled, however, that the skeletons are those of a
race of men not now in existence."

The author of a recent and very elaborate work <span
id="fr_459"></span>[\*](#fn_458) finds some cause for merriment over the
union of the sons of God with the "daughters of men," who *were fair,*
as alluded to in *Genesis,* and described at great length in that
wonderful legend, the *Book of Enoch.* More is the pity, that our most
learned and liberal men do not employ their close and merciless logic to
repair its one-sidedness by seeking the true spirit which dictated these
allegories of old. This spirit was certainly more *scientific* than
skeptics are yet prepared to admit. But with every year some new
discovery may corroborate their assertions, until the whole of antiquity
is vindicated.

One thing, at least, has been shown in the Hebrew text, viz.: that there
was one race of purely physical creatures, another purely spiritual. The
evolution and "transformation of species" required to fill the gap
between the two has been left to abler anthropologists. We can only
repeat the philosophy of men of old, which says that the union of these
two races produced a third--the Adamite race. Sharing the natures of
both its parents, it is equally adapted to an existence in the material
and spiritual worlds. Allied to the physical half of man's nature is
reason, which enables him to maintain his supremacy over the lower
animals, and to subjugate nature to his uses. Allied to his spiritual
part is his *conscience,* which will serve as his unerring guide through
the besetments of the senses; for conscience is that instantaneous
perception between right and wrong, which can only be exercised by the
spirit, which, being a portion of the Divine Wisdom and Purity, is
absolutely pure and wise. Its promptings are independent of reason, and
it can only manifest itself clearly, when unhampered by the baser
attractions of our dual nature.

Reason being a faculty of our physical brain, one which is justly
defined as that of deducing inferences from premises, and being wholly
dependent on the evidence of other senses, cannot be a quality
pertaining directly to our divine spirit. The latter *knows--*hence, all
reasoning which implies discussion and argument would be useless. So an
entity, which, if it must be considered as a direct emanation from the
eternal Spirit of wisdom, has to be viewed as possessed of the same
attri-

###### <span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

butes as the essence or the whole of which it is a part. Therefore, it
is with a certain degree of logic that the ancient theurgists maintained
that the *rational* part of man's soul (spirit) never entered wholly
into the man's body, but only overshadowed him more or less through the
*irrational* or astral soul, which serves as an intermediatory agent, or
a medium between spirit and body. The man who has conquered matter
sufficiently to receive the direct light from his shining *Augoeides,*
feels truth intuitionally; he could not err in his judgment,
notwithstanding all the sophisms suggested by cold reason, for he is
ILLUMINATED. Hence, prophecy, vaticination, and the so-called Divine
inspiration are simply the effects of this illumination from above by
our own immortal spirit.

Swedenborg, following the mystical doctrines of the Hermetic
philosophers, devoted a number of volumes to the elucidation of the
"internal sense" of *Genesis.* Swedenborg was undoubtedly a
"natural-born magician," a seer; he was *not* an *adept.* Thus, however
closely he may have followed the apparent method of interpretation used
by the alchemists and mystic writers, he partially failed; the more so,
that the model chosen by him in this method was one who, albeit a great
alchemist, was no more of an adept than the Swedish seer himself, in the
fullest sense of the word. Eugenius Philalethes had never attained "the
highest pyrotechny," to use the diction of the mystic philosophers. But,
although both have missed the whole truth in its details, Swedenborg has
virtually given the same interpretation of the first chapter of
*Genesis* as the Hermetic philosophers. The seer, as well as the
initiates, notwithstanding their veiled phraseology, clearly show that
the first chapters of *Genesis* relate to the *regeneration,* or a new
birth of man, not to the creation of our universe and its crown
work--MAN. The fact that the terms of the alchemists, such as *salt,
sulphur,* and *mercury* are transformed by Swedenborg into *ens, cause,*
and *effect*, <span id="fr_460"></span>[\*](#fn_459) does not affect the
underlying idea of solving the problems of the Mosaic books by the only
possible method--that used by the Hermetists--that of correspondences.

His doctrine of correspondence, or Hermetic symbolism, is that of
Pythagoras and of the kabalists--"as above, so below." It is also that
of the Buddhist philosophers, who, in their still more abstract
metaphysics, inverting the usual mode of definition given by our
*erudite* scholars, call the invisible types the only reality, and
everything else the effects of the causes, or visible
prototypes--*illusions.* However contradictory their various
elucidations of the *Pentateuch* may appear *on their surface,* every
one of them tends to show that the sacred literature of every country,
the *Bible* as much as the *Vedas* or the Buddhist *Scriptures,* can
only be

###### <span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

understood and thoroughly sifted by the light of Hermetic philosophy.
The great sages of antiquity, those of the mediaeval ages, and the
mystical writers of our more modern times also, were all *Hermetists.*
Whether the light of truth had illuminated them through their faculty of
intuition, or as a consequence of study and regular initiation,
virtually, they had accepted the method and followed the path traced to
them by such men as Moses, Gautama-Buddha, and Jesus. The truth,
symbolized by some alchemists as *dew from heaven,* had descended into
their hearts, and they had all gathered it upon the *tops of mountains,*
after having spread CLEAN *linen cloths* to receive it; and thus, in one
sense, they had secured, each for himself, and in his own way, the
*universal solvent.* How much they were allowed to share it with the
public is another question. That veil, which is alleged to have covered
the face of Moses, when, after descending from Sinai, he taught his
people the Word of God, cannot be withdrawn at the will of the teacher
only. It depends on the listeners, whether they will also remove the
veil which is "upon their hearts." Paul says it plainly; and his words
addressed to the Corinthians can be applied to every man or woman, and
of any age in the history of the world. If "their minds are blinded" by
the shining skin of divine truth, whether the Hermetic veil be withdrawn
or not from the face of the teacher, it cannot be taken away from their
heart unless "it *shall turn to the Lord.*" But the latter appellation
must not be applied to either of the three anthropomorphized personages
of the Trinity, but to the "Lord," as understood by Swedenborg and the
Hermetic philosophers--the Lord, who is Life and **M**AN.

The everlasting conflict between the world-religions--Christianity,
Judaism, Brahmanism, Paganism, Buddhism, proceeds from this one source:
Truth is known but to the few; the rest, unwilling to withdraw the veil
from their own hearts, imagine it blinding the eyes of their neighbor.
The god of every exoteric religion, including Christianity, not
withstanding its pretensions to mystery, is an idol, a fiction, and
cannot be anything else. Moses, *closely-veiled,* speaks to the
stiff-necked multitudes of Jehovah, the cruel, anthropomorphic deity, as
of the highest God, burying deep in the bottom of his heart that truth
which cannot be "either spoken of or revealed." Kapila cuts with the
sharp sword of his sarcasms the Brahman-Yoggins, who in their mystical
visions pretend to see the HIGHEST *one*. Gautama-Buddha conceals, under
an impenetrable cloak of metaphysical subtilties, the verity, and is
regarded by posterity as *an atheist.* Pythagoras, with his allegorical
mysticism and metempsychosis, is held for a clever impostor, and is
succeeded in the same estimation by other philosophers, like Apollonius
and Plotinus, who are generally spoken of as visionaries, if not
charlatans. Plato, whose writings

###### <span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

were never read by the majority of our *great* scholars but
superficially, is accused by many of his translators of absurdities and
puerilities, and even of being ignorant of his own language; <span
id="fr_461"></span>[\*](#fn_460) most likely for saying, in reference to
the Supreme, that "a matter of that kind cannot be expressed by words,
like other things to be learned"; <span
id="fr_462"></span>[\*\*](#fn_461) and making Protagoras lay too much
stress on the use of "veils." We could fill a whole volume with names of
misunderstood sages, whose writings--only because our materialistic
critics feel unable to lift the "veil," which shrouds them--pass off in
a current way for mystical absurdities. The most important feature of
this seemingly incomprehensible mystery lies perhaps in the inveterate
habit of the majority of readers to judge a work by its words and
insufficiently-expressed ideas, leaving the spirit of it out of the
question. Philosophers of quite different schools may be often found to
use a multitude of different expressions, some dark and
metaphorical--all figurative, and yet treating of the same subject. Like
the thousand divergent rays of a globe of fire, every ray leads,
nevertheless, to the central point, so every mystic philosopher, whether
he be a devotedly pious enthusiast like Henry More; an irascible
alchemist, using a Billingsgate phraseology--like his adversary,
Eugenius Philalethes; or an *atheist* (?) like Spinoza, all had one and
the same object in view--MAN. It is Spinoza, however, who furnishes
perhaps the truest key to a portion of this unwritten secret. While
Moses forbids "graven images" of Him whose name is not to be taken in
vain, Spinoza goes farther. He clearly infers that God must not be so
much as *described.* Human language is totally unfit to give an idea of
this "Being" who is altogether unique. Whether it is Spinoza or the
Christian theology that is more right in their premises and conclusion,
we leave the reader to judge for himself. Every attempt to the contrary
leads a nation to anthropomorphize the deity in whom it believes, and
the result is that given by Swedenborg. Instead of stating that God made
man after his own image, we ought in truth to say that "man *imagines*
God after his image," <span id="fr_463"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_462)
forgetting that he has set up his own reflection for worship.

Where, then, lies the true, real secret so much talked about by the
Hermetists? That there was and there is a secret, no candid student of
esoteric literature will ever doubt. Men of genius--as many of the
Hermetic philosophers undeniably were--would not have made fools of
themselves by trying to fool others for several thousand consecutive
years. That this great secret, commonly termed "the philosopher's
stone," had a spiritual as well as a physical meaning attached to it,
was suspected in all ages. The author of *Remarks on Alchemy and the
Alchemists* very truly

###### <span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

observes that the subject of the Hermetic art is MAN, and the object of
the art is the perfection of man. <span id="fr_464"></span>[\*](#fn_463)
But we cannot agree with him that only those whom he terms "money-loving
sots," ever attempted to carry a purely *moral* design (of the
alchemists) into the field of physical science. The fact alone that man,
in their eyes, is a trinity, which they divide into *Sol*, water of
*mercury,* and *sulphur,* which is the *secret fire*, or, to speak
plain, into *body, soul,* and *spirit,* shows that there is a physical
side to the question. Man is the philosopher's *stone* spiritually--"*a
triune or trinity in unity,*" as Philalethes expresses it. But he is
also that stone physically. The latter is but the effect of the cause,
and the cause is the universal solvent of everything--divine spirit. Man
is a correlation of chemical physical forces, as well as a correlation
of spiritual powers. The latter react on the physical powers of man in
proportion to the development of the earthly man. "The work is carried
to perfection according to the virtue of a body, soul, and spirit," says
an alchemist; "for the body would never be penetrable were it not for
the *spirit,* nor would the spirit be permanent in its supra-perfect
*tincture*, were it not for the body; nor could these two act one upon
another without the soul, *for the spirit is an invisible thing,* nor
doth it ever appear without another GARMENT, which garment is the
SOUL." <span id="fr_465"></span>[\*\*](#fn_464)

The "philosophers by fire" asserted, through their chief, Robert Fludd,
that sympathy is the offspring of light, and "antipathy hath its
beginning from darkness." Moreover, they taught, with other kabalists,
that "contrarieties in nature doth proceed from one eternal essence, or
from the root of all things." Thus, the first cause is the parent-source
of good as well as of evil. The creator--who is *not* the Highest
God--is the father of matter, which is *bad,* as well as of spirit,
which, emanating from the highest, invisible cause, passes through him
like through a vehicle, and pervades the whole universe. "It is most
certain," remarks Robertus di Fluctibus (Robert Fludd), "that, as there
are an infinity of *visible* creatures, so there is an endless variety
of invisible ones, of divers natures, in the universal machine. Through
the mysterious name of God, which Moses was so desirous of him (Jehova)
to hear and know, when he received from him this answer, *Jehova is my
everlasting name.* As for the other name, it is so pure and simple that
it *cannot be articulated, or compounded, or truly expressed by man's
voice* . . . all the other names are wholly comprehended within it, for
it contains the property as well of *Nolunty* as *volunty,* of privation
as position, of death as life, of cursing as blessing, of evil as good
(though nothing ideally is bad in

###### <span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

him), of hatred and discord, and consequently of sympathy and
antipathy." <span id="fr_466"></span>[\*](#fn_465)

Lowest in the scale of being are those invisible creatures called by the
kabalists the "elementary." There are three distinct classes of these.
The highest, in intelligence and cunning, are the so-called terrestrial
spirits, of which we will speak more categorically in other parts of
this work. Suffice to say, for the present, that they are the *larvae*,
or shadows of those who have lived on earth, have refused all spiritual
light, remained and died deeply immersed in the mire of matter, and from
whose sinful souls the immortal spirit has gradually separated. The
second class is composed of the invisible antitypes of the men *to be*
born. No form can come into objective existence--from the highest to the
lowest--before the abstract ideal of this form--or, as Aristotle would
call it, the *privation* of this form--is called forth. Before an artist
paints a picture every feature of it exists already in his imagination;
to have enabled us to discern a watch, this particular watch must have
existed in its abstract form in the watchmaker's mind. So with future
men.

According to Aristotle's doctrine, there are three principles of natural
bodies: privation, matter, and form. These principles may be applied in
this particular case. The privation of the child which is to be we will
locate in the invisible mind of the great Architect of the
Universe--privation not being considered in the Aristotelic philosophy
as a principle in the composition of bodies, but as an external property
in their production; for the production is a change by which the matter
passes from the shape it has not to that which it assumes. Though the
privation of the unborn child's form, as well as of the future form of
the unmade watch, is that which is neither substance nor extension nor
quality as yet, nor any kind of existence, it is still something which
*is*, though its outlines, in order to be, must acquire an objective
form--the abstract must become concrete, in short. Thus, as soon as this
privation of matter is transmitted by energy to universal ether, it
becomes a material form, however sublimated. If modern science teaches
that *human* thought "affects the matter of another universe
simultaneously with this," how can he who believes in an Intelligent
First Cause, deny that the divine thought is equally transmitted, by the
same law of energy, to our common mediator, the universal ether--the
world-soul? And, if so, then it must follow that once there the divine
thought manifests itself objectively, energy faithfully reproducing the
outlines of that whose "privation" was first born in the divine mind.
Only it must not be understood that this *thought* creates matter. No;
it creates but the design for the future form; the

###### <span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

matter which serves to make this design having always been in existence,
and having been prepared to form a human body, through a series of
progressive transformations, as the result of evolution. Forms pass;
ideas that created them and the material which gave them objectiveness,
remain. These models, as yet devoid of immortal spirits, are
"elementals,"--properly speaking, *psychic embryos--*which, when their
time arrives, die out of the invisible world, and are born into this
visible one as human infants, receiving in *transitu* that divine breath
called spirit which completes the perfect man. This class cannot
communicate *objectively* with men.

The third class are the "elementals" proper, which never evolve into
human beings, but occupy, as it were, a specific step of the ladder of
being, and, by comparison with the others, may properly be called
nature-spirits, or cosmic agents of nature, each being confined to its
own element and never transgressing the bounds of others. These are what
Tertullian called the "princes of the powers of the air."

This class is believed to possess but one of the three attributes of
man. They have neither immortal spirits nor tangible bodies; only astral
forms, which partake, in a distinguishing degree, of the element to
which they belong and also of the ether. They are a combination of
sublimated matter and a rudimental mind. Some are changeless, but still
have no separate individuality, acting collectively, so to say. Others,
of certain elements and species, change form under a fixed law which
kabalists explain. The most solid of their bodies is ordinarily just
immaterial enough to escape perception by our physical eyesight, but not
so unsubstantial but that they can be perfectly recognized by the inner,
or clairvoyant vision. They not only exist and can all live in ether,
but can handle and direct it for the production of physical effects, as
readily as we can compress air or water for the same purpose by
pneumatic and hydraulic apparatus; in which occupation they are readily
helped by the "human elementary." More than this; they can so condense
it as to make to themselves tangible bodies, which by their Protean
powers they can cause to assume such likeness as they choose, by taking
as their models the portraits they find stamped in the memory of the
persons present. It is not necessary that the sitter should be thinking
at the moment of the one represented. His image may have faded many
years before. The mind receives indelible impression even from chance
acquaintance or persons encountered but once. As a few seconds exposure
of the sensitized photograph plate is all that is requisite to preserve
indefinitely the image of the sitter, so is it with the mind.

According to the doctrine of Proclus, the uppermost regions from the
zenith of the universe to the moon belonged to the gods or planetary

###### <span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

spirits, according to their hierarchies and classes. The highest among
them were the twelve *uper-ouranioi,* or supercelestial gods, having
whole legions of subordinate demons at their command. They are followed
next in rank and power by the *egkosmioi,* the intercosmic gods, each of
these presiding over a great number of demons, to whom they impart their
power and change it from one to another at will. These are evidently the
personified forces of nature in their mutual correlation, the latter
being represented by the third class or the "elementals" we have just
described.

Further on he shows, on the principle of the Hermetic axiom--of types,
and prototypes--that the lower spheres have their subdivisions and
classes of beings as well as the upper celestial ones, the former being
always subordinate to the higher ones. He held that the four elements
are all filled with *demons,* maintaining with Aristotle that the
universe is full, and that there is no void in nature. The demons of the
earth, air, fire, and water are of an elastic, ethereal, semi-corporeal
essence. It is these classes which officiate as intermediate agents
between the gods and men. Although lower in intelligence than the
*sixth* order of the higher demons, these beings preside directly over
the elements and organic life. They direct the growth, the
inflorescence, the properties, and various changes of plants. They are
the personified ideas or virtues shed from the heavenly *ule* into the
inorganic matter; and, as the vegetable kingdom is one remove higher
than the mineral, these emanations from the celestial gods take form and
being in the plant, they become *its soul.* It is that which Aristotle's
doctrine terms the *form* in the three principles of natural bodies,
classified by him as privation, matter, and form. His philosophy teaches
that besides the original matter, another principle is necessary to
complete the triune nature of every particle, and this is form; an
invisible, but still, in an ontological sense of the word, a substantial
being, really distinct from matter proper. Thus, in an animal or a
plant, besides the bones, the flesh, the nerves, the brains, and the
blood, in the former, and besides the pulpy matter, tissues, fibres, and
juice in the latter, which blood and juice, by circulating through the
veins and fibres, nourishes all parts of both animal and plant; and
besides the animal spirits, which are the principles of motion; and the
chemical energy which is transformed into vital force in the green leaf,
there must be a substantial form, which Aristotle called in the horse,
the *horse's soul;* Proclus, the *demon* of every mineral, plant, or
animal, and the mediaeval philosophers, the *elementary spirits* of the
four kingdoms.

All this is held in our century as metaphysics and gross superstition.
Still, on strictly ontological principles, there is, in these old
hypotheses, some shadow of probability, some clew to the perplexing
"missing links"

###### <span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

of exact science. The latter has become so dogmatical of late, that all
that lies beyond the ken of *inductive* science is termed imaginary; and
we find Professor Joseph Le Conte stating that some of the best
scientists "ridicule the use of the term 'vital force,' or vitality, as
a remnant of *superstition*." <span id="fr_467"></span>[\*](#fn_466) De
Candolle suggests the term "vital movement," instead of vital
force; <span id="fr_468"></span>[\*\*](#fn_467) thus preparing for a
final scientific leap which will transform the immortal, thinking man,
into an automaton with a clock-work inside him. "But," objects Le Conte,
"can we conceive of movement without force? And if the movement is
peculiar, so also is *the form of force.*"

In the Jewish *Kabala,* the nature-spirits were known under the general
name of *Shedim* and divided into four classes. The Persians called them
all *devs;* the Greeks, indistinctly designated them as *demons;* the
Egyptians knew them as *afrites.* The ancient Mexicans, says Kaiser,
believed in numerous spirit-abodes, into one of which the shades of
innocent children were placed until final disposal; into another,
situated in the sun, ascended the valiant souls of heroes; while the
hideous spectres of incorrigible sinners were sentenced to wander and
despair in subterranean caves, held in the bonds of the
earth-atmosphere, unwilling and unable to liberate themselves. They
passed their time in communicating with mortals, and frightening those
who could see them. Some of the African tribes know them as *Yowahoos.*
In the Indian Pantheon there are no less than 330,000,000 of various
kinds of spirits, including elementals, which latter were termed by the
Brahmans the Daityas. These beings are known by the adepts to be
attracted toward certain quarters of the heavens by something of the
same mysterious property which makes the magnetic needle turn toward the
north, and certain plants to obey the same attraction. The various races
are also believed to have a special sympathy with certain human
temperaments, and to more readily exert power over such than others.
Thus, a bilious, lymphatic, nervous, or sanguine person would be
affected favorably or otherwise by conditions of the astral light,
resulting from the different aspects of the planetary bodies. Having
reached this general principle, after recorded observations extending
over an indefinite series of years, or ages, the adept astrologer would
require only to know what the planetary aspects were at a given anterior
date, and to apply his knowledge of the succeeding changes in the
heavenly bodies, to be able to trace, with approximate accuracy, the
varying fortunes of the personage whose horoscope was required, and even
to predict the future. The accuracy of the horoscope

###### <span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

would depend, of course, no less upon the astrologer's knowledge of the
occult forces and races of nature, than upon his astronomical erudition.

Eliphas Levi expounds with reasonable clearness, in his *Dogme et Rituel
de la Haute Magie,* the law of reciprocal influences between the planets
and their combined effect upon the mineral, vegetable, and animal
kingdoms, as well as upon ourselves. He states that the astral
atmosphere is as constantly changing from day to day, and from hour to
hour, as the air we breathe. He quotes approvingly the doctrine of
Paracelsus that every man, animal, and plant bears external and internal
evidences of the influences dominant at the moment of germinal
development. He repeats the old kabalistic doctrine, that nothing is
unimportant in nature, and that even so small a thing as the birth of
one child upon our insignificant planet has its effect upon the
universe, as the whole universe has its own reactive influence upon him.

"The stars," he remarks, "are linked to each other by attractions which
hold them in equilibrium and cause them to move with regularity through
space. This network of light stretches from all the spheres to all the
spheres, and there is not a point upon any planet to which is not
attached one of these indestructible threads. The precise locality, as
well as the hour of birth, should then be calculated by the true adept
in astrology; then, when he shall have made the exact calculation of the
astral influences, it remains for him to count the chances of his
position in life, the helps or hindrances he is likely to encounter . .
. and his natural impulses toward the accomplishment of his destiny." He
also asserts that the individual force of the person, as indicating his
ability to conquer difficulties and subdue unfavorable propensities, and
so carve out his fortune, or to passively await what blind fate may
bring, must be taken into account.

A consideration of the subject from the standpoint of the ancients,
affords us, it will be seen, a very different view from that taken by
Professor Tyndall in his famous Belfast address. "To supersensual
beings," says he, "which, however potent and invisible, were nothing but
species of *human creatures,* perhaps raised from among mankind, and
retaining all human passions and appetites, were handed over the rule
and governance of natural phenomena."

To enforce his point, Mr. Tyndall conveniently quotes from Euripides the
familiar passage in Hume: "The gods toss all into confusion, mix
everything with its reverse, that all of us, from our ignorance and
uncertainty, may pay them the more worship and reverence." Although
enunciating in *Chrysippus* several Pythagorean doctrines, Euripides is
considered by every ancient writer as heterodox, therefore the quotation

###### <span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

proceeding from this philosopher does not at all strengthen Mr.
Tyndall's argument.

As to the *human* spirit, the notions of the older philosophers and
medieval kabalists while differing in some particulars, agreed on the
whole; so that the doctrine of one may be viewed as the doctrine of the
other. The most substantial difference consisted in the location of the
immortal or divine spirit of man. While the ancient Neo-platonists held
that the Augoeides never descends hypostatically into the living man,
but only sheds more or less its radiance on the inner man--the astral
soul--the kabalists of the middle ages maintained that the spirit,
detaching itself from the ocean of light and spirit, entered into man's
soul, where it remained through life imprisoned in the astral capsule.
This difference was the result of the belief of Christian kabalists,
more or less, in the dead letter of the allegory of the fall of man. The
soul, they said, became, through the fall of Adam, contaminated with the
world of matter, or Satan. Before it could appear with its enclosed
divine spirit in the presence of the Eternal, it had to purify itself of
the impurities of darkness. They compared "the spirit imprisoned within
the soul to a drop of water enclosed within a capsule of gelatine and
thrown in the ocean; so long as the capsule remains whole the drop of
water remains isolated; break the envelope and the drop becomes a part
of the ocean--its individual existence has ceased. So it is with the
spirit. As long as it is enclosed in its plastic mediator, or soul, it
has an individual existence. Destroy the capsule, a result which may
occur from the agonies of withered conscience, crime, and moral disease,
and the spirit returns back to its original abode. Its individuality is
gone."

On the other hand, the philosophers who explained the "fall into
generation" in their own way, viewed spirit as something wholly distinct
from the soul. They allowed its presence in the astral capsule only so
far as the spiritual emanations or rays of the "shining one" were
concerned. Man and soul had to conquer their immortality by ascending
toward the unity with which, if successful, they were finally linked,
and into which they were absorbed, so to say. The individualization of
man after death depended on the spirit, not on his soul and body.
Although the word "personality," in the sense in which it is usually
understood, is an absurdity, if applied literally to our immortal
essence, still the latter is a distinct entity, immortal and eternal,
*per se;* and, as in the case of criminals beyond redemption, when the
shining thread which links the spirit to the soul, from the moment of
the birth of a child, is violently snapped, and the disembodied entity
is left to share the fate of the lower animals, to gradually dissolve
into ether, and have its individuality annihilated--even then the spirit
remains a distinct being. It becomes a

###### <span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

planetary spirit, an angel; for *the gods of the Pagan or the archangels
of the Christian,* the direct emanations of the First Cause,
notwithstanding the hazardous statement of Swedenborg, *never were or
will be men,* on our planet, at least.

This specialization has been in all ages the stumbling-block of
metaphysicians. The whole esoterism of the Buddhistical philosophy is
based on this mysterious teaching, understood by so few persons, and so
totally misrepresented by many of the most learned scholars. Even
metaphysicians are too inclined to confound the effect with the cause. A
person may have won his immortal life, and remain the same *inner-self*
he was on earth, throughout eternity; but this does not imply
necessarily that he must either remain the Mr. Smith or Brown he was on
earth, or lose his individuality. Therefore, the astral soul and
terrestrial body of man may, in the dark Hereafter, be absorbed into the
cosmical ocean of sublimated elements, and cease to feel his *ego,* if
this *ego* did not deserve to soar higher; and the divine spirit still
remain an unchanged entity, though this terrestrial experience of his
emanations may be totally obliterated at the instant of separation from
the unworthy vehicle.

If the "spirit," or the divine portion of the soul, is preexistent as a
distinct being from all eternity, as Origen, Synesius, and other
Christian fathers and philosophers taught, and if it is the same, and
nothing more than the metaphysically-objective soul, how can it be
otherwise than eternal? And what matters it in such a case, whether man
leads an animal or a pure life, if, do what he may, he can never lose
his individuality? This doctrine is as pernicious in its consequences as
that of vicarious atonement. Had the latter dogma, in company with the
false idea that we are all immortal, been demonstrated to the world in
its true light, humanity would have been bettered by its propagation.
Crime and sin would be avoided, not for fear of earthly punishment, or
of a ridiculous hell, but for the sake of that which lies the most
deeply rooted in our inner nature--the desire of an individual and
distinct life in the hereafter, the positive assurance that we cannot
win it unless we "take the kingdom of heaven by violence," and the
conviction that neither human prayers nor the blood of another man will
save us from individual destruction after death, unless we firmly link
ourselves during our terrestrial life with our own immortal spirit--our
**G**OD.

Pythagoras, Plato, Timaeus of Locris, and the whole Alexandrian school
derived the soul from the universal World-Soul; and the latter was,
according to their own teachings--ether; something of such a fine nature
as to be perceived only by our inner sight. Therefore, it cannot be the
essence of the Monas, or *cause,* because the *anima mundi* is but the
effect, the objective emanation of the former. Both the human spirit

###### <span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

and soul are preexistent. But, while the former exists as a distinct
entity, an individualization, the soul exists as preexisting matter, an
unscient portion of an intelligent whole. Both were originally formed
from the Eternal Ocean of Light; but as the theosophists expressed it,
there is a visible as well as invisible spirit in fire. They made a
difference between the *anima bruta* and the *anima divina.* Empedocles
firmly believed all men and animals to possess two souls; and in
Aristotle we find that he calls one the reasoning soul--νους, and the
other, the animal soul--ψυχε. According to these philosophers, the
reasoning soul comes from *without* the universal soul, and the other
from *within.* This divine and superior region, in which they located
the invisible and supreme deity, was considered by them (by Aristotle
himself) as a fifth element, purely spiritual and divine, whereas the
*anima mundi* proper was considered as composed of a fine, igneous, and
ethereal nature spread throughout the universe, in short--ether. The
Stoics, the greatest materialists of ancient days, excepted the
Invisible God and Divine Soul (Spirit) from any such a corporeal nature.
Their modern commentators and admirers, greedily seizing the
opportunity, built on this ground the supposition that the Stoics
believed in neither God nor soul. But Epicurus, whose doctrine
militating directly against the agency of a Supreme Being and gods, in
the formation or government of the world, placed him far above the
Stoics in atheism and materialism, taught, nevertheless, that the soul
is of a fine, tender essence, formed from the smoothest, roundest, and
finest atoms, which description still brings us to the same sublimated
ether. Arnobius, Tertullian, Irenaeus, and Origen, notwithstanding their
Christianity, believed, with the more modern Spinoza and Hobbes, that
the soul was corporeal, though of a very fine nature.

This doctrine of the possibility of losing one's soul and, hence,
individuality, militates with the ideal theories and progressive ideas
of some spiritualists, though Swedenborg fully adopts it. They will
never accept the kabalistic doctrine which teaches that it is only
through observing the law of harmony that individual life hereafter can
be obtained; and that the farther the inner and outer man deviate from
this fount of harmony, whose source lies in our divine spirit, the more
difficult it is to regain the ground.

But while the spiritualists and other adherents of Christianity have
little if any perception of this fact of the possible death and
obliteration of the human personality by the separation of the immortal
part from the perishable, the Swedenborgians fully comprehend it. One of
the most respected ministers of the New Church, the Rev. Chauncey Giles,
D.D., of New York, recently elucidated the subject in a public discourse
as follows: Physical death, or the death of the body, was a provision of
the

###### <span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

divine economy for the benefit of man, a provision by means of which he
attained the higher ends of his being. But there is another death which
is the interruption of the divine order and the destruction of every
human element in man's nature, and every possibility of human happiness.
This is the spiritual death, which takes place before the dissolution of
the body. "There may be a vast development of man's natural mind without
that development being accompanied by a particle of love of God, or of
unselfish love of man." When one falls into a love of self and love of
the world, with its pleasures, losing the divine love of God and of the
neighbor, he falls from life to death. The higher principles which
constitute the essential elements of his humanity perish, and he lives
only on the natural plane of his faculties. Physically he exists,
spiritually he is dead. To all that pertain to the higher and the only
enduring phase of existence he is as much dead as his body becomes dead
to all the activities, delights, and sensations of the world when the
spirit has left it. This spiritual death results from disobedience of
the laws of spiritual life, which is followed by the same penalty as the
disobedience of the laws of the natural life. But the spiritually dead
have still their delights; they have their intellectual endowments and
power, and intense activities. All the animal delights are theirs, and
to multitudes of men and women these constitute the highest ideal of
human happiness. The tireless pursuit of riches, of the amusements and
entertainments of social life; the cultivation of graces of manner, of
taste in dress, of social preferment, of scientific distinction,
intoxicate and enrapture these dead-alive; but, the eloquent preacher
remarks, "these creatures, with all their graces, rich attire, and
brilliant accomplishments, are dead in the eye of the Lord and the
angels, and when measured by the only true and immutable standard have
no more genuine life than skeletons whose flesh has turned to dust." A
high development of the intellectual faculties does not imply spiritual
and true life. Many of our greatest scientists are but animate
corpses--they have no spiritual sight because their spirits have left
them. So we might go through all ages, examine all occupations, weigh
all human attainments, and investigate all forms of society, and we
would find these *spiritually dead* everywhere.

Pythagoras taught that the entire universe is one vast system of
mathematically correct combinations. Plato shows the deity
*geometrizing.* The world is sustained by the same law of equilibrium
and harmony upon which it was built. The centripetal force could not
manifest itself without the centrifugal in the harmonious revolutions of
the spheres; all forms are the product of this dual force in nature.
Thus, to illustrate our case, we may designate the spirit as the
centrifugal, and the soul as the centripetal, spiritual energies. When
in perfect harmony, both forces

###### <span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

produce one result; break or damage the centripetal motion of the
earthly soul tending toward the centre which attracts it; arrest its
progress by clogging it with a heavier weight of matter than it can
bear, and the harmony of the whole, which was its life, is destroyed.
Individual life can only be continued if sustained by this two-fold
force. The least deviation from harmony damages it; when it is destroyed
beyond redemption the forces separate and the form is gradually
annihilated. After the death of the depraved and the wicked, arrives the
critical moment. If during life the ultimate and desperate effort of the
inner-self to reunite itself with the faintly-glimmering ray of its
divine parent is neglected; if this ray is allowed to be more and more
shut out by the thickening crust of matter, the soul, once freed from
the body, follows its earthly attractions, and is magnetically drawn
into and held within the dense fogs of the material atmosphere. Then it
begins to sink lower and lower, until it finds itself, when returned to
consciousness, in what the ancients termed *Hades.* The annihilation of
such a soul is never instantaneous; it may last centuries, perhaps; for
nature never proceeds by jumps and starts, and the astral soul being
formed of elements, the law of evolution must bide its time. Then begins
the fearful law of compensation, the *Yin-youan* of the Buddhists.

This class of spirits are called the "terrestrial" or "*earthly*
elementary," in contradistinction to the other classes, as we have shown
in the introductory chapter. In the East they are known as the "Brothers
of the Shadow." Cunning, low, vindictive, and seeking to retaliate their
sufferings upon humanity, they become, until final annihilation,
vampires, ghouls, and prominent actors. These are the leading "stars" on
the great spiritual stage of "materialization," which phenomena they
perform with the help of the more intelligent of the genuine-born
"elemental" creatures, which hover around and welcome them with delight
in their own spheres. Henry Kunrath, the great German kabalist, has on a
plate of his rare work, *Amphitheatri Sapientiae AEternae,*
representations of the four classes of these human "elementary spirits."
Once past the threshold of the sanctuary of initiation, once that an
adept has lifted the "Veil of Isis," the mysterious and jealous goddess,
he has nothing to fear; but till then he is in constant danger.

Although Aristotle himself, anticipating the modern physiologists,
regarded the human mind as a material substance, and ridiculed the
hylozoists, nevertheless he fully believed in the existence of a
"double" soul, or spirit and soul. <span
id="fr_469"></span>[\*](#fn_468) He laughed at Strabo for believing that
any particles of matter, *per se,* could have life and intellect in
themselves suf-

###### <span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

ficient to fashion by degrees such a multiform world as ours. <span
id="fr_470"></span>[\*](#fn_469) Aristotle is indebted for the sublime
morality of his Nichomachean Ethics to a thorough study of the
*Pythagoric Ethical Fragments;* for the latter can be easily shown to
have been the source at which he gathered his ideas, though he might not
have sworn "by him who the tetractys found." <span
id="fr_471"></span>[\*\*](#fn_470) Finally, what do we know so certain
about Aristotle? His philosophy is so abstruse that he constantly leaves
his reader to supply by the imagination the missing links of his logical
deductions. Moreover, we know that before his works ever reached our
scholars, who delight in his seemingly atheistical arguments in support
of his doctrine of fate, these works passed through too many hands to
have remained immaculate. From Theophrastus, his legator, they passed to
Neleus, whose heirs kept them mouldering in subterranean caves for
nearly 150 years; <span id="fr_472"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_471) after
which, we learn that his manuscripts were copied and much augmented by
Apellicon of Theos, who supplied such paragraphs as had become
illegible, by conjectures of his own, probably many of these drawn from
the depths of his inner consciousness. Our scholars of the nineteenth
century might certainly profit well by Aristotle's example, were they as
anxious to imitate him practically as they are to throw his inductive
method and materialistic theories at the head of the Platonists. We
invite them to collect *facts* as carefully as he did, instead of
denying those they know nothing about.

What we have said in the introductory chapter and elsewhere, of mediums
and the tendency of their mediumship, is not based upon conjecture, but
upon actual experience and observation. There is scarcely one phase of
mediumship, of either kind, that we have not seen exemplified during the
past twenty-five years, in various countries. India, Thibet, Borneo,
Siam, Egypt, Asia Minor, America (North and South), and other parts of
the world, have each displayed to us its peculiar phase of mediumistic
phenomena and magical power. Our varied experience has taught us two
important truths, viz.: that for the exercise of the latter personal
purity and the exercise of a trained and indomitable will-power are
indispensable; and that spiritualists can never assure themselves of the
genuineness of mediumistic manifestations, unless they occur in the
light and under such reasonable test conditions as would make an
attempted fraud instantly noticed.

For fear of being misunderstood, we would remark that while, as a rule,
physical phenomena are produced by the nature-spirits, of their own

###### <span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

motion and to please their own fancy, still good disembodied human
spirits, under *exceptional* circumstances, such as the aspiration of a
pure heart or the occurrence of some favoring emergency, can manifest
their presence by any of the phenomena *except personal
materialization.* But it must be a mighty attraction indeed to draw a
pure, disembodied spirit from its radiant home into the foul atmosphere
from which it escaped upon leaving its earthly body.

Magi and theurgic philosophers objected most severely to the "evocation
of souls." "Bring her (the soul) not forth, lest in departing she retain
something," says Psellus. <span id="fr_473"></span>[\*](#fn_472)

> "It becomes you not to behold them *before your* *body is
> initiated,*  
> Since, by always alluring, they seduce the souls of the uninitiated,"

says the same philosopher, in another passage. <span
id="fr_474"></span>[\*\*](#fn_473)

They objected to it for several good reasons. 1. "It is extremely
difficult to distinguish a good daemon from a bad one," says Iamblichus.
2. If a human soul succeeds in penetrating the density of the earth's
atmosphere--always oppressive to her, often hateful--still there is a
danger the soul is unable to come into proximity with the material world
without that she cannot avoid; "departing, she *retains* something,"
that is to say, contaminating her purity, for which she has to suffer
more or less after her departure. Therefore, the true theurgist will
avoid causing any more suffering to this pure denizen of the higher
sphere than is absolutely required by the interests of humanity. It is
only the practitioner of black magic who compels the presence, by the
powerful incantations of necromancy, of the tainted souls of such as
have lived bad lives, and are ready to aid his selfish designs. Of
intercourse with the Augoeides, through the mediumistic powers of
*subjective* mediums, we elsewhere speak. The theurgists employed
chemicals and mineral substances to chase away evil spirits. Of the
latter, a stone called Μνιζουριν was one of the most powerful agents.

> "When you shall see a *terrestrial* demon approaching,  
> Exclaim, and sacrifice the stone Mnizurin,"

exclaims a Zoroastrian oracle (*Psel.,* 40)

.

And now, to descend from the eminence of theurgico-magian poetry to the
"unconscious" magic of our present century, and the prose of a modern
kabalist, we will review it in the following:

In Dr. Morin's *Journal de Magnetisme,* published a few years since in

###### <span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

Paris, at a time when the "table-turning" was raging in France, a
curious letter was published.

"Believe me, sir," wrote the anonymous correspondent, "that there are no
spirits, no ghosts, no angels, no demons *enclosed in a table;* but, all
of these can be found there, nevertheless, for that depends on *our own
wills* and our imaginations. . . . This MENSAbulism <span
id="fr_475"></span>[\*](#fn_474) is an ancient phenomenon . . .
misunderstood by us moderns, but natural, for all that, and which
pertains to physics and psychology; unfortunately, it had to remain
incomprehensible until the discovery of electricity and heliography, as,
to explain a fact of spiritual nature, we are obliged to base ourselves
on a corresponding fact of a material order. . . .

"As we all know, the daguerreotype-plate may be impressed, not only by
objects, but also by their reflections. Well, the phenomenon in
question, which ought to be named *mental photography,* produces,
besides *realities,* the dreams of our imagination, with such a fidelity
that very often we become unable to distinguish a copy taken from *one
present,* from a negative obtained of an *image*. . . .

"The *magnetization* of a table or of a person is absolutely identical
in its results; it is the saturation of a foreign body by either the
*intelligent* vital electricity, or the thought of the magnetizer and
those present."

Nothing can give a better or a more just idea of it than the electric
battery gathering the fluid on its conductor, to obtain thereof a
*brute* force which manifests itself in sparks of light, etc. Thus, the
electricity accumulated on an isolated body acquires a power of reaction
equal to the action, either for charging, magnetizing, decomposing,
inflaming, or for discharging its vibrations far away. These are the
visible effects of the *blind,* or crude electricity produced by blind
elements--the word blind being used by the table itself in
contradistinction to the *intelligent* electricity. But there evidently
exists a corresponding electricity produced by the cerebral pile of man;
this *soul-electricity,* this spiritual and universal ether, which is
the *ambient, middle nature of the metaphysical universe,* or rather of
the *incorporeal* universe, has to be studied before it is admitted by
science, which, having no idea of it, will never know anything of the
great phenomenon of life until she does.

"It appears that to manifest itself the cerebral electricity requires
the help of the ordinary statical electricity; when the latter is
lacking in the atmosphere--when the air is very damp, for instance--you
can get little or nothing of either tables or mediums. . . .

"There is no need for the ideas to be formulated very precisely in the

###### <span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

brains of the persons present; the *table* discovers and formulates them
*itself,* in either prose or verse, but always correctly; the table
requires time to compose a verse; it begins, then it erases a word,
corrects it, and sometimes sends back the epigram to our address . . .
if the persons present are in sympathy with each other, *it* jokes and
laughs with us as any living person could. As to the things of the
exterior world, it has to content itself with conjectures, as well as
ourselves; *it* (the table) composes little philosophical systems,
discusses and maintains them as the most cunning rhetorician might. In
short, it creates itself a conscience and a reason properly belonging to
itself, but with the materials it finds in us. . . .

"The Americans are persuaded that they talk with their dead; some think
(more truly) that these are *spirits;* others take them for angels;
others again for devils . . . (the *intelligence*) assuming the shape
which fits the conviction and preconceived opinion of every one; so did
the initiates of the temples of Serapis, of Delphi, and other
theurgico-medical establishments of the same kind. They were convinced
beforehand that they would communicate with their gods; and *they* never
failed.

"We, who well know the value of the phenomenon . . . are perfectly sure
that after having charged the table with our magnetic *efflux*, we have
called to life, or created an intelligence analogous to our own, which
like ourselves is endowed with a free will, can talk and discuss with
us, with a degree of superior lucidity, considering that the resultant
is stronger than the individual, or rather the whole is larger than a
part of it. . . . We must not accuse Herodotus of telling us fibs when
he records the most extraordinary circumstances, for we must hold them
to be as true and correct as the rest of historical facts which are to
be found in all the Pagan writers of antiquity. . . .

"The phenomenon is as old as the world. . . . The priests of India and
China practiced it before the Egyptians and the Greeks. The savages and
the Esquimaux know it well. It is the phenomenon of Faith, sole source
of every prodigy," and it will be done to you according to *your faith.*
The one who enunciated this profound doctrine was verily the incarnated
word of Truth; he neither deceived himself, nor wanted to deceive
others; he expounded an axiom which we now repeat, without much hope of
seeing it accepted.

"Man is a microcosm, or a little world; he carries in him a fragment of
the great *All*, in a chaotic state. The task of our half-gods is to
disentangle from it the share belonging to them by an incessant mental
and material labor. They have their task to do, the perpetual invention
of new products, of new moralities, and the proper arrangement of the
crude and formless material furnished them by the Creator, who created

###### <span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

them in His own image, that they should create in their turn and so
complete here the work of the Creation; an immense labor which can be
achieved only when the *whole* will become so perfect, that it will be
like unto God Himself, and thus able to survive to itself. We are very
far yet from that final moment, for we can say that everything is to be
done, to be undone, and *outdone* as yet on our globe, institutions,
machinery, and products.

> "*Mens non solum agitat sed creat molem*.

"We live in this life, in an ambient, intellectual centre, which
entertains between human beings and things a necessary and perpetual
solidarity; every brain is a ganglion, a station of a universal
*neurological* telegraphy in constant rapport with the central and other
stations by the vibrations of thought.

"The spiritual sun shines for souls as the material sun shines for
bodies, for the universe *is double* and follows the law of couples. The
ignorant operator interprets erroneously the divine dispatches, and
often delivers them in a false and ridiculous manner. Thus study and
true science alone can destroy the superstitions and nonsense spread by
the ignorant interpreters placed at the *stations of teaching* among
every people in this world. These blind interpreters of the *Verbum,*
the WORD, have always tried to impose on their pupils the obligation to
swear to everything without examination in

verba magistri.

"Alas! we could wish for nothing better were they to translate correctly
the *inner* voices, which voices never deceive but those who have *false
spirits* in them. 'It is our duty,' they say, 'to interpret oracles; it
is we who have received the exclusive mission for it from heaven,
*spiritus flat ubi vult,* and it blows on us alone. . . .'

"It blows *on every one,* and the rays of the spiritual light illuminate
every conscience; and when all the bodies and all the minds will reflect
equally this dual light, people will see a great deal clearer than they
do now."

We have translated and quoted the above fragments for their great
originality and truthfulness. We know the writer; fame proclaims him a
great kabalist, and a few friends know him as a truthful and honest man.

The letter shows, moreover, that the writer has well and carefully
studied the chameleon-like nature of the intelligences presiding over
spiritual circles. That they are of the same kind and race as those so
frequently mentioned in antiquity, admits of as little doubt as that the
present generation of men are of the same nature as were human beings in
the days of Moses. Subjective manifestations proceed, under harmonious

###### <span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

conditions, from those beings which were known as the "good demons" in
days of old. Sometimes, but rarely, the planetary spirits--beings of
another race than our own--produce them; sometimes the spirits of our
translated and beloved friends; sometimes nature-spirits of one or more
of the countless tribes; but most frequently of all terrestrial
elementary spirits, disembodied evil men, the Diakka of A. Jackson
Davis.

We do not forget what we have elsewhere written about *subjective* and
*objective* mediumistic phenomena. We keep the distinction always in
mind. There are good and bad of both classes. An impure medium will
attract to his impure inner self, the vicious, depraved, malignant
influences as inevitably as one that is pure draws only those that are
good and pure. Of the latter kind of medium where can a nobler example
be found than the gentle Baroness Adelma von Vay, of Austria (born
Countess Wurmbrandt), who is described to us by a correspondent as "the
Providence of her neighborhood"? She uses her mediumistic power to heal
the sick and comfort the afflicted. To the rich she is a phenomenon; but
to the poor a ministering angel. For many years she has seen and
recognized the nature-spirits or cosmic elementaries, and found them
always friendly. But this was because she was a pure, good woman. Other
correspondents of the Theosophical Society have not fared so well at the
hands of these apish and impish beings. The Havanna case, elsewhere
described, is an example.

Though spiritualists discredit them ever so much, these nature-spirits
are realities. If the gnomes, sylphs, salamanders, and undines of the
Rosicrucians existed in their days, they must exist now. Bulwer-Lytton's
*Dweller of the Threshold,* is a modern conception, modelled on the
ancient type of the *Sulanuth* <span id="fr_476"></span>[\*](#fn_475) of
the Hebrews and Egyptians, which is mentioned in the *Book of
Jasher*. <span id="fr_477"></span>[\*\*](#fn_476)

The Christians call them "devils," "imps of Satan," and like
characteristic names. They are nothing of the kind, but simply creatures
of ethereal matter, irresponsible, and neither good nor bad, unless
influenced by a superior intelligence. It is very extraordinary to hear
devout

###### <span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

Catholics abuse and misrepresent the nature-spirits, when one of their
greatest authorities, Clement the Alexandrian, disposed of them, by
describing these creatures as they really are. Clement, who perhaps had
been a theurgist as well as a Neo-platonist, thus arguing upon good
authority, remarks, that it is absurd to call them devils, <span
id="fr_478"></span>[\*](#fn_477) for they are only *inferior* angels,
"the powers which inhabit elements, move the winds and distribute
showers, and as such are agents and subject to God." <span
id="fr_479"></span>[\*\*](#fn_478) Origen, who before he became a
Christian also belonged to the Platonic school, is of the same opinion.
Porphyry describes these daemons more carefully than any one else.

When the possible nature of the manifesting intelligences, which science
believes to be a "psychic force," and spiritualists the identical
spirits of the dead, is better known, then will academicians and
believers turn to the old philosophers for information.

Let us for a moment imagine an intelligent orang-outang or some African
anthropoid ape disembodied, *i.e.,* deprived of its physical and in
possession of an astral, if not an immortal body. We have found in
spiritual journals many instances where apparitions of departed pet dogs
and other animals have been seen. Therefore, upon spiritualistic
testimony, we must think that such animal "spirits" do appear although
we reserve the right of concurring with the ancients that the forms are
but tricks of the elementals. Once open the door of communication
between the terrestrial and the spiritual world, what prevents the ape
from producing physical phenomena such as he sees human spirits produce.
And why may not these excel in cleverness of ingenuity many of those
which have been witnessed in spiritual circles? Let spiritualists
answer. The orang-outang of Borneo is little, if any, inferior to the
savage man in intelligence. Mr. Wallace and other great naturalists give
instances of its wonderful acuteness, although its brains are inferior
in cubic capacity to the most undeveloped of savages. These apes lack
but speech to be men of low grade. The sentinels placed by monkeys; the
sleeping chambers selected and built by orang-outangs; their prevision
of danger and calculations, which show more than instinct; their choice
of leaders whom they obey; and the exercise of many of their faculties,
certainly entitle them to a place at least on a level with many a
flat-headed Australian. Says Mr. Wallace, "The mental requirements of
savages, and the faculties actually exercised by them, are very little
above those of the animals."

Now, people assume that there can be no apes in the other world, because
apes have no "souls." But apes have as much intelligence, it

###### <span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

appears, as some men; why, then, should these men, in no way superior to
the apes, have immortal spirits, and the apes none? The materialists
will answer that neither the one nor the other has a spirit, but that
annihilation overtakes each at physical death. But the spiritual
philosophers of all times have agreed that man occupies a step one
degree higher than the animal, and is possessed of that something which
it lacks, be he the most untutored of savages or the wisest of
philosophers. The ancients, as we have seen, taught that while man is a
trinity of body, astral spirit, and immortal soul, the animal is but a
duality--a being having a physical body and an astral spirit animating
it. Scientists can distinguish no difference in the elements composing
the bodies of men and brutes; and the kabalists agree with them so far
as to say that the astral bodies (or, as the physicists would call it,
"the life-principle") of animals and men are *identical* in essence.
Physical man is but the highest development of animal life. If, as the
scientists tell us, even *thought* is matter, and every sensation of
pain or pleasure, every transient desire is accompanied by a disturbance
of ether; and those bold speculators, the authors of the *Unseen
Universe* believe that thought is conceived "to affect the matter of
another universe simultaneously with this"; why, then, should not the
gross, brutish thought of an orang-outang, or a dog, impressing itself
on the ethereal waves of the astral light, as well as that of man,
assure the animal a continuity of life after death, or "a future state"?

The kabalists held, and now hold, that it is unphilosophical to admit
that the astral body of man can survive corporeal death, and at the same
time assert that the astral body of the ape is resolved into independent
molecules. That which survives as an *individuality* after the death of
the body is the *astral soul,* which Plato, in the *Timaeus* and
*Gorgias,* calls the *mortal* soul, for, according to the Hermetic
doctrine, it throws off its more material particles at every progressive
change into a higher sphere. Socrates narrates to Callicles <span
id="fr_480"></span>[\*](#fn_479) that this *mortal* soul retains all the
characteristics of the body after the death of the latter; so much so,
indeed, that a man marked with the whip will have his astral body "full
of the prints and scars." The astral spirit is a faithful duplicate of
the body, both in a physical and spiritual sense. The Divine, the
highest and *immortal* spirit, can be neither punished nor rewarded. To
maintain such a doctrine would be at the same time absurd and
blasphemous, for it is not merely a flame lit at the central and
inexhaustible fountain of light, but actually a portion of it, and of
identical essence. It assures immortality to the individual astral being
in proportion to the willingness of the latter to receive it. So long as
the *double* man*, i.e.,* the man of

###### <span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

flesh and spirit, keeps within the limits of the law of spiritual
continuity; so long as the divine spark lingers in him, however faintly,
he is on the road to an immortality in the future state. But those who
resign themselves to a materialistic existence, shutting out the divine
radiance shed by their spirit, at the beginning of the earthly
pilgrimage, and stifling the warning voice of that faithful sentry, the
conscience, which serves as a focus for the light in the soul--such
beings as these, having left behind conscience and spirit, and crossed
the boundaries of matter, will of necessity have to follow its laws.

Matter is as indestructible and eternal as the immortal spirit itself,
but only in its particles, and not as organized forms. The body of so
grossly materialistic a person as above described, having been deserted
by its spirit before physical death, when that event occurs, the plastic
material, astral soul, following the laws of blind matter, shapes itself
thoroughly into the mould which vice has been gradually preparing for it
through the earth-life of the individual. Then, as Plato says, it
assumes the form of that "animal to which it resembled in its evil
ways" <span id="fr_481"></span>[\*](#fn_480) during life. "It is an
ancient saying," he tells us, "that the souls departing hence exist in
Hades and return hither again and *are produced from the dead* <span
id="fr_482"></span>[\*\*](#fn_481) . . . But those who are found to have
lived an eminently holy life, these are they who arrive at the pure
abode ABOVE and DWELL ON THE UPPER PARTS of the earth" <span
id="fr_483"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_482) (the ethereal region). In
*Phaedrus,* again, he says that when man has ended his *first* life (on
earth), some go to places of punishment *beneath* the earth. <span
id="fr_484"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_483) This region *below* the earth,
the kabalists do not understand as a place inside the earth, but
maintain it to be a sphere, far inferior in perfection to the earth, and
far more material.

Of all the modern speculators upon the seeming incongruities of the *New
Testament,* alone the authors of the *Unseen Universe* seem to have
caught a glimpse of its kabalistic truths, respecting the gehenna of the
universe. <span id="fr_485"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_484) This gehenna,
termed by the occultists the *eighth* sphere (numbering inversely), is
merely a planet like our own, *attached to the latter and following it
in its penumbra;* a kind of dust-hole, a "place where all its garbage
and filth is consumed," to borrow an expression of the above-mentioned
authors, and on which all the dross and scorification of the cosmic
matter pertaining to our planet is in a continual state of remodelling.

The secret doctrine teaches that man, if he wins immortality, will
remain forever the trinity that he is in life, and will continue so
through-

###### <span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

out all the spheres. The astral body, which in this life is covered by a
gross physical envelope, becomes--when relieved of that covering by the
process of corporeal death--in its turn the shell of another and more
ethereal body. This begins developing from the moment of death, and
becomes perfected when the astral body of the earthly form finally
separates from it. This process, they say, is repeated at every new
transition from sphere to sphere. But the immortal soul, "the silvery
spark," observed by *Dr. Fenwick* in *Margrave's* brain, <span
id="fr_486"></span>[\*](#fn_485) and not found by him in the animals,
never changes, but remains indestructible "by aught that shatters its
tabernacle." The descriptions by Porphyry and Iamblichus and others, of
the spirits of animals, which inhabit the astral light, are corroborated
by those of many of the most trustworthy and intelligent clairvoyants.
Sometimes the animal forms are even made visible to every person present
at a spiritual circle, by being materialized. In his *People from the
Other World,* Colonel H. S. Olcott describes a materialized squirrel
which followed a spirit-woman into the view of the spectators,
disappeared and reappeared before their eyes several times, and finally
followed the spirit into the cabinet.

Let us advance another step in our argument. If there is such a thing as
existence in the spiritual world after corporeal death, then it must
occur in accordance with the law of evolution. It takes man from his
place at the apex of the pyramid of matter, and lifts him into a sphere
of existence where the same inexorable law follows him. And if it
follows him, why not everything else in nature? Why not animals and
plants, which have all a life-principle, and whose gross forms decay
like his, when that life-principle leaves them? If his astral body
becomes more ethereal upon attaining the other sphere, why not theirs?
They, as well as he, have been evolved out of condensed cosmic matter,
and our physicists cannot see the slightest difference between the
molecules of the four kingdoms of nature, which are thus specified by
Professor Le Conte:

> 4\. *Animal Kingdom.  
> *3. Vegetable Kingdom*.  
> *2. Mineral Kingdom.  
> 1. Elements.

The progress of matter from each of these planes to the plane above is
continuous; and, according to Le Conte, there is no force in nature

###### <span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

capable of raising matter at once from No. 1 to No. 3, or from No. 2 to
No. 4, without stopping and receiving an accession of force of a
different kind on the intermediate plane.

Now, will any one presume to say that out of a given number of
molecules*, originally and constantly homogeneous, and all energized by
the same principle of evolution,* a certain number can be carried
through those four kingdoms to the final result of evolving immortal
man, and the others not be allowed to progress beyond planes 1, 2, and
3? Why should not *all* these molecules have an equal future before
them; the mineral becoming plant, the plant, animal, and the animal,
man--if not upon *this* earth, at least somewhere in the boundless
realms of space? The harmony which geometry and mathematics--the only
exact sciences--demonstrate to be the law of the universe, would be
destroyed if evolution were perfectly exemplified in man alone and
limited in the subordinate kingdoms. What logic suggests, psychometry
proves; and, as we said before, it is not unlikely that a monument will
one day be erected by men of science to Joseph R. Buchanan, its modern
discoverer. If a fragment of mineral, fossilized plant, or animal form
gives the psychometer as vivid and accurate pictures of their previous
conditions, as a fragment of human bone does of those of the individual
to which it belonged, it would seem as if the same subtile spirit
pervaded all nature, and was inseparable from organic or inorganic
substances. If anthropologists, physiologists, and psychologists are
equally perplexed by primal and final causes, and by finding in matter
so much similarity in all its forms, but in spirit such abysses of
difference, it is, perhaps, because their inquiries are limited to our
visible globe, and that they cannot, or dare not, go beyond. The spirit
of a mineral, plant, or animal, may begin to form here, and reach its
final development millions of ages hereafter, on other planets, known or
unknown, visible or invisible to astronomers. For, who is able to
controvert the theory previously suggested, that the earth itself will,
like the living creatures to which it has given birth, ultimately, and
after passing through its own stage of death and dissolution, become an
etherealized astral planet? "As above, so below"; harmony is the great
law of nature.

Harmony in the physical and mathematical world of sense, is *justice* in
the spiritual one. Justice produces harmony, and injustice, discord; and
discord, on a cosmical scale, means chaos--annihilation.

If there is a developed immortal spirit in man, it must be in every
thing else, at least in a latent or germinal state, and it can only be a
question of time for each of these germs to become fully developed. What
gross injustice it would be for an impenitent criminal man, the
perpetrator of a brutal murder when in the exercise of his free will, to
have

###### <span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

all immortal spirit which in time may be washed clean of sin, and
enjoying perfect happiness, while a poor horse, innocent of all crime,
should toil and suffer under the merciless torture of his master's whip
during a whole life, and then be annihilated at death? Such a belief
implies a brutal injustice, and is only possible among people taught in
the dogma that everything is created for man, and he alone is the
sovereign of the universe;--a sovereign so mighty that to save him from
the consequences of his own misdeeds, it was not too much that the God
of the universe should die to placate his own just wrath.

If the most abject savage, with a brain "very little inferior to that of
a philosopher" <span id="fr_487"></span>[\*](#fn_486) (the latter
developed physically by ages of civilization), is still, as regards the
actual exercise of his mental faculties, very little superior to an
animal, is it just to infer that both he and the ape will not have the
opportunity to become philosophers; the ape in this world, the man on
some other planet peopled equally with beings created in *some other
image* of God?

Says Professor Denton, when speaking of the future of psychometry:
"Astronomy will not disdain the assistance of this power. As new forms
of organic being are revealed, when we go back to the earlier geologic
periods, so new groupings of the stars, new constellations, will be
displayed, when the heavens of those early periods are examined by the
piercing gaze of future psychometers. An accurate map of the starry
heavens during the Silurian period may reveal to us many secrets that we
have been unable to discover. . . . Why may we not indeed be able to
read the history of the various heavenly bodies . . . their geological,
their natural, and, perchance, their human history? . . . I have good
reason to believe that trained psychometers will be able to travel from
planet to planet, and read their present condition minutely, and their
past history." <span id="fr_488"></span>[\*\*](#fn_487)

Herodotus tells us that in the eighth of the towers of Belus, in
Babylon, used by the sacerdotal astrologers, there was an uppermost
room, a sanctuary, where the prophesying priestesses slept to receive
communications from the god. Beside the couch stood a table of gold,
upon which were laid various stones, which Manetho informs us were all
aerolites. The priestesses developed the prophetic vision in themselves
by pressing one of these sacred stones against their heads and bosoms.
The same took place at Thebes, and at Patara, in Lycia. <span
id="fr_489"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_488)

This would seem to indicate that psychometry was known and extensively
practiced by the ancients. We have somewhere seen it stated that

###### <span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

the profound knowledge possessed, according to Draper, by the ancient
Chaldean astrologers, of the planets and their relations, was obtained
more by the divination of the betylos, or the meteoric stone, than by
astronomical instruments. Strabo, Pliny, Hellanicus--all speak of the
electrical, or electromagnetic power of the betyli. They were worshipped
in the remotest antiquity in Egypt and Samothrace, as magnetic stones,
"containing souls which had fallen from heaven"; and the priests of
Cybele wore a small betylos on their bodies. How curious the coincidence
between the practice of the priests of Belus and the experiments of
Professor Denton!

As Professor Buchanan truthfully remarks of psychometry, it will enable
us " . . . to detect vice and crime. No criminal act . . . can escape
the detection of psychometry, when its powers are properly brought forth
. . . the sure detection of guilt by psychometry (no matter how secret
the act) will nullify all concealment." <span
id="fr_490"></span>[\*](#fn_489)

Speaking of the elementary, Porphyry says: "These invisible beings have
been receiving from men honors as gods . . . a universal belief makes
them capable of becoming very malevolent: it proves that their wrath is
kindled against those who neglect to offer them a legitimate
worship." <span id="fr_491"></span>[\*\*](#fn_490)

Homer describes them in the following terms: "Our *gods* appear to us
when we offer them sacrifice . . . *sitting themselves at our tables,
they partake of our festival meals.* Whenever they meet on his travels a
solitary Phoenician, they *serve to him as guides,* and otherwise
manifest their presence. We can say that *our piety* approaches us to
them as much as crime and bloodshed unite the Cyclopes and the ferocious
race of giants." <span id="fr_492"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_491) The latter
proving that these gods were kind and beneficent *daemons,* and that,
whether they were *disembodied* spirits or elementary beings, they were
no

devils.

The language of Porphyry, who was himself a direct disciple of Plotinus,
is still more explicit as to the nature of these spirits. "Demons," he
says, "are invisible; but they know *how to clothe themselves* with
forms and configurations subjected to numerous variations, which can be
explained by their nature *having much of the corporeal in itself.*
Their abode is in the neighborhood of the earth . . . and *when they can
escape the vigilance of the good daemons, there is no mischief they will
not dare commit.* One day they will employ brute force; another,
*cunning*." <span id="fr_493"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_492) Further, he
says: "It is a child's play for them to arouse

###### <span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

in us vile passions, to impart to societies and nations turbulent
doctrines, provoking wars, seditions, and other public calamities, and
then tell you 'that all of these is the work of the gods.' . . . These
spirits pass their time in cheating and deceiving mortals, creating
around them illusions and prodigies; *their greatest ambition* is to
pass as *gods* and *souls* (disembodied spirits)." <span
id="fr_494"></span>[\*](#fn_493)

Iamblichus, the great theurgist of the Neo-platonic school, a man
skilled in sacred magic, teaches that "good daemons appear to us *in*
*reality,* while the bad ones can manifest themselves but under the
*shadowy forms of phantoms.*" Further, he corroborates Porphyry, and
tells that " . . . the *good ones fear not the light,* while the wicked
*ones require darkness*. . . . The sensations they excite in us make us
believe in the presence and reality of things they show, though these
things be absent." <span id="fr_495"></span>[\*\*](#fn_494)

Even the most practiced theurgists found danger sometimes in their
dealings with certain elementaries, and we have Iamblichus stating that,
"The gods, the angels, and the daemons, as well as the *souls,* may be
summoned through evocation and prayer. . . . But when, during theurgic
operations, a mistake is made, beware! Do not imagine that you are
communicating with beneficent divinities, who have answered your earnest
prayer; no, for they are bad daemons, only under the guise of good ones!
For the elementaries often clothe themselves with the similitude of the
good, and assume a rank very much superior to that they really occupy.
Their boasting betrays them." <span id="fr_496"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_495)

Some twenty years since, Baron Du Potet, disgusted with the indifference
of the scientists, who persisted in seeing in the greatest psychological
phenomena only the result of clever trickery, gave vent to his
indignation in the following terms:

"Here am I, on my way, I may truly say, to the land of marvels! I am
preparing to shock every opinion, and provoke laughter in our most
illustrious scientists . . . for I am convinced that *agents of an
immense potency* exist *outside of us;* that they can *enter in us;*
move our limbs and organs; and use us as they please. It was, after all,
the belief of our fathers and of the whole of antiquity. Every religion
admitted the reality of *spiritual agents*. . . . Recalling innumerable
phenomena which I have produced in the sight of thousands of persons,
seeing the *beastly indifference* of *official* science, in presence of
a discovery which transports the mind into the regions of the unknown
\[sic\]; an old man, at the very *moment when I ought to be just being
born*. . . . I am not

###### <span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

sure if it would not have been better for me to have shared the common
ignorance.

"I have suffered calumnies to be written without refuting them. . . . At
one time it is simple ignorance which speaks, and I am silent; at
another still, superficiality, raising its voice, makes a bluster, and I
find myself hesitating whether or not to speak. Is this indifference or
laziness? Has fear the power to paralyze my spirit? No; none of these
causes affect me; I know simply that it is necessary to prove what one
asserts, and this restrains me. For, in justifying my assertions, in
showing the living FACT, which proves my sincerity and the truth, I
translate OUTSIDE THE PRECINCTS OF THE TEMPLE the sacred inscription,
WHICH NO PROFANE EYE SHOULD EVER READ.

"You doubt sorcery and magic? O, truth! thy possession is a heavy
burden!" <span id="fr_497"></span>[\*](#fn_496)

With a bigotry which one might search for in vain outside the church in
whose interest he writes, des Mousseaux quotes the above language, as
proof positive that this devoted savant, and all who share his belief,
have given themselves over to the dominion of the

Evil One!

Self-complacency is the most serious obstacle to the enlightenment of
the modern spiritualist. His thirty years' experience with the phenomena
seem to him sufficient to have established intermundane intercourse upon
an unassailable basis. His thirty years have not only brought to him the
conviction that the dead communicate and thus prove the spirit's
immortality, but also settled in his mind an idea that little or nothing
can be learned of the other world, except through mediums.

For the spiritualists, the records of the past either do not exist, or
if they are familiar with its gathered treasures, they regard them as
having no bearing upon their own experiences. And yet, the problems
which so vex them, were solved thousands of years ago by the theurgists,
who have left the keys to those who will search for them in the proper
spirit and with knowledge. Is it possible that nature has changed her
work, and that we are encountering different spirits and different laws
from those of old? Or can any spiritualist imagine that he knows more,
or even as much about mediumistic phenomena or the nature of various
spirits, as a priest-caste who spent their lives in theurgical practice,
which had been known and studied for countless centuries? If the
narratives of Owen and Hare, of Edmonds, and Crookes, and Wallace are
credible, why not those of Herodotus, the "Father of History," of
Iamblichus, and Porphyry, and hundreds of other ancient authors? If the
spiritualists

###### <span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

have their phenomena under test-conditions, so had the old theurgists,
whose records, moreover, show that they could produce and vary them at
will. The day when this fact shall be recognized, and profitless
speculations of modern investigators shall give place to patient study
of the works of the theurgists, will mark the dawn of new and important
discoveries in the field of psychology.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_434"></span>[294:\*](iu008.htm#fr_435) Orpheus is said to
have ascribed to the grand cycle 120,000 years of duration, and
Cassandrus 136,000. See Censorinus: "de Natal. Die"; "Chronological and
Astronomical Fragments."

<span id="fn_435"></span>[295:\*](iu008.htm#fr_436) W. and E. Denton:
"The Soul of Things," vol. i.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[298:\*](iu008.htm#fr_437) See the "Cosmogony
of Pherecydes."

<span id="fn_437"></span>[298:\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_438) See a few pages
further on the quotation from the "Codex of the Nazarenes."

<span id="fn_438"></span>[299:\*](iu008.htm#fr_439) See Plato's
"Timaeus."

<span id="fn_439"></span>[299:\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_440) On the authority
of Irenaeus, Justin Martyr, and the "Codex" itself, Dunlap shows that
the Nazarenes treated their "spirit," or rather soul, as a female and
*Evil Power*. Irenaeus, accusing the Gnostics of heresy, calls Christ
and the Holy Ghost "the *gnostic pair* that produce the AEons" (Dunlap:
"Sod, the Son of the Man," p. 52, footnote).

<span id="fn_440"></span>[300:\*](iu008.htm#fr_441) Fetahil was with the
Nazarenes the king of light, and the *Creator;* but in this instance he
is the unlucky Prometheus, who fails to get hold of the *Living Fire,*
necessary for the formation of the divine soul, as he is ignorant of the
*secret* name (the ineffable or incommunicable name of the kabalists).

<span id="fn_441"></span>[300:\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_442) The spirit of
matter and concupiscence.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[300:\*\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_443) See Franck's
"Codex Nazaraeus" and Dunlap's "Sod, the Son of the Man."

<span id="fn_443"></span>[300:\*\*\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_444) "Codex
Nazaraeus," ii. 233.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[300:\*\*\*\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_445) This Mano of
the Nazarenes strangely resembles the Hindu Manu, the heavenly man of
the "Rig-Vedas."

<span id="fn_445"></span>[300:\*\*\*\*\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_446) "I am the
*true vine* and my Father is the husbandman" (John xv. 1).

<span id="fn_446"></span>[300:\*\*\*\*\*\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_447) With the
Gnostics, Christ, as well as Michael, who is identical in some respects
with him, was the "Chief of the Æons."

<span id="fn_447"></span>[300:\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_448) "Codex
Nazaraeus," i. 135.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[300:\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_449)
Ibid.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[301:\*](iu008.htm#fr_450) "Codex Nazaraeus,"
iii. 61.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[301:\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_451) The Astral Light,
or *anima mundi,* is dual and bisexual. The male part of it is purely
divine and spiritual; it is the *Wisdom;* while the female portion (the
spiritus of the Nazarenes) is tainted, in one sense, with matter, and
therefore is evil already. It is the life-principle of every living
creature, and furnishes the astral soul, the fluidic *perisprit* to men,
animals, fowls of the air, and everything living. Animals have only the
germ of the highest immortal soul as a third principle. It will develop
but through a series of countless evolutions; the doctrine of which
evolution is contained in the kabalistic axiom: "A stone becomes a
plant; a plant a beast; a beast a *man;* a man a *spirit;* and the
spirit a god."

<span id="fn_451"></span>[301:\*\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_452) See Commentary
on "Idra Suta," by Rabbi Eleashar.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[301:\*\*\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_453) *Sod* means a
religious Mystery. Cicero mentions the *sod,* as constituting a portion
of the *Idean* Mysteries. "The members of the *Priest-Colleges* were
called *Sodales,*" says Dunlap, quoting Freund's "Latin Lexicon," iv.
448.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[302:\*](iu008.htm#fr_454) The author of the
"Sohar," the great kabalistic work of the first century B.C.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[302:\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_455) See Abbe Huc's
works.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[302:\*\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_456) "The Sohar,"
iii. 288; "Idra Suta."

<span id="fn_456"></span>[303:\*](iu008.htm#fr_457) Everard: "Mysteres
Physiologiques," p. 132.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[303:\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_458) See Plato's
"Timaeus."

<span id="fn_458"></span>[305:\*](iu008.htm#fr_459) "Supernatural
Religion; an Inquiry into the Reality of Divine Revelation," vol. ii.
London, 1875.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[306:\*](iu008.htm#fr_460) See "Heavenly
Arcana."

<span id="fn_460"></span>[308:\*](iu008.htm#fr_461) Burges: Preface.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[308:\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_462) "Seventh Letter."

<span id="fn_462"></span>[308:\*\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_463) "The True
Christian Religion."

<span id="fn_463"></span>[309:\*](iu008.htm#fr_464) E. A. Hitchcock:
"Swedenborg, a Hermetic Philosopher."

<span id="fn_464"></span>[309:\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_465) "Ripley Revived,"
1678.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[310:\*](iu008.htm#fr_466) "Mosaicall
Philosophy," p. 173. 1659.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[313:\*](iu008.htm#fr_467) "Correlation of
Vital with Chemical and Physical Forces," by J. Le Conte.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[313:\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_468) "Archives des
Sciences," vol. xlv., p. 345. December, 1872.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[319:\*](iu008.htm#fr_469) Aristotle: "De
Generat. et Corrupt.," lib. ii.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[320:\*](iu008.htm#fr_470) "De Part.," an. lib.
i., c. I.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[320:\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_471) A Pythagorean
oath. The Pythagoreans swore by their master.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[320:\*\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_472) See Lempriere:
"Classical Dictionary."

<span id="fn_472"></span>[321:\*](iu008.htm#fr_473) Psel. in Alieb:
"Chaldean Oracles."

<span id="fn_473"></span>[321:\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_474) Proc. in 1
"Alieb."

<span id="fn_474"></span>[322:\*](iu008.htm#fr_475) From the Latin word
*mensa--*table. This curious letter is copied in full in "La Science des
Esprits," by Eliphas Levi.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[325:\*](iu008.htm#fr_476) The Sulanuth is
described in chap. lxxx., vers. 19, 20, of "Jasher."

<span id="fn_476"></span>[325:\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_477) "And when the
Egyptians hid themselves on account of the swarm" (one of the plagues
alleged to have been brought on by Moses) ". . . they locked their doors
after them, and God ordered the *Sulanuth .* . ." (a *sea-monster,*
naively explains the translator, in a foot-note) "which was then in the
sea, to come up and go into Egypt . . . and she had long arms, ten
cubits in length . . . and she went upon the roofs and uncovered the
rafting and cut them . . . and stretched forth her arm into the house
and removed the lock and the bolt and opened the houses of Egypt . . .
and the swarm of animals destroyed the Egyptians, and it grieved them
exceedingly."

<span id="fn_477"></span>[326:\*](iu008.htm#fr_478) "Strom," vi., 17, §
159.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[326:\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_479) Ibid., vi., 3, §
30.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[327:\*](iu008.htm#fr_480) "Gorgias."

<span id="fn_480"></span>[328:\*](iu008.htm#fr_481) "Timaeus."

<span id="fn_481"></span>[328:\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_482) Cory: "Phaedro,"
i. 69.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[328:\*\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_483) Ibid., i. 123.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[328:\*\*\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_484) Cory:
"Phaedras"; Cory's "Plato," 325.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[328:\*\*\*\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_485) See "The
Unseen Universe," pp. 205, 206.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[329:\*](iu008.htm#fr_486) See Bulwer-Lytton:
"Strange Story," p. 76. We do not know where in literature can be found
a more vivid and beautiful description of this difference between the
life-principle of man and that of animals, than in the passages herein
briefly alluded to.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[331:\*](iu008.htm#fr_487) A. R. Wallace: "The
Action of Natural Selection on Man."

<span id="fn_487"></span>[331:\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_488) W. Denton: "The
Soul of Things," p. 273.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[331:\*\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_489) "Herodotus," b.
i., c. 181.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[332:\*](iu008.htm#fr_490) "Anthropology," p.
125.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[332:\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_491) "Of Sacrifices to
Gods and Daemons," chap. ii.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[332:\*\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_492) "Odyssey," book
vii.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[332:\*\*\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_493) Porphyry: "Of
Sacrifices to Gods and Daemons," chap. ii.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[333:\*](iu008.htm#fr_494) Ibid.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[333:\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_495) Iamblichus: "De
Mysteriis Egyptorum."

<span id="fn_495"></span>[333:\*\*\*](iu008.htm#fr_496) Ibid.: "On the
Difference between the Daemons, the Souls, etc."

<span id="fn_496"></span>[334:\*](iu008.htm#fr_497) Du Potet: "La Magie
Devoilee."

<span id="DDE_LINK2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](iu009)
