[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Theosophy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](iu013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### <span id="page_574">p. 574</span>

### CHAPTER XV.

> "**S**TE.--Have we devils here? Do you put tricks upon us with
> savages, and men of Inde?" *The Tempest,* Act ii., Sc. 2.

> "We have now, so far forth as it is requisite for our design,
> considered the *Nature and Functions of the Soule;* and have plainly
> demonstrated that she is a substance distinct from the body."--**D**R.
> **H**ENRY **M**ORE: *Immortality of the Soule.* 1659.

> "**K**NOWLEDGE IS **P**OWER; **I**GNORANCE IS
> **I**MBECILITY."--**A**UTHOR OF "Art-Magic":
>
> Ghost-Land.

THE "secret doctrine" has for many centuries been like the symbolical
"man of sorrows" of the prophet Isaiah. "Who hath believed our report?"
its martyrs have repeated from one generation to another. The doctrine
has grown up before its persecutors "as a tender plant and as a root out
of a dry ground; it hath no form, nor comeliness . . . it is despised
and rejected of men; and they hid their faces from it. . . . They
esteemed him not."

There need be no controversy as to whether this doctrine agrees or not
with the iconoclastic tendency of the skeptics of our times. It agrees
with *truth* and that is enough. It would be idle to expect that it
would be believed by its detractors and slanderers. But the tenacious
vitality it exhibits all over the globe, wherever there are a group of
men to quarrel over it, is the best proof that the seed planted by our
fathers on "the other side of the flood" was that of a mighty oak, not
the spore of a mushroom theology. No lightning of human ridicule can
fell to the ground, and no thunderbolts ever forged by the Vulcans of
science are powerful enough to blast the trunk, or even scar the
branches of this world-tree of **K**NOWLEDGE.

We have but to leave unnoticed their letter that killeth, and catch the
subtile spirit of their hidden wisdom, to find concealed in the *Books
of Hermes--*be they the model or the copy of all others--the evidences
of a truth and philosophy which we feel *must* be based on the eternal
laws. We instinctively comprehend that, however finite the powers of
man, while he is yet embodied, they must be in close kinship with the
attributes of an infinite Deity; and we become capable of better
appreciating the hidden sense of the gift lavished by the *Elohim* on
*H'Adam:* "Behold, I have given you everything which is upon the face of
all the earth . . . *subdue it*," and "*have dominion*" over ALL.

Had the allegories contained in the first chapters of *Genesis* been

###### <span id="page_575">p. 575</span>

better understood, even in their geographical and historical sense,
which involve nothing at all esoteric, the claims of its true
interpreters, the kabalists, could hardly have been rejected for so long
a time. Every student of the *Bible* must be aware that the first and
second chapters of *Genesis* could not have proceeded from the same pen.
They are evidently allegories and parables; <span
id="fr_805"></span>[\*](#fn_804) for the two narratives of the creation
and peopling of our earth diametrically contradict each other in nearly
every particular of order, time, place, and methods employed in the
so-called creation. In accepting the narratives literally, and as a
whole, we lower the dignity of the unknown Deity. We drag him down to
the level of humanity, and endow him with the peculiar personality of
man, who needs the "cool of the day" to refresh him; who rests from his
labors; and is capable of anger, revenge, and even of using precautions
against man, "lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of
life." (A tacit admission, by the way, on the part of the Deity, that
man *could do it,* if not prevented by sheer force.) But, in recognizing
the allegorical coloring of the description of what may be termed
historical facts, we find our feet instantly on firm ground.

To begin with--the garden of Eden as a locality is no myth at all; it
belongs to those landmarks of history which occasionally disclose to the
student that the *Bible* is not all mere allegory. "Eden, or the Hebrew
}<span id="img_iu1-575a"></span> ![](img/iu1-575a.jpg)GAN-EDEN, meaning
the park or the garden of Eden, is an archaic name of the country
watered by the Euphrates and its many branches, from Asia and Armenia to
the Erythraian Sea." <span id="fr_806"></span>[\*\*](#fn_805) In the
Chaldean *Book of Numbers,* its location is designated in numerals, and
in the cipher Rosicrucian manuscript, left by Count St. Germain, it is
fully described. In the Assyrian *Tablets,* it is rendered *gan-dunyas.*
"Behold," say the <span id="img_iu1-575b"></span>
![](img/iu1-575b.jpg)*Eloim* of Genesis, "the man is become as one of
us." The *Eloim* may be accepted in one sense for *gods* or powers, and
taken in another one for the *Aleim*, or priests; the hierophants
initiated into the good and the evil of this world; for there was a
college of priests called the *Aleim,* while the head of their caste, or
the chief of the hierophants, was known as *Java Aleim.* Instead of
becoming a neophyte, and gradually obtaining his esoteric knowledge
through a regular initiation, an *Adam,* or man, uses his intuitional
faculties, and, prompted by the Serpent--*Woman* and matter--tastes of
the Tree of Knowledge--the esoteric or secret doctrine--unlawfully. The
priests of Hercules, or Mel-Karth, the "Lord" of the Eden, all wore
"coats of skin." The text says: "And *Java Aleim,* made for Adam and his
wife <span id="img_iu1-575c"></span> ![](img/iu1-575c.jpg), "CHITONUTH
OUR." The first

###### <span id="page_576">p. 576</span>

Hebrew word, *chitun,* is the Greek *chiton.* It became a Slavonic word
by adoption from the *Bible,* and means a *coat,* an upper garment.

Though containing the same substratum of esoteric truth as every early
cosmogony, the Hebrew Scripture wears on its face the marks of its
double origin. Its *Genesis* is purely a reminiscence of the Babylonian
captivity. The names of places, men, and even objects, can be traced
from the original text to the Chaldeans and the Akkadians, the
progenitors and Aryan instructors of the former. It is strongly
contested that the Akkad tribes of Chaldea, Babylonia, and Assyria were
in any way cognate with the Brahmans, of Hindustan; but there are more
proofs in favor of this opinion than otherwise. The Shemite, or
Assyrian, ought, perchance, to have been called the Turanian, and the
Mongolians have been denominated Scyths. But if the Akkadians ever
existed otherwise than in the imagination of some philologists and
ethnologists, they certainly would never have been a Turanian tribe, as
some Assyriologists have striven to make us believe. They were simply
emigrants on their way to Asia Minor from India, the cradle of humanity,
and their sacerdotal adepts tarried to civilize and initiate a barbarian
people. Halevy proved the fallacy of the Turanian mania in regard to the
Akkadian people, whose very name has been changed a dozen times already;
and other scientists have proved that the Babylonian civilization was
neither born nor developed in that country. It was imported from India,
and the importers were Brahmanical Hindus.

It is the opinion of Professor A. Wilder, that if the Assyrians had been
called Turanians and the Mongolians Scyths, then, in such a case the
wars of Iran and Turan, Zohak and Jemshid, or Yima, would have been
fairly comprehended as the struggle of the old Persians against the
endeavors of the Assyrian satraps to conquer them, which ended in the
overthrow of Nineveh; "the spider weaving her web in the palace of
Afrasiab." <span id="fr_807"></span>[\*](#fn_806)

"The Turanian of Prof. Muller and his school," adds our correspondent,
"was evidently the savage and nomadic Caucasian, out of whom the Hamite
or AEthiopian builders come; then the Shemites--perhaps a hybrid of
Hamite and Aryan; and lastly the Aryan--Median, Persian, Hindu; and
later, the Gothic and Slavic peoples of Europe. He supposes the Celt to
have been a hybrid, analogous to the Assyrians--between the Aryan
invaders of Europe and the Iberic (probably AEthiopic) population of
Europe." In such a case he must admit the possibility of our assertion
that the Akkadians were a tribe of the earliest Hindus. Now,

###### <span id="page_577">p. 577</span>

whether they were Brahmans, from the Brahmanic planisphere proper (40°
north latitude), or from India (Hindustan), or, again, from the India of
Central Asia, we will leave to philologists of future ages to decide.

An opinion which with us amounts to certitude, demonstrated by an
inductive method of our own, which we are afraid will be but little
appreciated by the orthodox methods of modern science, is based on what
will appear to the latter merely circumstantial evidence. For years we
have repeatedly noticed that the same esoteric truths were expressed in
identical symbols and allegories in countries between which there had
never been traced any historical affiliation. We have found the Jewish
*Kabala* and the *Bible* repeating the Babylonian "myths," <span
id="fr_808"></span>[\*](#fn_807) and the Oriental and Chaldean
allegories, given in form and substance in the oldest manuscripts of the
Siamese Talapoin (monks), and in the popular but oldest traditions of
Ceylon.

In the latter place we have an old and valued acquaintance whom we have
also met in other parts of the globe, a Pali scholar, and a native
Cingalese, who has in his possession a curious palm leaf, to which, by
chemical processes, a timeproof durability has been given, and an
enormous conch, or rather one-half of a conch--for it has been split in
two. On the leaf we saw the representation of a giant of Ceylonian
antiquity and fame, blind, and pulling down--with his outstretched arms,
which are embracing the four central pillars of a pagoda--the whole
temple on a crowd of armed enemies. His hair is long and reaches nearly
to the ground. We were informed by the possessor of this curious relic,
that the blind giant was "Somona, the Little"; so called in
contradistinction with Somona-Kadom, the Siamese saviour. Moreover, the
Pali legend, in as important particulars, corresponds with that of the
biblical Samson.

The shell bore upon its pearly surface a pictorial engraving, divided in
two compartments, and the workmanship was far more artistic, as to
conception and execution, than the crucifixes and other religious
trinkets carved out of the same material in our days, at Jaffa and
Jerusalem. In the first panel is represented Siva, with all his Hindu
attributes, sacrificing his son--whether the "only-begotten," or one of
many, we never stopped to inquire. The victim is laid on a funeral pile,
and the father is hovering in the air over him, with an uplifted weapon
ready to strike; but the god's face is turned toward a jungle in which a
rhinoceros has deeply buried its horn in a huge tree and is unable to
extricate it. The adjoining panel, or division, represents the same
rhinoceros on the pile

###### <span id="page_578">p. 578</span>

with the weapon plunged in its side, and the intended victim--Siva's
son--free, and helping the god to kindle the fire upon the sacrificial
altar.

Now, we have but to remember that Siva and the Palentinian Baal, or
Moloch, and Saturn are identical; that Abraham is held until the present
day by the Mahometan Arabs as Saturn in the Kaaba; <span
id="fr_809"></span>[\*](#fn_808) that Abraham and Israel were names of
Saturn; <span id="fr_810"></span>[\*\*](#fn_809) and that Sanchoniathon
tells us that Saturn offered his only-begotten son as a sacrifice to his
father Ouranos, and even circumcised himself and forced all his
household and allies to do the same, <span
id="fr_811"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_810) to trace unerringly the biblical
myth to its source. But this source is neither Phoenician, nor Chaldean;
it is purely Indian, and the original of it may be found in the
*Maha-Bharata.* But, whether Brahmanical or Buddhistical, it must
certainly be much older than the Jewish *Pentateuch,* as compiled by
Ezra after the Babylonian captivity, and revised by the Rabbis of the
Great Synagogue.

Therefore, we are bold enough to maintain our assertion against the
opinion of many men of learning, whom, nevertheless, we consider far
more learned than ourselves. Scientific induction is one thing, and
*knowledge of facts,* however unscientific they may seem at first, is
another. But science has discovered enough to inform us that Sanscrit
originals, of Nepaul, were translated by Buddhistic missionaries into
nearly every Asiatic language. Likewise Pali manuscripts were translated
into Siamese, and carried to Burmah and Siam; it is easy, therefore, to
account for the same religious legends and myths circulating in all
these countries. But Manetho tells us also of Pali shepherds who
emigrated westward; and when we find some of the oldest Ceylonic
traditions in the Chaldean *Kabala* and Jewish *Bible,* we must think
that either Chaldeans or Babylonians had been in Ceylon or India, or the
ancient Pali had the same traditions as the Akkadians, whose origin is
so uncertain. Suppose even Rawlinson to be right, and that the Akkadians
did come from Armenia, he did not trace them farther back. As the field
is now opened for any kind of hypothesis, we submit that this tribe
might as well have come to Armenia from beyond the Indus, following
their way in the direction of the Caspian Sea--a part which was also
India, once upon a time--and from thence to the Euxine. Or they might
have come originally from Ceylon by the same way. It has been found
impossible to follow, with any degree of certitude, the wanderings of
these nomadic Aryan tribes; hence we are left to judge from inference,
and by comparing their esoteric myths. Abraham himself, for all our
scientists can know, might have been one of these Pali shepherds who
emigrated *West.* He is shown to have gone

###### <span id="page_579">p. 579</span>

with his father, Terah, from "*Ur* of the Chaldees"; and Sir H.
Rawlinson found the Phoenician city of Martu or Marathos mentioned in an
inscription at *Ur,* and shows it to signify THE **W**EST.

If their language seems in one sense to oppose their identity with the
Brahmans of Hindustan, yet there are other reasons which make good our
claims that the biblical allegories of *Genesis* are entirely due to
these nomadic tribes. Their name Ak-ad, is of the same class as Ad-Am,
Ha-va, <span id="fr_812"></span>[\*](#fn_811) or Ed-En--"perhaps," says
Dr. Wilder, "meaning son of *Ad,* like the sons of Ad in ancient Arabia.
In Assyrian, *Ak* is creator and Ad-ad is AD, the father." In Aramean Ad
also means *one*, and Ad-ad the *only-one;* and in the *Kabala Ad-ant*
is the only-begotten, the first emanation of the unseen Creator. *Adon*
was the "Lord" god of Syria and the consort of Adar-gat, or Aster-'t,'
the Syrian goddess, who was Venus, Isis, Istar, or Mylitta, etc.; and
each of these was "mother *of all living*"*--*the

Magna Mater.

Thus, while the first, second, and third chapters of *Genesis* are but
disfigured imitations of other cosmogonies, the fourth chapter,
beginning at the sixteenth verse, and the fifth chapter to the end--give
purely historical facts; though the latter were never correctly
interpreted. They are taken, word for word, from the secret *Book of
Numbers,* of the Great Oriental *Kabala.* From the birth of Enoch, the
appropriated first parent of modern Freemasonry, begins the genealogy of
the so-called Turanian, Aryan, and Semitic families, if such they be
correctly. Every woman is an euhemerized land or city; every man and
patriarch a race, a branch, or a subdivision of a race. The wives of
Lamech give the key to the riddle which some good scholar might easily
master, even without studying the esoteric sciences. "And Ad-ah bare
Jabal: he was the father of such as dwell in tents, and *of such as have
cattle,*" nomadic Aryan race; " . . . and his brother was Jubal; he was
the father of all such as *handle the harp and organ;* . . . and Zillah
bare Tubal-Cain, an instructor *of every artificer in brass and iron,*"
etc. Every word has a significance; but it is no *revelation.* It is
simply a compilation of the most *historical* facts, although history is
too perplexed upon this point to know how to claim them. It is from the
Euxine to Kashmere, and beyond that we must search for the cradle of
mankind and the sons of Ad-ah; and leave the particular garden of Ed-en
on the Euphrates to

###### <span id="page_580">p. 580</span>

the college of the weird astrologers and magi, the Aleim. <span
id="fr_813"></span>[\*](#fn_812) No wonder that the Northern seer,
Swedenborg, advises people to search for the LOST WORD among the
hierophants of Tartary, China, and Thibet; for it is there, and only
there now, although we find it inscribed on the monuments of the oldest
Egyptian dynasties.

The grandiose poetry of the four *Vedas*; the *Books of Hermes*; the
Chaldean *Book of Numbers;* the *Nazarene Codex;* the *Kabala* of the
Tanaim; the *Sepher Jezira;* the *Book of Wisdom,* of Schlomah
(Solomon); the secret treatise on *Muhta and Badha <span
id="fr_814"></span>[\*\*](#fn_813)* attributed by the Buddhist kabalists
to Kapila, the founder of the Sankhya system; the *Brahmanas; <span
id="fr_815"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_814)* the *Stan-gyour, <span
id="fr_816"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_815)* of the Thibetans; all these
volumes have the same ground-work. Varying but in allegories they teach
the same secret doctrine which, when once thoroughly eliminated, will
prove to be the Ultima Thule of true philosophy, and disclose what is
this LOST WORD.

It is useless to expect scientists to find in these works anything of
interest except that which is in direct relation to either philology or
comparative mythology. Even Max Muller, as soon as he refers to the
mysticism and metaphysical philosophy scattered through the old Sanscrit
literature, sees in it naught but "theological absurdities" and
"fantastic nonsense."

Speaking of the *Brahmanas,* all full of *mysterious,* therefore, as a
matter of course, absurd, meanings, we find him saying: "The greater
portion of them is simply twaddle, and what is worse, *theological
twaddle.* No person who is not acquainted beforehand with the place
which the *Brahmanas fill* in the history of the Indian mind, could read
more than ten pages *without being disgusted.*" <span
id="fr_817"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_816)

We do not wonder at the severe criticism of this erudite scientist.

###### <span id="page_581">p. 581</span>

Without a clew to the real meaning of this "twaddle" of religious
conceptions, how can they judge of the esoteric by the exoteric? We find
an answer in another of the highly-interesting lectures of the German
savant: "No Jew, no Roman, no Brahman ever thought of converting people
to his own national form of worship. Religion was looked upon as private
or national property. It was to be guarded against strangers. The most
sacred names of the gods, the prayers by which their favor could be
gained, were kept secret. No religion was more exclusive than that of
the Brahmans." <span id="fr_818"></span>[\*](#fn_817)

Therefore, when we find scholars who imagine, because they have learned
the meaning of a few exoteric rites from a srotriya, a Brahman priest
initiated in the sacrificial mysteries, that they are capable of
interpreting all the symbols, and have sifted the Hindu religions, we
cannot help admiring the completeness of their scientific delusions. The
more so, since we find Max Muller himself asserting that since "a
Brahman was born--*nay, twice-born,* and could not be made, not even the
lowest caste, that of the Sudras, would open its ranks to a stranger."
How much less likely that he would allow that stranger to unveil to the
world his most sacred religious Mysteries, the secret of which has been
guarded so jealously from profanation throughout untold ages.

No; our scientists do not--nay, cannot understand correctly the old
Hindu literature, any more than an atheist or materialist is able to
appreciate at their just value the feelings of a seer, a mystic, whose
whole life is given to contemplation. They have a perfect right to
soothe themselves with the sweet lullaby of their self-admiration, and
the just consciousness of their great learning, but none at all to lead
the world into their own error, by making it believe that they have
solved the last problem of ancient thought in literature, whether
Sanscrit or any other; that there lies not behind the external "twaddle"
far more than was ever dreamed of by our modern exact philosophy; or
that above and beyond the correct rendering of Sanscrit words and
sentences there is no deeper thought, intelligible to some of the
descendants of those who veiled it in the morning hours of earth's day,
if they are not to the profane reader.

We do not feel in the least astonished that a materialist, and even an
orthodox Christian, is unable to read either the old Brahmanical works
or their progeny, the *Kabala*, the *Codex* of Bardesanes, or the Jewish
*Scripture* without disgust at their immodesty and apparent lack of what
the uninitiated reader is pleased to call "common sense." But if we can
hardly blame them for such a feeling, especially in the case of the
Hebrew, and

###### <span id="page_582">p. 582</span>

even the Greek and Latin literature, and are quite ready to agree with
Professor Fiske that "it is a mark of wisdom to be dissatisfied with
imperfect evidence"; on the other hand we have a right to expect that
they should recognize that it is no less a mark of honesty to confess
one's ignorance in cases where there are two sides to the question, and
in the solution of which the scientist may as easily blunder as any
ignoramus. When we find Professor Draper, in his definition of periods
in the *Intellectual Development of Europe,* classifying the time from
the days of Socrates, the precursor and teacher *of Plato,* to
Karneades, as "the age of faith"; and that from Philo to the destruction
of the Neo-platonic schools by Justinian--the "age of decrepitude," we
may be allowed to infer that the learned professor knows as little about
the real tendency of Greek philosophy and the Attic schools as he
understood the true character of Giordano Bruno. So when we see one of
the best of Sanscrit scholars stating on his own unsupported authority
that the "greater portion of the *Brahmanas* is simply theological
twaddle," we deeply regret to think that Professor Muller must be far
better acquainted with the old Sanscrit verbs and nouns than with
Sanscrit thought; and that a scholar so uniformly disposed to do justice
to the religions and the men of old should so effectually play into the
hands of Christian theologians. "What is the use of Sanscrit?" exclaims
Jacquemont, who alone has made more false statements about the East than
all the Orientalists put together. At such a rate there would be none
indeed. If we are to exchange one corpse for another, then we may as
well dissect the dead letter of the Jewish *Bible* as that of the
*Vedas.* He who is not intuitionally vivified by the religious spirit of
old, will never see beyond the exoteric "twaddle."

When first we read that "in the cavity of the cranium of
Macroprosopos--the Long-Face--lies hidden the aerial **W**ISDOM which
nowhere is opened; and it is not discovered, and not opened"; or again,
that "the *nose* of the 'ancient of days' is *Life* in every part"; we
are inclined to regard it as the incoherent ravings of a lunatic. And
when, moreover, we are apprized by the *Codex Nazaraeus* that "she, the
*Spiritus,*" invites her son Karabtanos, "who is frantic and without
judgment," to an unnatural crime with his own mother, we are pretty well
disposed to throw the book aside in disgust. But is this only
meaningless trash, expressed in rude and even obscene language? No more
can it be judged by external appearance than the sexual symbols of the
Egyptian and Hindu religions, or the coarse frankness of expression of
the "holy" *Bible* itself. No more than the allegory of Eve and the
tempting serpent of Eden. The ever-insinuating, restless spirit, when
once it "falls into matter," tempts Eve, or Hava, which bodily represent
chaotic matter "frantic and without judgment." For *matter*, Karabtanos,
is the son of *Spirit,* or

###### <span id="page_583">p. 583</span>

the *Spiritus* of the Nazarenes, the *Sophia-Achamoth,* and the latter
is the daughter of the pure, intellectual spirit, the divine breath.
When science shall have effectually demonstrated to us the origin of
matter, and proved the fallacy of the occultists and old philosophers
who held (as their descendants now hold) that matter is but one of the
correlations of spirit, then will the world of skeptics have a right to
reject the old Wisdom, or throw the charge of obscenity in the teeth of
the old religions.

"From time immemorial," <span id="fr_819"></span>[\*](#fn_818) says Mrs.
Lydia Maria Child, "an emblem has been worshipped in Hindustan as the
type of creation, or the origin of life. It is the most common symbol of
Siva \[Bala, or Maha-Deva\], and is universally connected with his
worship. . . . Siva was not merely the reproducer of human forms; he
represented the fructifying principle, the generative power that
pervades the universe. . . . Small images of this emblem carved in
ivory, gold, or crystal, are worn as ornaments about the neck. . . . The
maternal emblem is likewise a religious type; and worshippers of Vishnu
represent it on their forehead by a horizontal mark. . . . Is it strange
that they regarded with reverence the great mystery of human birth? Were
*they* impure thus to regard it? Or are we impure that we do *not* so
regard it? We have travelled far, and unclean have been the paths, since
those old Anchorites first spoke of God and the soul in the solemn
depths of their first sanctuaries. Let us not smile at their mode of
tracing the infinite and incomprehensible Cause throughout all the
mysteries of nature, lest by so doing we cast the shadow of our own
grossness on their patriarchal simplicity."

Many are the scholars who have tried, to the best of their ability, to
do justice to old India. Colebrooke, Sir William Jones, Barthelemy St.
Hilaire, Lassen, Weber, Strange, Burnouf, Hardy, and finally Jacolliot,
have all brought forward their testimony to her achievements in
legislation, ethics, philosophy, and religion. No people in the world
have ever attained to such a grandeur of thought in ideal conceptions of
the Deity and its offspring, MAN, as the Sanscrit metaphysicians and
theologians. "My complaint against many translators and Orientalists,"
says Jacolliot, "while admiring their profound knowledge is, that *not
having lived in India,* they fail in exactness of expression and in
comprehension of the *symbolical* sense of poetic chants, prayers, and
ceremonies, and thus too often fall into material errors, whether of
translation or appreciation." <span id="fr_820"></span>[\*\*](#fn_819)
Further, this author who, from a long residence in India, and the study
of its literature, is better qualified to testify than those who have
never been there, tells us that "the life of several generations would
scarce suffice

###### <span id="page_584">p. 584</span>

merely to read the works that ancient India has left us on history,
ethics *(morale),* poetry, philosophy, religion, different sciences, and
medicine." And yet Louis Jacolliot is able to judge but by the few
fragments, access to which had ever depended on the complaisance and
friendship of a few Brahmans with whom he succeeded in becoming
intimate. Did they show him *all* their treasures? Did they explain to
him *all* he desired to learn? We doubt it, otherwise he would not
himself have judged their religious ceremonies so hastily as he has upon
several occasions merely upon circumstantial evidence.

Still, no traveller has shown himself fairer in the main or more
impartial to India than Jacolliot. If he is severe as to her present
degradation, he is still severer to those who were the cause of it--the
sacerdotal caste of the last few centuries--and his rebuke is
proportionate to the intensity of his appreciation of her past grandeur.
He shows the sources whence proceeded the revelations of all the ancient
creeds, including the inspired *Books of Moses,* and points at India
directly as the cradle of humanity, the parent of all other nations, and
the hot-bed of all the lost arts and sciences of antiquity, for which
old India, herself, was lost already in the Cimmerian darkness of the
archaic ages. "To study India," he says, "is to trace humanity to its
sources."

"In the same way as modern society jostles antiquity at each step," he
adds, "as our poets have copied Homer and Virgil, Sophocles and
Euripides, Plautus and Terence; as our philosophers have drawn
inspiration from Socrates, Pythagoras, Plato, and Aristotle; as our
historians take Titus Livius, Sallust, or Tacitus, as models; our
orators, Demosthenes or Cicero; our physicians study Hippocrates, and
our codes transcribe Justinian--so had antiquity's self also an
antiquity to study, to imitate, and to copy. What more simple and more
logical? Do not peoples precede and succeed each other? Does the
knowledge, painfully acquired by one nation, confine itself to its own
territory, and die with the generation that produced it? Can there be
any absurdity in the suggestion that the India of 6,000 years ago,
brilliant, civilized, overflowing with population, impressed upon Egypt,
Persia, Judea, Greece, and Rome, a stamp as ineffaceable, impressions as
profound, as these last have impressed upon us?

"It is time to disabuse ourselves of those prejudices which represent
the ancients as having almost spontaneously-elaborated ideas,
philosophic, religious, and moral, the most lofty--those prejudices that
in their naive admiration explain all in the domain of science, arts,
and letters, by the intuition of some few great men, and in the realm of
religion by revelation." <span id="fr_821"></span>[\*](#fn_820)

###### <span id="page_585">p. 585</span>

We believe that the day is not far off when the opponents of this fine
and erudite writer will be silenced by the force of irrefutable
evidence. And when *facts* shall once have corroborated his theories and
assertions, what will the world find? That it is to India, the country
less explored, and less known than any other, that all the other great
nations of the world are indebted for their languages, arts,
legislature, and civilization. Its progress, impeded for a few centuries
before our era--for, as this writer shows, at the epoch of the great
Macedonian conqueror, "India had already passed the period of her
splendor"--was completely stifled in the subsequent ages. But the
evidence of her past glories lies in her literature. What people in all
the world can boast of such a literature, which, were the Sanscrit less
difficult, would be more studied than now? Hitherto the general public
has had to rely for information on a few scholars who, notwithstanding
their great learning and trustworthiness, are unequal to the task of
translating and commenting upon more than a few books out of the almost
countless number that, notwithstanding the vandalism of the
missionaries, are still left to swell the mighty volume of Sanscrit
literature. And to do even so much is the labor of a European's
lifetime. Hence, people judge hastily, and often make the most
ridiculous blunders.

Quite recently a certain Reverend Dunlop Moore, of New Brighton, Pa.,
determined to show his cleverness and piety at a single stroke, attacked
the statement made by a Theosophist in a discourse delivered at the
cremation of Baron de Palm, that the *Code of Manu* existed a thousand
years before Moses. "All Orientalists of any note," he says, "are now
agreed that the *Institutes of Manu* were written at different times.
*The oldest part of* *the collection probably dates from the sixth
century before the Christian era*." <span
id="fr_822"></span>[\*](#fn_821) Whatever other Orientalists,
encountered by this Pennsylvania pundit, may think, Sir William Jones is
of a different opinion. "It is clear," he says, "that the *Laws of
Manu,* such as we possess them, and which comprise but 680 slokas,
cannot be the work attributed to Soumati, which is probably that
described under the name of *Vriddha Manava,* or *Ancient Code of Manu,*
which has not yet been entirely reconstructed, although many passages of
the book have been preserved by tradition, and are often cited by
commentators."

"We read in the preface to a treatise on legislation by Narada," says
Jacolliot, "written by one of his adepts, a client of Brahmanical power:
'Manu having written the laws of Brahma, in 100,000 slokas, or distichs,
which formed twenty-four books and a thousand chapters, gave the work to
Narada, the sage of sages, who abridged it for the use

###### <span id="page_586">p. 586</span>

of mankind to 12,000 verses, which he gave to a son of Brighou, named
Soumati, who, for the greater convenience of man, reduced them to
4,000.' "

Here we have the opinion of Sir William Jones, who, in 1794, affirmed
that the fragments in possession of the Europeans could not be *The
Ancient Code of Manu,* and that of Louis Jacolliot, who, in 1868, after
consulting all the authorities, and adding to them the result of his own
long and patient research, writes the following: "The Hindu laws were
codified by Manu *more than* 3,000 *years before the Christian era,*
copied by the whole of antiquity, and notably by Rome, which alone has
left us a written law--the *Code of Justinian;* which has been adopted
as the basis of all modern legislations." <span
id="fr_823"></span>[\*](#fn_822)

In another volume, entitled *Christna et le Christ,* in a scientific
arraignment of a pious, albeit very learned Catholic antagonist, M.
Textor de Ravisi, who seeks to prove that the orthography of the name
Christna is not warranted by its Sanscrit spelling--and has the worst of
it--Jacolliot remarks: "We know that the legislator Manu is lost in the
night of the ante-historical period of India; and that no Indianist has
dared to refuse him the title of the most ancient law-giver in the
world" (p. 350).

But Jacolliot had not heard of the Rev. Dunlop Moore. This is why,
perhaps, he and several other Indiologists are preparing to prove that
many of the Vedic texts, as well as those of Manu, sent to Europe by the
Asiatic Society of Calcutta, *are not genuine texts at all,* but mostly
due to the cunning tentative efforts of certain Jesuit missionaries to
mislead science, by the help of apocryphal works calculated at once to
throw upon the history of ancient India a cloud of uncertainty and
darkness, and on the modern Brahmans and pundits a suspicion of
systematical interpolation. "These facts," he adds, "which are so well
established in India that they are not even brought in question, *must
be revealed to Europe*" *(Christna et le Christ,* p. 347).

Moreover, the *Code of Manu,* known to European Orientalists as that one
which is commented upon by Brighou, does not even form a part of the
ancient Manu called the *Vriddha-Manava.* Although but small fragments
of it have been discovered by our scientists, it does exist as a whole
in certain temples; and Jacolliot proves that the texts sent to Europe
disagree entirely with the same texts as found in the pagodas of
Southern India. We can also cite for our purpose Sir William Jones, who,
complaining of Callouca, remarks that the latter seems in his
commentaries to have never considered that "the laws of Manu are
*restricted to the first three ages*" *(Translation of Manu and
Commentaries)*.

###### <span id="page_587">p. 587</span>

According to computation we are now in the age of Kali-Yug, the *third*,
reckoning from that of Satya or Kritayug, first age in which Hindu
tradition establishes the laws of Manu, and the authenticity of which
Sir William Jones implicitly accepted. Admitting all that may be said as
to the enormous exaggerations of Hindu chronology--which, by the bye,
dovetails far better with modern geology and anthropology than the 6,000
years' caricature chronology of the Jewish *Scripture--*still as about
4,500 years have elapsed since the fourth age of the world, or Kali-Yug,
began, we have here a proof that one of the greatest Orientalists that
ever lived--and a Christian in the bargain, not a Theosophist--believed
that Manu is many thousand years older than Moses. Clearly one of two
things should happen: Either Indian history should be remodelled for the
*Presbyterian Banner,* or the writers for that sheet should study Hindu
literature before trying their hand again at criticism of Theosophists.

But apart from the private opinions of these reverend gentlemen whose
views very little concern us, we find even in the *New American
Cyclopaedia* a decided tendency to dispute the antiquity and importance
of the Hindu literature. The *Laws of Manu,* says one of the writers,
"do not date earlier than the third century B.C." This term is a very
elastic one. If by the *Laws of Manu* the writer means the *abridgment*
of these laws, compiled and arranged by later Brahmans to serve as an
authority for their ambitious projects, and with an idea of creating for
themselves a rule of domination, then, in such a sense, they may be
right, though we are prepared to dispute even that. At all events it is
as little proper to pass off this abridgment for the genuine old laws
codified by Manu, as to assert that the Hebrew Bible does not date
earlier than the tenth century of our era, because we have no Hebrew
manuscript older than that, or that the poems of Homer's *Iliad* were
neither known nor written before its first authenticated manuscript was
found. There is no Sanscrit manuscript in the possession of European
scholars much older than four or five centuries, <span
id="fr_824"></span>[\*](#fn_823) a fact which did not in the least
restrain them from assigning to the *Vedas* an antiquity of between four
or five thousand years. There are the strongest possible arguments in
favor of the great antiquity of the *Books of Manu,* and without going
to the trouble of quoting the opinions of various scholars, no two of
whom agree, we will bring forward our own, at least as regards this most
unwarranted assertion of the

Cyclopaedia.

If, as Jacolliot proves, text in hand, the *Code of Justinian* was
copied from the *Laws of Manu,* we have first of all to ascertain the
age of the

###### <span id="page_588">p. 588</span>

former; not as a written and perfect code, but its origin. To answer, is
not difficult we believe.

According to Varro, Rome was built in 3961 of the Julian period (754
B.C.). The Roman Law, as embodied by order of Justinian, and known as
the *Corpus Juris Civilis,* was not a code, we are told, but a digest of
the customs of legislation of many centuries. Though nothing is actually
known of the original authorities, the chief source from which the *jus
scriptum,* or written law, was derived, was the *jus non scriptum,* or
the law of custom. Now it is just on this law *of custom* that we are
prepared to base our arguments. The law of the twelve tables, moreover,
was compiled about A.U.C. 300, and even this as respects private law was
compiled *from still earlier sources.* Therefore, if these earlier
sources are found to agree so well with the *Laws of Manu,* which the
Brahmans claim to have been codified in the *Kritayug,* an age anterior
to the actual *Kali-yug,* then we must suppose that this source of the
"Twelve Tables," as laws of *custom* and tradition, are at least, by
several hundred years, older than their copyists. This, alone, carries
us right back to more than 1,000 years B.C.

The *Manava Dharma Sastra,* embodying the Hindu system of cosmogony, is
recognized as next to the *Vedas* in antiquity; and even Colebrooke
assigns the latter to the fifteenth century B.C. And, now, what is the
etymology of the name of *Manava Dharma Sastra?* It is a word compounded
of *Manu; d'harma,* institute; and *sastra,* command or law. How then
can Manu's laws date only since the third century before our Christian
era?

The Hindu *Code* had never laid any claims to be divinely revealed. The
distinction made by the Brahmans themselves between the *Vedas* and
every other sacred book of however respectable an antiquity, is a proof
of it. While every sect holds the *Vedas* as the direct word of
God--*sruti* (revelation)--the *Code of Manu* is designated by them
simply as the *smriti,* a collection of oral traditions. Still these
traditions, or "recollections," are among the oldest as well as the most
revered in the land. But, perhaps, the strongest argument in favor of
its antiquity, and the general esteem in which it is held, lies in the
following fact. The Brahmans have undeniably remodelled these traditions
at some distant period, and made many of the actual laws, as they now
stand in the *Code of Manu,* to answer their ambitious views. Therefore,
they *must have done it at a time when the burning of widows (suttee)
was neither practiced nor intended to be,* which it has been for nearly
2,500 years. No more than in the *Vedas* is there any such atrocious law
mentioned in the *Code of Manu!* Who, unless he is completely
unacquainted with the history of India, but knows that this country was
once on the verge of a

###### <span id="page_589">p. 589</span>

religious rebellion occasioned by the prohibition of *suttee* by the
English government? The Brahmans appealed to a verse from the *Rig-Veda*
which commanded it. But this verse has been recently proved to have been
falsified. <span id="fr_825"></span>[\*](#fn_824) Had the Brahmans been
the sole authors of the *Code of Manu,* or had they codified it entirely
instead of simply filling it with interpolations to answer their object
not earlier than the time of Alexander, how is it possible that they
would have neglected this most important point, and so imperilled its
authority? This fact alone proves that the *Code* must be counted one of
their most ancient books.

It is on the strength of such circumstantial evidence--that of reason
and logic--that we affirm that, if Egypt furnished Greece with her
civilization, and the latter bequeathed hers to Rome, Egypt herself had,
in those unknown ages when Menes reigned, <span
id="fr_826"></span>[\*\*](#fn_825) received her laws, her social
institutions, her arts and her sciences, from pre-Vedic India; <span
id="fr_827"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_826) and that therefore, it is in that
old initiation of the priests--adepts of all the other countries--we
must seek for the key to the great mysteries of humanity.

And when we say, indiscriminately, "India," we do not mean the India of
our modern days, but that of the archaic period. In those ancient times
countries which are now known to us by other names were all called
India. There was an Upper, a Lower, and a Western India, the latter of
which is now Persia-Iran. The countries now named Thibet, Mongolia, and
Great Tartary, were also considered by the ancient writers as India. We
will now give a legend in relation to those places which science now
fully concedes to have been the cradle of humanity.

Tradition says, and the records of the *Great Book* explain, that long
before the days of Ad-am, and his inquisitive wife, He-va, where now are
found but salt lakes and desolate barren deserts, there was a vast
inland sea, which extended over Middle Asia, north of the proud
Himalayan range, and its western prolongation. An island, which for its
unparalleled beauty had no rival in the world, was inhabited by the last
remnant of the race which preceded ours. This race could live with equal
ease in water, air, or fire, for it had an unlimited control over the
elements. These were the "Sons of God"; not those who saw the daughters
of men, but the real *Elohim,* though in the Oriental *Kabala* they have
another name. It was they who imparted Nature's most weird secrets to
men, and revealed to them the ineffable, and now *lost* "word."

###### <span id="page_590">p. 590</span>

This word, which is no word, has travelled once around the globe, and
still lingers as a far-off dying echo in the hearts of some privileged
men. The hierophants of all the Sacerdotal Colleges were aware of the
existence of this island, but the "word" was known only to the *Java
Aleim,* or chief lord of every college, and was passed to his successor
only at the moment of death. There were many such colleges, and the old
classic authors speak of them.

We have already seen that it is one of the universal traditions accepted
by all the ancient peoples that there were many races of men anterior to
our present races. Each of these was distinct from the one which
preceded it; and each disappeared as the following appeared. In *Manu,*
six such races are plainly mentioned as having succeeded each other.

"From this Manu Swayambhouva (the minor, and answering to Adam Kadmon)
issued from Swayambhouva, or the Being existing through himself,
descended six other Manus (men typifying progenitors), each of whom gave
birth *to a race* of men. . . . These Manus, all powerful, of whom
Swayambhouva is the first, have each, *in his period--antara--*produced
and directed this world composed of movable and unmovable beings"
(*Manu,* book i.).

In the *Siva-Purana, <span id="fr_828"></span>[\*](#fn_827)* it runs
thus:

"O Siva, thou god of fire, mayest thou destroy my sins, as the
bleaching-grass of the jungle is destroyed by fire. It is through thy
mighty Breath that Adhima (the first man) and Heva (completion of life,
in Sanscrit), *the ancestors of this race of men* have received life and
covered the world with their descendants."

There was no communication with the fair island by sea, but subterranean
passages known only to the chiefs, communicated with it in all
directions. Tradition points to many of the majestic ruins of India,
Ellora, Elephanta, and the caverns of Ajunta (Chandor range), which
belonged once to those colleges, and with which were connected such
subterranean ways. <span id="fr_829"></span>[\*\*](#fn_828) Who can tell
but the lost Atlantis--which is also

###### <span id="page_591">p. 591</span>

mentioned in the *Secret Book,* but, again, under another name,
pronounced in the sacred language--did not exist yet in those days? The
great lost continent might have, perhaps, been situated south of Asia,
extending from India to Tasmania? <span id="fr_830"></span>[\*](#fn_829)
If the hypothesis now so much doubted, and positively denied by some
learned authors who regard it as a joke of Plato's, is ever verified,
then, perhaps, will the scientists believe that the description of the
god-inhabited continent was not altogether fable. And they may then
perceive that Plato's guarded hints and the fact of his attributing the
narrative to Solon and the Egyptian priests, were but a prudent way of
imparting the fact to the world and by cleverly combining truth and
fiction, to disconnect himself from a story which the obligations
imposed at initiation forbade him to divulge.

And how could the name of Atlanta itself originate with Plato at all?
Atlante is *not* a Greek name, and its construction has nothing of the
Grecian element in it. Brasseur de Bourbourg tried to demonstrate it
years ago, and Baldwin, in his *Prehistoric Nations and Ancient
America,* cites the former, who declares that "the words *Atlas* and
*Atlantic* have no satisfactory etymology in any language known in
Europe. They are not Greek, and cannot be referred to any known language
of the Old World. But in the Nahuatl (or Toltec) language we find
immediately the radical *a, atl,* which signifies water, war, and the
top of the head. From this comes a series of words, such as *atlan,* or
the border of or amid the water; from which we have the adjective
*Atlantic.* We have also *atlaca,* to combat. . . . A city named *Atlan*
existed when the continent was discovered by Columbus, at the entrance
of the Gulf of Uraha, in Darien, with a good harbor. It is now reduced
to an unimportant *pueblo* (village) named Aclo." <span
id="fr_831"></span>[\*\*](#fn_830)

Is it not, to say the least, very extraordinary to find in America a
city called by a name which contains a purely local element, foreign
moreover to every other country, in the alleged *fiction* of a
philosopher of 400 years B.C.? The same may be said of the name of
*America,* which may one day be found more closely related to Meru, the
sacred mount in the centre of the *seven* continents, according to the
Hindu tradition, than to Americus Vespucius, whose name by the bye, was
never Americus at all, but *Albericus,* a trifling difference not deemed
worth mentioning till very lately by *exact* history. <span
id="fr_832"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_831) We adduce the following reasons in
favor of our argument:

###### <span id="page_592">p. 592</span>

1st. Americ, Amerrique, or Amerique is the name in Nicaragua for the
high land or mountain range that lies between Juigalpa and Libertad, in
the province of Chontales, and which reaches on the one side into the
country of the Carcas Indians, and on the other side into the country of
the Ramas Indians.

Ic or *ique,* as a terminal, means great, as *cazique*, etc.

Columbus mentions, in his fourth voyage, the village *Cariai,* probably
*Caicai.* The people abounded with sorcerers, or medicine men; and this
was the region of the Americ range, 3,000 feet high.

Yet he omits to mention this word.

The name *America Provincia,* first appeared on a map published at
Basle, in 1522. Till that time, the region was believed to be part of
India. That year Nicaragua was conquered by Gil Gonzales de Avida. <span
id="fr_833"></span>[\*](#fn_832)

2d. "The Northmen who visited the continent in the tenth century, <span
id="fr_834"></span>[\*\*](#fn_833) a low level coast thickly covered
with wood," called it *Markland,* from *mark,* a wood. The *r* had a
rolling sound as in *marrick.* A similar word is found in the country of
the Himalayas, and the name of the World-Mountain, Meru, is pronounced
in some dialects as **M**ERUAH, the letter *h* being strongly aspirated.
The main idea is, however, to show how two peoples could possibly accept
a word of similar sound, each having used it in their own sense, and
finding it applied to the same territory.

"It is most plausible," says Professor Wilder, "that the State of
Central America, where we find the name *Americ* signifying (like the
Hindu Meru we may add) great mountain, gave the continent its name.
Vespucius would have used his surname if he had designed to give a title
to a continent. If the Abbe de Bourbourg's theory of *Atlan* as the
source of Atlas and Atlantic is verified, the two hypotheses could agree
most charmingly. As Plato was not the only writer that treated of a
world beyond the pillars of Hercules, and as the ocean is still shallow
and grows sea-weed all through the tropical part of the Atlantic, it is
not wild to imagine that this continent projected, or that there was an
island-world on that coast. The Pacific also shows signs of having been
a populous island-empire of Malays or Javanese--if not a continent amid
the North and South. We know that Lemuria in the Indian Ocean is a dream
of scientists; and that the Sahara and the middle belt of Asia were
perhaps once sea-beds."

To continue the tradition, we have to add that the class of hierophants

###### <span id="page_593">p. 593</span>

was divided into two distinct categories: those who were instructed by
the "Sons of God," of the island, and who were initiated in the divine
doctrine of pure revelation, and others who inhabited the lost
Atlantis--if such must be its name--and who, being of another race, were
born with a sight which embraced all hidden things, and was independent
of both distance and material obstacle. In short, they were the *fourth*
race of men mentioned in the *Popol-Vuh,* whose sight was unlimited and
who knew all things at once. They were, perhaps, what we would now term
"natural-born mediums," who neither struggled nor suffered to obtain
their knowledge, nor did they acquire it at the price of any sacrifice.
Therefore, while the former walked in the path of their divine
instructors, and acquiring their knowledge by degrees, learned at the
same time to discern the evil from the good, the born *adepts* of the
Atlantis blindly followed the insinuations of the great and invisible
"Dragon," the King *Thevetat* (the Serpent of *Genesis*?). Thevetat had
neither learned nor acquired knowledge, but, to borrow an expression of
Dr. Wilder in relation to the tempting Serpent, he was "a sort of
Socrates who *knew* without being initiated." Thus, under the evil
insinuations of their demon, Thevetat, the Atlantis-race became a nation
of wicked *magicians.* In consequence of this, war was declared, the
story of which would be too long to narrate; its substance may be found
in the disfigured allegories of the race of Cain, the giants, and that
of Noah and his righteous family. The conflict came to an end by the
submersion of the Atlantis; which finds its imitation in the stories of
the Babylonian and Mosaic flood: The giants and magicians " . . . and
all flesh died . . . and every man." All except Xisuthrus and Noah, who
are substantially identical with the great Father of the Thlinkithians
in the *Popol-Vuh,* or the sacred book of the Guatemaleans, which also
tells of his escaping in a large boat, like the Hindu Noah--Vaiswasvata.

If we believe the tradition at all, we have to credit the further story
that from the intermarrying of the progeny of the hierophants of the
island and the descendants of the Atlantian Noah, sprang up a mixed race
of righteous and wicked. On the one side the world had its Enochs,
Moseses, Gautama-Buddhas, its numerous "Saviours," and great
hierophants; on the other hand, its "*natural* magicians" who, through
lack of the restraining power of proper spiritual enlightenment, and
because of weakness of physical and mental organizations,
unintentionally perverted their gifts to evil purposes. Moses had no
word of rebuke for those adepts in prophecy and other powers who had
been instructed in the colleges of esoteric wisdom <span
id="fr_835"></span>[\*](#fn_834) mentioned in the *Bible.* His
denunciations

###### <span id="page_594">p. 594</span>

were reserved for such as either wittingly or otherwise debased the
powers inherited from their Atlantian ancestors to the service of evil
spirits, to the injury of humanity. His wrath was kindled against the
spirit of *Ob,* not that of **O**D. <span
id="fr_836"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_835)

<span id="page_595">p. 595</span>

The ruins which cover both Americas, and are found on many West Indian
islands, are all attributed to the submerged Atlantians. As well as the
hierophants of the old world, which in the days of Atlantis was almost
connected with the new one by land, the magicians of the now submerged
country had a net-work of subterranean passages running in all
directions. In connection with those mysterious catacombs we will now
give a curious story told to us by a Peruvian, long since dead, as we
were travelling together in the interior of his country. There must be
truth in it; as it was afterward confirmed to us by an Italian gentleman
who had seen the place and who, but for lack of means and time, would
have verified the tale himself, at least partially. The informant of the
Italian was an old priest, who had had the secret divulged to him, at
confession, by a Peruvian Indian. We may add, moreover, that the priest
was compelled

###### <span id="page_596">p. 596</span>

to make the revelation, being at the time completely under the mesmeric
influence of the traveller.

The story concerns the famous treasures of the last of the Incas. The
Peruvian asserted that since the well-known and miserable murder of the
latter by Pizarro, the secret had been known to all the Indians, except
the *Mestizos* who could not be trusted. It runs thus: The Inca was made
prisoner, and his wife offered for his liberation a room full of gold,
"from the floor up to the ceiling, as high up as his conqueror could
reach" before the sun would set on the third day. She kept her promise,
but Pizarro broke his word, according to Spanish practice. Marvelling at
the exhibition of such treasures, the conqueror declared that he would
not release the prisoner, but would murder him, unless the queen
revealed the place whence the treasure came. He had heard that the Incas
had somewhere an inexhaustible mine; a subterranean road or tunnel
running many miles under ground, where were kept the accumulated riches
of the country. The unfortunate queen begged for delay, and went to
consult the oracles. During the sacrifice, the chief-priest showed her
in the consecrated "black mirror" <span id="fr_837"></span>[\*](#fn_836)
the unavoidable murder of her husband, whether she delivered the
treasures of the crown to Pizarro or not. Then the queen gave the order
to close the entrance, which was a door cut in the rocky wall of a
chasm. Under the direction of the priest and magicians, the chasm was
accordingly filled to the top with huge masses of rock, and the surface
covered over so as to conceal the work. The Inca was murdered by the
Spaniards and his unhappy queen committed suicide. Spanish greed
overreached itself and the secret of the buried treasures was locked in
the breasts of a few faithful Peruvians.

Our Peruvian informant added that in consequence of certain
indiscretions at various times, persons had been sent by different
governments to search for the treasure under the pretext of scientific
exploration. They had rummaged the country through, but without
realizing their object. So far this tradition is corroborated by the
reports of Dr. Tschuddi and other historians of Peru. But there are
certain additional details which we are not aware have been made public
before now.

###### <span id="page_597">p. 597</span>

Several years after hearing the story, and its corroboration by the
Italian gentleman, we again visited Peru. Going southward from Lima, by
water, we reached a point near Arica at sunset, and were struck by the
appearance of an enormous rock, nearly perpendicular, which stood in
mournful solitude on the shore, apart from the range of the Andes. It
was the tomb of the Incas. As the last rays of the setting sun strike
the face of the rock, one can make out, with an ordinary opera-glass,
some curious hieroglyphics inscribed on the volcanic surface.

When Cusco was the capital of Peru, it contained a temple of the sun,
famed far and near for its magnificence. It was roofed with thick plates
of gold, and the walls were covered with the same precious metal; the
eave-troughs were also of solid gold. In the west wall the architects
had contrived an aperture in such a way that when the sunbeams reached
it, it focused them inside the building. Stretching like a golden chain
from one sparkling point to another, they encircled the walls,
illuminating the grim idols, and disclosing certain mystic signs at
other times invisible. It was only by understanding these
hieroglyphics--identical with those which may be seen to this day on the
tomb of the Incas--that one could learn the secret of the tunnel and its
approaches. Among the latter was one in the neighborhood of Cusco, now
masked beyond discovery. This leads directly into an immense tunnel
which runs from Cusco to Lima, and then, turning southward, extends into
Bolivia. At a certain point it is intersected by a royal tomb. Inside
this sepulchral chamber are cunningly arranged two doors; or, rather,
two enormous slabs which turn upon pivots, and close so tightly as to be
only distinguishable from the other portions of the sculptured walls by
the secret signs, whose key is in the possession of the faithful
custodians. One of these turning slabs covers the southern mouth of the
Liman tunnel--the other, the northern one of the Bolivian corridor. The
latter, running southward, passes through Trapaca and Cobijo, for Arica
is not far away from the little river called Pay'quina, <span
id="fr_838"></span>[\*](#fn_837) which is the boundary between Peru and
Bolivia.

Not far from this spot stand three separate peaks which form a curious
triangle; they are included in the chain of the Andes. According to
tradition the only practicable entrance to the corridor leading
northward is in one of these peaks; but without the secret of its
landmarks, a regiment of Titans might rend the rocks in vain in the
attempt to find it. But even were some one to gain an entrance and find
his way as far as the turning slab in the wall of the sepulchre, and
attempt to blast it out,

###### <span id="page_598">p. 598</span>

the superincumbent rocks are so disposed as to bury the tomb, its
treasures, and--as the mysterious Peruvian expressed it to us--"a
thousand warriors" in one common ruin. There is no other access to the
Arica chamber but through the door in the mountain near Pay'quina. Along
the entire length of the corridor, from Bolivia to Lima and Cusco, are
smaller hiding places filled with treasures of gold and precious stone,
the accumulations of many generations of Incas, the aggregate value of
which is incalculable.

We have in our possession an accurate plan of the tunnel, the sepulchre,
and the doors, given to us at the time by the old Peruvian. If we had
ever thought of profiting by the secret, it would have required the
cooperation of the Peruvian and Bolivian governments on an extensive
scale. To say nothing of physical obstacles, no one individual or small
party could undertake such an exploration without encountering the army
of smugglers and brigands with which the coast is infested; and which,
in fact, includes nearly the whole population. The mere task of
purifying the mephitic air of the tunnel, which had not been entered for
centuries, would also be a serious one. There, however, the treasure
lies, and there the tradition says it will lie till the last vestige of
Spanish rule disappears from the whole of North and South America.

The treasures exhumed by Dr. Schliemann at Mycenae, have awakened
popular cupidity, and the eyes of adventurous speculators are being
turned toward the localities where the wealth of ancient peoples is
supposed to be buried, in crypt or cave, or beneath sand or alluvial
deposit. Around no other locality, not even Peru, hang so many
traditions as around the Gobi Desert. In Independent Tartary this
howling waste of shifting sand was once, if report speaks correctly, the
seat of one of the richest empires the world ever saw. Beneath the
surface are said to lie such wealth in gold, jewels, statuary, arms,
utensils, and all that indicates civilization, luxury, and fine arts, as
no existing capital of Christendom can show to-day. The Gobi sand moves
regularly from east to west before terrific gales that blow continually.
Occasionally some of the hidden treasures are uncovered, but not a
native dare touch them, for the whole district is under the ban of a
mighty spell. Death would be the penalty. Bahti--hideous, but faithful
gnomes--guard the hidden treasures of this prehistoric people, awaiting
the day when the revolution of cyclic periods shall again cause their
story to be known for the instruction of mankind.

According to local tradition, the tomb of Ghengiz Khan still exists near
Lake Tabasun Nor. Within lies the Mongolian Alexander, as though asleep.
After three more centuries he will awake and lead his people to new
victories and another harvest of glory. Though this prophetic

###### <span id="page_599">p. 599</span>

tradition be received with ever so many grains of salt, we can affirm as
a fact that the tomb itself is no fiction, nor has its amazing richness
been exaggerated.

The district of the Gobi wilderness and, in fact, the whole area of
Independent Tartary and Thibet is jealously guarded against foreign
intrusion. Those who are permitted to traverse it are under the
particular care and pilotage of certain agents of the chief authority,
and are in duty bound to convey no intelligence respecting places and
persons to the outside world. But for this restriction, even we might
contribute to these pages accounts of exploration, adventure, and
discovery that would be read with interest. The time will come, sooner
or later, when the dreadful sand of the desert will yield up its
long-buried secrets, and then there will indeed be unlooked-for
mortifications for our modern vanity.

"The people of Pashai," <span id="fr_839"></span>[\*](#fn_838) says
Marco Polo, the daring traveller of the thirteenth century, "are great
adepts in sorceries and the *diabolic* arts." And his learned editor
adds: "This Pashai, or Udyana, was the native country of Padma Sambhava,
one of the chief apostles of lamaism, *i.e*., of Thibetan Buddhism, and
a great master of enchantments. The doctrines of Sakya, as they
prevailed in Udyana *in old times,* were probably strongly tinged with
Sivaitic magic, and the Thibetans still regard the locality as the
classic ground of sorcery and witchcraft."

The "old times" are just like the "modern times"; nothing is changed as
to magical practices except that they have become still more esoteric
and arcane, and that the caution of the adepts increases in proportion
to the traveller's curiosity. Hiouen-Thsang says of the inhabitants:
"The men . . . are fond of study, but pursue it with no ardor. *The
science of magical formulae has become a regular professional business
with them.*"* <span id="fr_840"></span>[\*\*](#fn_839)* We will not
contradict the venerable Chinese pilgrim on this point, and are willing
to admit that in the seventh century *some* people made "a professional
business" of magic; so, also, do *some* people now, but certainly not
the true adepts. It is not Hiouen-Thsang, the pious, courageous man, who
risked his life a hundred times to have the bliss of perceiving Buddha's
shadow in the cave of Peshawer, who would have accused the holy lamas
and monkish thaumaturgists of "making a professional business" of
showing it to travellers. The injunction of Gautama, contained in his
answer to King Prasenagit, his protector, who called on him to perform
miracles, must have been ever

###### <span id="page_600">p. 600</span>

present to the mind of Hiouen-Thsang. "Great king," said Gautama, "I do
not teach the law to my pupils, telling them 'go, ye saints, and before
the eyes of the Brahmans and householders perform, by means of your
supernatural powers, miracles greater than any man can perform.' I tell
them, when I teach them the law, 'Live, ye saints, *hiding your good
works, and showing your sins*.' "

Struck with the accounts of magical exhibitions witnessed and recorded
by travellers of every age who had visited Tartary and Thibet, Colonel
Yule comes to the conclusion that the natives must have had "at their
command the whole encyclopaedia of modern 'Spiritualists.' Duhalde
mentions among their sorceries the art of producing by their invocations
the figures of Laotsen <span id="fr_841"></span>[\*](#fn_840) and their
divinities *in the air,* and *of making a pencil write answers to
questions without anybody touching it.*" <span
id="fr_842"></span>[\*\*](#fn_841)

The former invocations pertain to religious mysteries of their
sanctuaries; if done otherwise, or for the sake *of gain,* they are
considered *sorcery*, necromancy, and strictly forbidden. The latter
art, that of making a pencil write *without contact,* was known and
practiced in China and other countries centuries before the Christian
era. It is the A B C of magic in those countries.

When Hiouen-Thsang desired to adore the shadow of Buddha, it was not to
"professional magicians" that he resorted, but to the power of his own
soul-invocation; the power of prayer, faith, and contemplation. All was
dark and dreary near the cavern in which the miracle was alleged to take
place sometimes. Hiouen-Thsang entered and began his devotions. He made
100 salutations, but neither saw nor heard anything. Then, thinking
himself too sinful, he cried bitterly, and despaired. But as he was
going to give up all hope, he perceived on the eastern wall a feeble
light, but it disappeared. He renewed his prayers, full of hope this
time, and again he saw the light, which flashed and disappeared again.
After this he made a solemn vow: he would not leave the cave till he had
the rapture to see at last the shadow of the "Venerable of the Age." He
had to wait longer after this, for only after 200 prayers was the dark
cave suddenly "bathed in light, and the shadow of Buddha, of a brilliant
white color, rose majestically on the wall, as when the clouds suddenly
open, and, all at once, display the marvellous image of the 'Mountain of
Light.' A dazzling splendor lighted up the features of the divine
countenance. Hiouen-Thsang was lost in contemplation and wonder, and
would not turn his eyes away from the sublime and incom-

###### <span id="page_601">p. 601</span>

parable object." Hiouen-Thsang adds in his own diary, *See-yu-kee,* that
it is only when man prays with sincere faith, and if he has received
from above a hidden impression, that he sees the shadow clearly, but he
cannot enjoy the sight for any length of time. <span
id="fr_843"></span>[\*](#fn_842)

Those who are so ready to accuse the Chinese of irreligion will do well
to read Schott's *Essays on Buddhism in China and Upper Asia*. <span
id="fr_844"></span>[\*\*](#fn_843) "In the years *Yuan-yeu* of the Sung
(A.D. 1086-1093) a pious matron with her two servants lived entirely to
the Land of Enlightenment. One of the maids said one day to her
companion: 'To-night I shall pass over to the Realm of Amita' (Buddha).
The same night a balsamic odor filled the house, and the maid died
without any preceding illness. On the following day the surviving maid
said to her lady: 'Yesterday my deceased companion appeared to me in a
dream, and said: "Thanks to the persevering supplications of our dear
mistress, I am become an inhabitant of Paradise, and my blessedness is
past all expression in words." ' The matron replied: 'If she will appear
to me also, then will I believe all you say.' The next night the
deceased really appeared to her. The lady asked: 'May I, for once, visit
the Land of Enlightenment?' 'Yea,' answered the blessed soul; 'thou hast
but to follow thine hand-maiden.' The lady followed her (in her dream),
and soon perceived a lake of immeasurable expanse, overspread with
innumerable red and white lotus flowers, of various sizes, some
blooming, some fading. She asked what those flowers might signify? The
maiden replied: 'These are all human beings on the Earth whose thoughts
are turned to the Land of Enlightenment. The very first longing after
the Paradise of Amita produces a flower in the Celestial Lake, and this
becomes daily larger and more glorious as the self-improvement of the
person whom it represents advances; in the contrary case, it loses in
glory and fades away.' <span id="fr_845"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_844) The
matron desired to know the name of an enlightened one who reposed on one
of the flowers, clad in a waving and wondrously glistening raiment. Her
whilom maiden answered: 'That is Yang-kie.' Then asked she the name of
another, and was answered: 'That is Mahu.'

###### <span id="page_602">p. 602</span>

The lady then said: 'At what place shall I hereafter come into
existence?' Then the Blessed Soul led her a space further, and showed
her a hill that gleamed with gold and azure. 'Here,' said she, 'is your
future abode. You will belong to the first order of the blessed.' When
the matron awoke, she sent to inquire for Yang-kie and Mahu. The first
was already departed; the other still alive and well. And thus the lady
learned that the soul of one who advances in holiness and never turns
back, may be already a dweller in the Land of Enlightenment, even though
the body still sojourn in this transitory world."

In the same essay, another Chinese story is translated, and to the same
effect: "I knew a man," says the author, "who during his life had killed
many living beings, and was at last struck with an apoplexy. The sorrows
in store for his sin-laden soul pained me to the heart; I visited him,
and exhorted him to call on the Amita; but he obstinately refused. His
illness clouded his understanding; in consequence of his misdeeds he had
become hardened. What was before such a man when once his eyes were
closed? In this life the night followeth the day, and the winter
followeth the summer; that, all men are aware of. But that life is
followed by death, no man will consider. Oh, what blindness and obduracy
is this!" (p. 93.)

These two instances of Chinese literature hardly strengthen the usual
charge of irreligion and total materialism brought against the nation.
The first little mystical story is full of spiritual charm, and would
grace any Christian religious book. The second is as worthy of praise,
and we have but to replace "Amita" with "Jesus" to have a highly
Orthodox tale, as regards religious sentiments and code of philosophical
morality. The following instance is still more striking, and we quote it
for the benefit of Christian revivalists:

"Hoang-ta-tie, of T'anchen, who lived under the Sung, followed the craft
of a blacksmith. Whenever he was at his work he used to call, without
intermission, on the name of Amita Buddha. One day he handed to his
neighbors the following verses of his own composition to be spread
about: --

> 'Ding dong! The hammer-strokes fall long and fast,  
> Until the iron turns to steel at last!  
> Now shall the long, long day of rest begin,  
> The *Land of Bliss Eternal* calls me in!'

"Thereupon he died. But his verses spread all over Honan, and many
learned to call upon Buddha." <span id="fr_846"></span>[\*](#fn_845)

To deny to the Chinese or any people of Asia, whether Central,

###### <span id="page_603">p. 603</span>

Upper, or Lower, the possession of any knowledge, or even perception of
spiritual things, is perfectly ridiculous. From one end to the other the
country is full of mystics, religious philosophers, Buddhist saints, and
*magicians.* Belief in a spiritual world, full of invisible beings who,
on certain occasions, appear to mortals objectively, is universal.
"According to the belief of the nations of Central Asia," remarks I. J.
Schmidt, "the earth and its interior, as well as the encompassing
atmosphere, are filled with spiritual beings, which exercise an
influence, partly beneficent, partly malignant, on the whole of organic
and inorganic nature. . . . Especially are deserts and other wild or
uninhabited tracts, or regions in which the influences of nature are
displayed on a gigantic and terrible scale, regarded as the chief abode
or rendezvous of evil spirits. And hence the steppes of Turan, and in
particular the great sandy Desert of Gobi have been looked on as the
dwelling-place of malignant beings, from days of hoary antiquity."

Marco Polo--as a matter of course--mentions more than once in his
curious book of *Travels,* these tricky nature-spirits of the deserts.
For centuries, and especially in the last one, had his strange stories
been completely rejected. No one would believe him when he said he had
witnessed, time and again, with his own eyes, the most wonderful feats
of magic performed by the subjects of Kublai-Khan and adepts of other
countries. On his death-bed Marco was strongly urged to retract his
alleged "falsehoods"; but he solemnly swore to the truth of what he
said, adding that "he had not told *one-half* of what he had really
seen!" There is now no doubt that he spoke the truth, since Marsden's
edition, and that of Colonel Yule have appeared. The public is
especially beholden to the latter for bringing forward so many
authorities corroborative of Marco's testimony, and explaining some of
the phenomena in the usual way, for he makes it plain beyond question
that the great traveller was not only a veracious but an exceedingly
observant writer. Warmly defending his author, the conscientious editor,
after enumerating more than one hitherto controverted and even rejected
point in the Venetian's Travels, concludes by saying: "Nay, the last two
years have thrown a promise of light even on what seemed *the wildest*
of Marco's stories, and the bones of a veritable **R**UC from New
Zealand lie on the table of Professor Owen's cabinet!" <span
id="fr_847"></span>[\*](#fn_846)

The monstrous bird of the *Arabian Nights,* or "Arabian Mythology," as
Webster calls the *Ruc* (or Roc), having been identified, the next thing
in order is to *discover* and recognize that *Aladdin's* magical lamp
has also certain claims to reality.

###### <span id="page_604">p. 604</span>

Describing his passage through the great desert of Lop, Marco Polo
speaks of a marvellous thing, "which is that, when travellers are on the
move by night . . . they will hear spirits talking. Sometimes the
spirits will call him by name . . . even in the daytime one hears these
spirits talking. And sometimes you shall hear the sound of a variety of
musical instruments, and still more commonly the sound of drums." <span
id="fr_848"></span>[\*](#fn_847)

In his notes, the translator quotes the Chinese historian, Matwanlin,
who corroborates the same. "During the passage of this wilderness you
hear sounds," says Matwanlin, "sometimes of singing, sometimes of
wailing; and it has often happened that travellers going aside to see
what those sounds might be, have strayed from their course and been
entirely lost; for they were voices of spirits and goblins." <span
id="fr_849"></span>[\*\*](#fn_848) "These goblins are not peculiar to
the Gobi," adds the editor, "though that appears to have been their most
favored haunt. *The awe of the vast and solitary desert raises them in
all similar localities.*"

Colonel Yule would have done well to consider the possibility of serious
consequences arising from the acceptance of his theory. If we admit that
the weird cries of the Gobi are due to the *awe* inspired "by the vast
and solitary desert," why should the goblins of the Gadarenes (*Luke*
viii. 29) be entitled to any better consideration? and why may not Jesus
have been self-deceived as to his objective tempter during the forty
days' trial in the "wilderness"? We are quite ready to receive or reject
the theory enunciated by Colonel Yule, but shall insist upon its
impartial application to all cases. Pliny speaks of the phantoms that
appear and vanish in the deserts of Africa; <span
id="fr_850"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_849) AEthicus, the early Christian
cosmographer, mentions, though incredulous, the stories that were told
of the voices of singers and revellers in the desert; and "Mas'udi tells
of the *ghuls,* which in the deserts appear to travellers by night and
in lonely hours"; and also of "Apollonius of Tyana and his companions,
who, in a desert near the Indus by moonlight, saw an *empusa* or ghul
taking many forms. . . . They revile it, and it goes off uttering shrill
cries." <span id="fr_851"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_850) And Ibn Batuta
relates a like legend of the Western Sahara: "If the messenger be
solitary, the demons sport with him and fascinate him, so that he strays
from his course and perishes." <span
id="fr_852"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_851) Now if all these matters are
capable of a "rational explanation," and we do not doubt it as regards
most of these cases, then, the Bible-devils of the wilderness deserve no
more consideration, but should have the same rule applied to them. They,
too, are creatures of terror, imagination, and

superstition;

###### <span id="page_605">p. 605</span>

hence, the narratives of the *Bible* must be false; and if one single
verse is false, then a cloud is thrown upon the title of all the rest to
be considered *divine* revelation. Once admit this, and this collection
of canonical documents is at least as amenable to criticism as any other
book of stories. <span id="fr_853"></span>[\*](#fn_852)

There are many spots in the world where the strangest phenomena have
resulted from what was later ascertained to be natural physical causes.
In Southern California there are certain places on the sea-shore where
the sand when disturbed produces a loud musical ring. It is known as the
"musical sand," and the phenomenon is supposed to be of an electrical
nature. "The sound of musical instruments, chiefly of drums, is a
phenomenon of another class, and is really produced in certain
situations among sandhills when the sand is disturbed," says the editor
of *Marco Polo.* "A very striking account of a phenomenon of this kind,
*regarded as supernatural,* is given by Friar Odoric, whose experience I
have traced to the Reg Ruwan or flowing sand north of Kabul. Besides
this celebrated example . . . I have noted that equally well-known one
of the *Jibal Nakics,* or 'Hill of the Bell' in the Sinai desert; . . .
Gibalul-Thabul, or hill of the drums. . . . A Chinese narrative of the
tenth century mentions the phenomenon as known near Kwachau, on the
eastern border of the Lop desert, under the name of "the singing
sands." <span id="fr_854"></span>[\*\*](#fn_853)

That all these are natural phenomena, no one can doubt. But what of the
questions and answers, plainly and audibly given and received? What of
conversations held between certain travellers and the *invisible*
spirits, or unknown beings, that sometimes appear to whole caravans in
tangible form? If so many millions believe in the possibility that
spirits may clothe themselves with material bodies, behind the curtain
of a "medium," and appear to the *circle,* why should they reject the
same possibility for the elemental spirits of the deserts? This is the
"to be,

###### <span id="page_606">p. 606</span>

or not to be" of Hamlet. If "spirits" can do all that Spiritualists
claim for them, why can they not appear equally to the traveller in the
wildernesses and solitudes? A recent scientific article in a Russian
journal attributes such "spirit-voices," in the great Gobi desert, *to
the echo*. A very reasonable explanation, if it can only be demonstrated
that these voices simply repeat what has been previously uttered by a
living person. But when the "superstitious" traveller gets intelligent
*answers* to his questions, this Gobi *echo* at once shows a very near
relationship with the famous echo of the Theatre Porte St. Martin at
Paris. "How do you do, sir?" shouts one of the actors in the play. "Very
poorly, my son; thank you. I am getting old, very . . . very old!"
politely answers the echo!

What incredulous merriment must the *superstitious* and *absurd*
narratives of Marco Polo, concerning the "supernatural" gifts of certain
shark and wild-beast charmers of India, whom he terms *Abraiaman,* have
excited for long centuries. Describing the pearl-fishery of Ceylon, as
it was in his time, he says that the merchants are "obliged also to pay
those men who *charm* the great fishes--to prevent them from injuring
the divers whilst engaged in seeking pearls under water--one-twentieth
part of all that they take. These fish-charmers are termed Abraiaman
(Brahman?), and their charm holds good for that day only, for at night
they dissolve the charm, so that the fishes can work mischief at their
will. These Abraiaman know also how to charm beasts and birds, and every
living thing."

And this is what we find in the explanatory notes of Colonel Yule, in
relation to this *degrading* Asiatic "superstition": "Marco's account of
the pearl-fishery is still substantially correct. . . . At the diamond
mines of the northern Circars, Brahmans are employed in the analogous
office of propitiating the tutelary genii. The shark-charmers are called
in *Tamil, Kadal-Katti,* 'sea-binders,' and in Hindustani, *Hai-banda*,
or 'shark-binders.' At Aripo they belong to one family, supposed to have
the monopoly of the charm. <span id="fr_855"></span>[\*](#fn_854) The
chief operator is (or was, not many years ago) *paid by the government,*
and he also received ten oysters from each boat daily during the
fishery. Tennent, on his visit, found the incumbent of the office to be
a *Roman Catholic Christian* (?), but that did not seem to affect the
exercise of the validity of his functions. *It is remarkable that not
more than one authenticated accident from sharks had taken place during
the whole period of the British occupation.*" <span
id="fr_856"></span>[\*\*](#fn_855)

Two items of fact in the above paragraph are worthy of being

###### <span id="page_607">p. 607</span>

placed in juxtaposition. 1. The British authorities pay professional
shark-charmers a stipend to exercise their art; and, 2, only *one life*
has been lost since the execution of the contract. (We have yet to learn
whether the loss of this *one* life did not occur under the Roman
Catholic *sorcerer*.) Is it pretended that the salary is paid as a
concession to a *degrading* native superstition? Very well; but how
about the sharks? Are they receiving salaries, also, from the British
authorities out of the Secret Service Fund? Every person who has visited
Ceylon must know that the waters of the pearl coast swarm with sharks of
the most voracious kind, and that it is even dangerous to bathe, let
alone to dive for oysters. We might go further, if we chose, and give
the names of British officials of the highest rank in the Indian
service, who, after resorting to native "magicians" and "sorcerers," to
assist them in recovering things lost, or in unravelling vexatious
mysteries of one kind or another, and being successful, and at the time
*secretly* expressing their gratitude, have gone away, and shown their
innate cowardice before the world's Areopagus, by publicly denying the
truth of magic, and leading the jest against Hindu "superstition."

Not many years ago, one of the worst of *superstitions* scientists held
to be that of believing that the murderer's portrait remained impressed
on the eye of the murdered person, and that the former could be easily
recognized by examining carefully the retina. The "superstition"
asserted that the likeness could be made still more striking by
subjecting the murdered man to certain old women's fumigations, and the
like gossip. And now an American newspaper, of March 26, 1877, says: "A
number of years ago attention was attracted to a theory which insisted
that the last effort of vision materialized itself and remained as an
object imprinted on the retina of the eye after death. This has been
proved a fact by an experiment tried in the presence of Dr. Gamgee, F.
R. S., of Birmingham, England, and Prof. Bunsen, the subject being a
living rabbit. The means taken to prove the merits of the question were
most simple, the eyes being placed near an opening in a shutter, and
retaining the shape of the same after the animal had been deprived of
life."

If, from the regions of idolatry, ignorance, and superstition, as India
is termed by some missionaries, we turn to the so-called centre of
civilization--Paris, we find the same principles of magic exemplified
there under the name of *occult* Spiritualism. The Honorable John L.
O'Sullivan, Ex-Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States to
Portugal, has kindly furnished us with the strange particulars of a
semi-magical seance which he recently attended with several other
eminent men, at Paris. Having his permission to that effect, we print
his letter in full.

###### <span id="page_608">p. 608</span>

> "**N**EW **Y**ORK, Feb. 7, 1877.

> "I cheerfully obey your request for a written statement of what I
> related to you orally, as having been witnessed by me in Paris, last
> summer, at the house of a highly respectable physician, whose name I
> have no authority to use, but whom, after the usual French fashion of
> anonymizing, I will call Dr. X.

> "I was introduced there by an English friend, well-known in the
> Spiritualist circles in London--Mr. Gledstanes. Some eight or ten
> other visitors were present, of both sexes. We were seated in
> *fauteuils,* occupying half of a long drawing-room, flush with a
> spacious garden. In the other half of the room was a grand piano, a
> considerable open space between it and us, and a couple of *fauteuils*
> in that space, evidently placed there to be occupied by other sitters.
> A door near them opened into the private apartments.

> "Dr. X. came in, and discoursed to us for about twenty minutes with
> rapid and vehement French eloquence, which I could not undertake to
> report. He had, for over twenty-five years, investigated occult
> mysteries, of which he was about to exhibit some phenomena. His object
> was to attract his brethren of the scientific world, but few or none
> of them came to see for themselves. He intended before long to publish
> a book. He presently led in two ladies, the younger one his wife, the
> other (whom I will call Madame Y.) a medium or sensitive, with whom he
> had worked through all that period in the prosecution of these
> studies, and who had devoted and sacrificed her whole life to this
> work with him. Both these ladies had their eyes closed, apparently in
> trance.

> "He stood them at the opposite ends of the long grand piano (which was
> shut), and directed them to put their hands upon it. Sounds soon began
> to issue from its chords, marching, galloping, drums, trumpets,
> rolling musketry, cannon, cries, and groans--in one word, a *battle.*
> This lasted, I should say, some five to ten minutes.

> "I should have mentioned that before the two mediums were brought in I
> had written in pencil, on a small bit of paper (by direction of Mr.
> Gledstanes, who had been there before), the names of three objects, to
> be known to myself alone, viz., some *musical composer,* deceased, a
> *flower*, and *a cake.* I chose *Beethoven*, a *Marguerite* (daisy),
> and a kind of French cake called *plombieres,* and rolled the paper
> into a pellet, which I kept in my hand, without letting even my friend
> know its contents.

> "When the battle was over, he placed Mme. Y. in one of the two
> *fauteuils,* Mme. X. being seated apart at one side of the room, and I
> was asked to hand my folded, or rolled, paper to Mme. Y. She held it
> (unopened) between her fingers, on her lap. She was dressed in white
> merino, flowing from her neck and gathered in at the waist, under a
> blaze of light from chandeliers on the right and left. After a while
> she dropped the little roll of paper to the floor, and I picked it up.
> Dr. X. then raised her to her feet and told her to make "the evocation
> of the dead." He withdrew the *fauteuils* and placed in her hand a
> steel rod of about four and half or five feet in length, the top of
> which was surmounted with a short cross-piece--the Egyptian *Tau*.
> With this she traced a circle round herself, as she stood, of about
> six feet in diameter. She did not hold the cross-piece as a handle,
> but, on the contrary, she held the rod at the opposite end. She
> presently handed it back to Dr. X. There she stood for some time, her
> hands hanging down and folded together in front of her, motionless,
> and with her eyes directed slightly upward toward one of the opposite
> corners of the long *salon.* Her lips presently began to move, with
> muttered sounds, which after a while became distinct in articulation,
> in short broken sentences or phrases, very much like the recitation of
> a litany. Certain

###### <span id="page_609">p. 609</span>

> words, seeming to be names, would recur from time to time. It sounded
> to me somewhat as I have heard Oriental languages sound. Her face was
> very earnest and mobile with expression, with sometimes a slight frown
> on the brow. I suppose it lasted about fifteen or twenty minutes,
> amidst the motionless silence of all the company, as we gazed on the
> weird scene. Her utterance finally seemed to increase in vehemence and
> rapidity. At last she stretched forth one arm toward the space on
> which her eyes had been fixed, and, with a loud cry, almost a scream,
> she exclaimed: '**B**EETHOVEN!'--and fell backward, prostrate on the
> floor.

> "Dr. X. hastened to her, made eager magnetic passes about her face and
> neck, and propped up her head and shoulders on cushions. And there she
> lay like a person sick and suffering, occasionally moaning, turning
> restlessly, etc. I suppose a full half-hour then elapsed, during which
> she seemed to pass through all the phases of gradual *death* (this I
> was told was a re-enacting of the death of Beethoven). It would be
> long to describe in detail, even if I could recall all. We watched as
> though assisting at a scene of real death. I will only say that her
> pulse ceased; no beating of the heart could be perceived; her hands
> first, then her arms became cold, while warmth was still to be felt
> under her arm-pits; even they at last became entirely cold; her feet
> and legs became cold in the same manner, and they swelled
> astonishingly. The doctor invited us all to come and recognize these
> phenomena. The gasping breaths came at longer and longer intervals,
> and feebler and feebler. At last came the end; her head fell sidewise,
> her hands, which had been picking with the fingers about her dress,
> collapsed also. The doctor said, 'she is now dead'; and so it indeed
> seemed. In vehement haste he produced (I did not see from where) two
> small *snakes,* which he seemed to huddle about her neck and down into
> her bosom, making also eager transverse passes about her head and
> neck. After a while she appeared to revive slowly, and finally the
> doctor and a couple of men servants lifted her up and carried her off
> into the private apartments, from which he soon returned. He told us
> that this was all very critical, but perfectly safe, but that no time
> was to be lost, for otherwise the death, which he said was real, would
> be permanent.

> "I need not say how ghastly the effect of this whole scene had been on
> all the spectators. Nor need I remind you that this was no trickery of
> a performer paid to astonish. The scene passed in the elegant
> drawing-room of a respectable physician, to which access without
> introduction is impossible, while (outside of the phenomenal facts) a
> thousand indescribable details of language, manner, expression, and
> action presented those minute guarantees of sincerity and earnestness
> which carry conviction to those who witness, though it may be
> transmitted to those who only hear or read of them.

> "After a time Mme. Y. returned and was seated in one of the two
> *fauteuils* before mentioned, and I was invited to the other by her
> side. I had still in my hand the unopened pellet of paper containing
> the three words privately written by me, of which (Beethoven) had been
> the first. She sat for a few minutes with her open hands resting on
> her lap. They presently began to move restlessly about. "Ah, it burns,
> it burns," she said, and her features contracted with an expression of
> pain. In a few moments she raised one of them, and it contained a
> *marguerite*, the flower I had written as my second word. I received
> it from her, and after it had been examined by the rest of the
> company, I preserved it. Dr. X. said it was of a species not known in
> that part of the country; an opinion in which he was certainly
> mistaken, as a few days afterwards I saw the same in the flower-market
> of the Madeleine. Whether this flower was *produced* under her hands,
> or was simply an *apport,* as in the phenomenon we are familiar with
> in the experiences of Spiritualism, I do not know. It was the one or
> the other, for she certainly did not have it as she sat there by my
> side, under a strong light, before it

###### <span id="page_610">p. 610</span>

> made its appearance. The flower was perfectly fresh in every one of
> its delicate petals.

> "The third word I had written on my bit of paper was the name of a
> cake--*plombieres.* She presently began to go through the motions of
> eating, though no cake was visible, and asked me if I would not go
> with her to *Plombieres--*the name of the cake I had written. This
> might have been simply a case of mind-reading.

> "After this followed a scene in which Madame X., the doctor's wife,
> was said, and seemed to be, possessed by the spirit of Beethoven. The
> doctor addressed her as "Monsieur Beethoven." She took no notice until
> he called the name aloud in her ear. She then responded with polite
> bows, etc. (You may remember that Beethoven was extremely deaf.) After
> some conversation he begged her to play, and she seated herself at the
> piano and performed magnificently both some of his known music and
> some improvisations which were generally recognized by the company as
> in his style. I was told afterwards, by a lady friend of Madame X.,
> that in her normal state she was a very ordinary amateur performer.
> After about half an hour spent in music and in dialogue in the
> character of Beethoven, to whom her face in expression, and her
> tumbled hair, seemed to acquire a strange resemblance, the doctor
> placed in her hands a sheet of paper and a crayon, and asked her to
> sketch the face of the person she saw before her. She produced very
> rapidly a profile sketch of a head and face resembling Beethoven's
> busts, though as a younger man; and she dashed off a rapid name under
> it, as though a signature, 'Beethoven.' I have preserved the sketch,
> though how the handwriting may correspond with Beethoven's signature I
> cannot say.

> "The hour was now late, and the company broke up; nor had I any time
> to interrogate Dr. X. upon what we had thus witnessed. But I called on
> him with Mr. Gledstanes a few evenings afterwards. I found that he
> admitted the action of spirits, and was a Spiritualist, but also a
> great deal more, having studied long and deeply into the occult
> mysteries of the Orient. So I understood him to convey, while he
> seemed to prefer to refer me to his book, which he would probably
> publish in the course of the present year. I observed a number of
> loose sheets on a table all covered with Oriental characters unknown
> to me--the work of Madame Y. in trance, as he said, in answer to an
> inquiry. He told us that in the scene I had witnessed, she became
> (*i.e*., as I presumed, was possessed by) *a priestess of one of the
> ancient Egyptian temples,* and that the origin of it was this: A
> scientific friend of his had acquired in Egypt possession of the mummy
> of a priestess, and had given him some of the linen swathings with
> which the body was enveloped, and from the contact with this cloth of
> 2,000 or 3,000 years old, the devotion of her whole existence to this
> occult relation, and twenty years seclusion from the world, his
> medium, as sensitive Madame Y., had become what I had seen. The
> language I had heard her speak was the sacred language of the temples
> in which she had been instructed, not so much by inspiration but very
> much as we now study languages, by dictation, written exercises, etc.,
> being even chided and punished when she was dull or slow. He said that
> Jacolliot had heard her in a similar scene, and recognized sounds and
> words of the very oldest sacred language as preserved in the temples
> of India, anterior, if I remember right, to the epoch of the Sanscrit.

> "Respecting the *snakes* he had employed in the hasty operation of
> restoring her to life, or rather perhaps arresting the last
> consummation of the process of death, he said there was a strange
> mystery in their relation to the phenomena of life and death. I
> understood that they were indispensable. Silence and inaction on our
> part were also insisted upon throughout, and any attempt at
> questioning him at the time was peremptorily, almost angrily,
> suppressed. We might come and talk afterward, or wait for the
> appearance of his book, but he alone seemed entitled to exercise the
> faculty of

###### <span id="page_611">p. 611</span>

> speech throughout all these performances--which he certainly did with
> great volubility, the while, with all the eloquence and precision of
> diction of a Frenchman, combining scientific culture with vividness of
> imagination.

> "I intended to return on some subsequent evening, but learned from Mr.
> Gledstanes that he had given them up for the present, disgusted with
> his ill-success in getting his professional colleagues and men of
> science to come and witness what it was his object to show them.

> "This is about as much as I can recall of this strange, weird evening,
> excepting some uninteresting details. I have given you the name and
> address of Dr. X. confidentially, because he would seem to have gone
> more or less far on the same path as you pursue in the studies of your
> Theosophical Society. Beyond that I feel bound to keep it private, not
> having his authority to use it in any way which might lead to
> publicity.

> "Very respectfully,  
> "Your friend and obedient servant,  
> "**J. L. O'S**ULLIVAN."

In this interesting case simple Spiritualism has transcended its routine
and encroached upon the limits of magic. The features of mediumship are
there, in the double life led by the sensitive Madame Y., in which she
passes an existence totally distinct from the normal one, and by reason
of the subordination of her individuality to a foreign will, becomes the
permutation of a priestess of Egypt; and in the personation of the
spirit of Beethoven, and in the unconscious and cataleptic state into
which she falls. On the other hand, the will-power exercised by Dr. X.
upon his sensitive, the tracing of the mystic circle, the evocations,
the materialization of the desired flower, the seclusion and education
of Madame Y., the employment of the wand and its form, the creation and
use of the serpents, the evident control of the astral forces--all these
pertain to magic. Such experiments are of interest and value to science,
but liable to abuse in the hands of a less conscientious practitioner
than the eminent gentleman designated as Dr. X. A true Oriental kabalist
would not recommend their duplication.

Spheres unknown below our feet; spheres still more unknown and still
more unexplored above us; between the two a handful of moles, blind to
God's great light, and deaf to the whispers of the invisible world,
boasting that they lead mankind. Where? Onward, they claim; but we have
a right to doubt it. The greatest of our physiologists, when placed side
by side with a Hindu fakir, who knows neither how to read nor write,
will very soon find himself feeling as foolish as a school-boy who has
neglected to learn his lesson. It is not by vivisecting living animals
that a physiologist will assure himself of the existence of man's soul,
nor on the blade of the knife can he extract it from a human body. "What
sane man," inquires Sergeant Cox, the President of the London
Psychological Society, "what sane man who knows nothing of magnetism or
physiology, who had never witnessed an experiment nor learned its

###### <span id="page_612">p. 612</span>

principles, would proclaim himself *a fool* by denying its facts and
denouncing its theory?" The truthful answer to this would be,
"two-thirds of our modern-day scientists." The impertinence, if truth
can ever be impertinent, must be laid at the door of him who uttered
it--a scientist of the number of those few who are brave and honest
enough to utter wholesome truths, however disagreeable. And there is no
mistaking the real meaning of the imputation, for immediately after the
irreverent inquiry, the learned lecturer remarks as pointedly: "The
chemist takes his electricity from the electrician, the physiologist
looks to the geologist for his geology--each would deem it an
impertinence in the other if he were to pronounce judgment in the branch
of knowledge not his own. Strange it is, but true as strange, that this
rational rule is wholly set at naught in the treatment of psychology.
*Physical scientists deem themselves competent to pronounce a dogmatic
judgment upon psychology and all that appertains to it, without having
witnessed any of its phenomena, and in entire ignorance of its
principles and practice*." <span id="fr_857"></span>[\*](#fn_856)

We sincerely hope that the two eminent biologists, Mr. Mendeleyeff, of
St. Petersburg, and Mr. Ray Lankester, of London fame, will bear
themselves under the above as unflinchingly as their living victims do
when palpitating under their dissecting knives.

For a belief to have become universal, it must have been founded on an
immense accumulation of facts, tending to strengthen it, from one
generation to another. At the head of all such beliefs stands magic, or,
if one would prefer--occult psychology. Who, of those who appreciate its
tremendous powers even from its feeble, half-paralyzed effects in our
civilized countries, would dare disbelieve in our days the assertions of
Porphyry and Proclus, that even inanimate objects, such as statues of
gods, could be made to move and exhibit a factitious life for a few
moments? Who can deny the allegation? Is it those who testify daily over
their own signatures that they have seen tables and chairs move and
walk, and pencils write, without contact? Diogenes Laertius tells us of
a certain philosopher, Stilpo, who was exiled from Athens by the
Areopagus, for having dared to deny publicly that the Minerva of
Pheidias was anything else than a block of marble. But our own age,
after having mimicked the ancients in everything possible, even to their
very names, such as "senates," "prefects," and "consuls," etc.; and
after admitting that Napoleon the Great conquered three-fourths of
Europe by applying the principles of war taught by the Caesars and the
Alexanders, knows so much better than its preceptors about psychology,
that it would vote every believer in "animated tables" into Bedlam.

###### <span id="page_613">p. 613</span>

Be this as it may, *the religion of the ancients is the religion of the
future.* A few centuries more, and there will linger no sectarian
beliefs in either of the great religions of humanity. Brahmanism and
Buddhism, Christianity and Mahometanism will all disappear before the
mighty rush of *facts*. "I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh,"
writes the prophet Joel. "Verily I say unto you . . . greater works than
these shall you do," promises Jesus. But this can only come to pass when
the world returns to the grand religion of the past; the *knowledge* of
those majestic systems which preceded, by far, Brahmanism, and even the
primitive monotheism of the ancient Chaldeans. Meanwhile, we must
remember the direct effects of the revealed mystery. The only means by
which the wise priests of old could impress upon the grosser senses of
the multitudes the idea of the Omnipotency of the Creative *will* or
**F**IRST **C**AUSE; namely, the divine animation of inert matter, the
soul infused into it by the potential will of man, the microcosmic image
of the great Architect, and the transportation of ponderous objects
through space and material obstacles.

Why should the pious Roman Catholic turn away in disgust at the
"heathen" practices of the Hindu Tamil, for instance? We have witnessed
the miracle of San Gennaro, in good old Naples, and we have seen the
same in Nargercoil, in India. Where is the difference? The coagulated
blood of the Catholic saint is made to boil and fume in its crystal
bottle, to the gratification of the lazzaroni; and from its jewelled
shrine the martyr's idol beams radiant smiles and blessings at the
Christian congregation. On the other hand, a ball of clay filled with
water, is stuffed into the open breast of the god Suran; and while the
padre shakes *his* bottle and produces his "miracle" of blood, the Hindu
priest plunges an arrow into the god's breast, and produces *his*
"miracle," for the blood gushes forth in streams, and the water is
changed into blood. Both Christians and Hindus fall in raptures at the
sight of such a miracle. So far, we do not see the slightest difference.
But can it be that the Pagan learned the trick from San Gennaro?

"Know, O, Asclepius," says Hermes, "that as the **H**IGHEST **O**NE is
the father of the celestial gods, so is man *the artisan of the gods who
reside in the temples,* and who delight in the society of mortals.
Faithful to its origin and nature, humanity perseveres in this imitation
of the divine powers; and, if the Father Creator has made in His image
the *eternal gods,* mankind in its turn makes its gods in its own
image." "And, dost thou speak of statues of gods; O, Trismegistus?"
"Verily, I do, Asclepius, and however great thy defiance, perceivest
thou not that these statues are endowed *with reason,* that they are
animated with a soul, and that they can operate the greatest prodigies.
How can we reject the

###### <span id="page_614">p. 614</span>

evidence, when we find these gods possessing the gift of predicting the
future, which they are compelled to tell, when forced to it by magic
spells, as through the lips of the divines and their visions? . . . It
is the marvel of marvels that man could have invented and created gods.
. . . True, the faith of our ancestors has erred, and in their pride
they fell into error as to the precise essence of these gods . . . but
they have still found out that art themselves. Powerless to create soul
and spirit, they evoke the souls of angels and demons in order to
introduce them into the consecrated statues; and so make them preside at
their Mysteries, by communicating to idols their own faculty to *do good
as well as evil.*"

It is not antiquity alone which is full of evidence that the statues and
idols of the gods at times exhibited intelligence and locomotive powers.
Full in the nineteenth century, we see the papers recording the capers
played by the statue of the Madonna of Lourdes. This gracious lady, the
French Notre Dame, runs away several times to the woods adjoining her
usual residence, the parish church. The sexton is obliged to hunt after
the runaway, and bring her home more than once. <span
id="fr_858"></span>[\*](#fn_857) After this begins a series of
"miracles," healing, prophesying, letter-dropping from on high, and what
not. These "miracles" are implicitly accepted by millions and millions
of Roman Catholics; numbers of these belonging to the most intelligent
and educated classes. Why, then, should we disbelieve in testimony of
precisely the same character, given as to contemporary phenomena of the
same kind, by the most accredited and esteemed historians--by Titus
Livy, for instance? "Juno, would you please abandon the walls of Veii,
and change this abode for that of Rome?" inquires of the goddess a Roman
soldier, after the conquest of that city. Juno consents, and nodding her
head in token of acquiescence, her statue answers: "Yes, I will."
Furthermore, upon their carrying off the figure, it seems to instantly
"*lose its immense weight,*" adds the historian, and the statue seems
rather to follow them than otherwise. <span
id="fr_859"></span>[\*\*](#fn_858)

With *naivete,* and a faith bordering on the sublime, des Mousseaux,
bravely rushes into the dangerous parallels, and gives a number of
instances of Christian as well as "heathen" *miracles* of that kind. He
prints a list of such walking statues of saints and Madonnas, who lose
their weight, and move about as so many living men and women; and
presents unimpeachable evidence of the same, from classical authors, who
described their *miracles. <span id="fr_860"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_859)*
He has but one thought, one anxious and all-overpowering desire--to
prove to his readers that magic does exist,

###### <span id="page_615">p. 615</span>

and that Christianity beats it flat. Not that the miracles of the latter
are either more numerous, or more extraordinary, or suggestive than
those of the Pagans. Not at all; and he is a fair historian as to facts
and evidence. But, it is his arguments and reflections that are
priceless: one kind of miracle is produced by God, the other by the
Devil; he drags down the Deity and placing Him face to face with Satan,
allows the arch-enemy to beat the Creator by long odds. Not a word of
solid, evident proof to show the substantial difference between the two
kinds of wonders.

Would we inquire the reason why he traces in one the hand of God and in
the other the horn and hoof of the Devil? Listen to the answer: "The
Holy Roman Catholic and Apostolical Church declares the miracles wrought
by her faithful sons produced by the will of God; and all others the
work of the spirits of Hell." Very well, but on what ground? We are
shown an endless list of holy writers; of saints who fought during their
whole lives with the fiends; and of fathers whose word and authority are
accepted as "word of God" by the same Church. "Your idols, your
consecrated statues are the abode of *demons,*" exclaims St. Cyprian.
"Yes, it is these *spirits* who inspire your divines, who animate the
bowels of your victims, who govern the flight of birds, and who, mixing
incessantly falsehood with truth, render oracles, and . . . operate
prodigies, their object being to bring you invincibly to their
worship." <span id="fr_861"></span>[\*](#fn_860)

Fanaticism in religion, fanaticism in science, or fanaticism in any
other question becomes a hobby, and cannot but blind our senses. It will
ever be useless to argue with a fanatic. And here we cannot help
admiring once more the profound knowledge of human nature which dictated
to Mr. Sergeant Cox the following words, delivered in the same address
as before alluded to: "There is no more fatal fallacy than that the
truth will prevail by its own force, that it has only to be seen to be
embraced. In fact the desire for the actual truth exists in very few
minds, and the capacity to discern it in fewer still. When men say that
they are seeking the truth, they mean that they are looking for evidence
to support some prejudice or prepossession. Their beliefs are moulded to
their wishes. They see all, and more than all, that seems to tell for
that which they desire; they are blind as bats to whatever tells against
them. The scientists are no more exempt from this common failing than
are others."

We know that from the remotest ages there has existed a mysterious,
awful science, under the name of *theopoea.* This science taught the art
of endowing the various symbols of gods with temporary life and
intelligence.

###### <span id="page_616">p. 616</span>

Statues and blocks of inert matter became animated under the potential
will of the hierophant. The fire stolen by Prometheus had fallen down in
the struggle to earth; it embraced the lower regions of the sky, and
settled in the waves of the universal ether as the potential *Akasa* of
the Hindu rites. We breathe and imbibe it into our organic system with
every mouthful of fresh air. Our organism is full of it from the instant
of our birth. But it becomes potential only under the influx of WILL and
SPIRIT.

Left to itself, this life-principle will blindly follow the laws of
nature; and, according to conditions, will produce health and an
exuberance of *life,* or cause *death* and dissolution. But, guided by
the will of the adept, it becomes obedient; its currents restore the
equilibrium in organic bodies, they fill the waste, and produce physical
and psychological miracles, well-known to mesmerizers. Infused in
inorganic and inert matter, they create an appearance of life, hence
motion. If to that life an individual intelligence, a personality, is
wanting, then the operator must either send his *scin-lecca,* his own
astral spirit, to animate it; or use his power over the region of
nature-spirits to force one of them to *infuse* his entity into the
marble, wood, or metal; or, again, be helped by human spirits. But the
latter--except the vicious, earth-bound class <span
id="fr_862"></span>[\*](#fn_861)--will *not* infuse their essence into
these inanimate objects. They leave the lower kinds to produce the
similitude of life and animation, and only send their influence through
the intervening spheres like a ray of divine light, when the so-called
"miracle" is required for a good purpose. The condition--and this is a
law in spiritual nature--is purity of motive, purity of the surrounding
magnetic atmosphere, personal purity of the operator. Thus is it, that a
Pagan "miracle" may be by far holier than a Christian one.

Who that has seen the performance of the fakirs of Southern India, can
doubt the existence of *theopoea* in ancient times? An inveterate
skeptic, though more than anxious to attribute every phenomenon to
jugglery, still finds himself compelled to testify to facts; and facts
that are to be witnessed daily if one chooses. "I dare not," he says,
speaking of Chibh-Chondor, a fakir of Jaffna-patnam, "describe all the
exercises which he performed. There are things one *dares* not say even

###### <span id="page_617">p. 617</span>

after having witnessed them, for fear of being charged with having been
under an inexplicable hallucination! And yet, ten, nay, twenty times, I
saw and saw again the fakir obtain similar results over inert matter. .
. . It was but child's play for our 'charmer' to make the flame of
candles which had, by his directions, been placed in the remotest
corners of the apartment, pale and become extinguished at will; to cause
the furniture to move, even the sofas on which we sat, the doors to open
and shut repeatedly: and all this without quitting the mat upon which he
sat on the floor.

"Perhaps I will be told that I saw imperfectly. Possibly; but I will say
that hundreds and thousands of persons have seen and do see what I have,
and things more wonderful; has one of all these discovered the secret,
or been able to duplicate these phenomena? And I can never repeat too
often that all this does not occur on a stage, supplied with mechanical
contrivances for the use of the operator. No, it is a beggar crouched,
naked, on the floor, who thus sports with your intelligence, your
senses, and all that which we have agreed among ourselves to style the
immutable laws of nature, but which he appears to alter at will!

"Does he change its course? 'No, but he makes it act by using forces
which are yet unknown to us,' say the believers. However that may be, I
have found myself twenty times at similar performances in company with
the most distinguished men of British India--professors, physicians,
officers. Not one of them but thus summarized his impressions upon
quitting the drawing-room. 'This is something terrifying to human
intelligence!' Every time that I saw repeated by a fakir the experiment
of reducing serpents to a cataleptic state, a condition in which these
animals have all the rigidity of the dry branch of a tree, my thoughts
have reverted to the biblical fable (?) which endows Moses and the
priests of Pharaoh with the like power." <span
id="fr_863"></span>[\*](#fn_862)

Assuredly, the flesh of man, beast, and bird should be as easily endowed
with magnetic life-principle as the inert table of a modern medium.
Either both wonders are possible and true, or both must fall to the
ground, together with the miracles of Apostolic days, and those of the
more modern Popish Church. As for vital proofs furnished to us in favor
of such possibilities, we might name books enough to fill a whole
library. If Sixtus V. cited a formidable array of spirits attached to
various talismans, was not his threat of excommunication for all those
who practiced the art, uttered merely because he would have the
knowledge of this secret confined within the precincts of the Church?
How would it do for his "divine" miracles to be studied and successfully
reproduced by

###### <span id="page_618">p. 618</span>

every man endowed with perseverance, a strong positive magnetic power,
and an unflinching will? Recent events at Lourdes (of course, supposing
them to have been truthfully reported) prove that the secret is not
wholly lost; and if there is no strong magician-mesmerizer concealed
under frock and surplice, then the statue of Notre-Dame is moved by the
same forces which move every magnetized table at a spiritual seance; and
the nature of these "intelligences," whether they belong to the classes
of human, human elementary, or elemental spirits depends on a variety of
conditions. With one who knows anything of mesmerism, and at the same
time of the charitable spirit of the Roman Catholic Church, it ought not
to be difficult to comprehend that the incessant curses of the priests
and monks; and the bitter anathemas so freely pronounced by Pius
**IX**.--himself a strong mesmerizer, and believed to be a *jettatore*
(evil eye)--have drawn together legions of elementaries and elementals
under the leadership of the disembodied Torquemadas. These are the
"angels" who play pranks with the statue of the Queen of Heaven. Any one
who accepts the "miracle" and thinks otherwise blasphemes.

Although it would seem as if we had already furnished sufficient proofs
that modern science has little or no reason to boast of originality, yet
before closing this volume we will adduce a few more to place the matter
beyond doubt. We have but to recapitulate, as briefly as possible, the
several claims to new philosophies and discoveries, the announcement of
which has made the world open its eyes so wide within these last two
centuries. We have pointed to the achievements in arts, sciences, and
philosophy of the ancient Egyptians, Greeks, Chaldeans, and Assyrians;
we will now quote from an author who has passed long years in India
studying their philosophy. In the famous and recent work of *Christna et
le Christ,* we find the following tabulation:

"*Philosophy.--*The ancient Hindus have created from the foundation the
two systems of spiritualism and materialism, of metaphysical philosophy
and of positive philosophy. The first taught in the Vedantic school,
whose founder was Vyasa; the second taught in the Sankya school, whose
founder was Kapila.

"*Astronomical Science.--*They fixed the calendar, invented the zodiac,
calculated the precession of the equinoxes, discovered the general laws
of the movements, observed and predicted the eclipses.

"*Mathematics.--*They invented the decimal system, algebra, the
differential, integral, and infinitesimal calculi. They also discovered
geometry and trigonometry, and in these two sciences they constructed
and proved theorems *which were only discovered in Europe as late as the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.* It was the Brahmans in fact who
first deduced the superficial measure of a triangle from the calculation
of its three

###### <span id="page_619">p. 619</span>

sides, and calculated the relations of the circumference to the
diameter. Furthermore, we must restore to them the square of the
hypotenuse and the table so improperly called Pythagorean, which we find
engraved on the *goparama* of the majority of great pagodas.

"*Physics.--*They established the principle which is still our own
to-day, that the universe is a harmonious whole, subject to laws which
may be determined by observation and experiment. They discovered
hydrostatics; and the famous proposition that every body plunged in
water loses of its own weight a weight equal to the volume which it
displaces, is only a loan made by the Brahmans to the famous Greek
architect, Archimedes. The physicists of the pagodas calculated the
velocity of light, fixed in a positive manner the laws which it follows
in its reflection. And finally, it is beyond doubt, from the
calculations of Surya-Sidhenta, that they knew and calculated the force
of steam.

"*Chemistry.--*They knew the composition of water, and formulated for
gases the famous law, *which we know only from yesterday, that the
volumes of gas are in inverse ratio to the pressures that they support.*
They knew how to prepare sulphuric, nitric, and muriatic acids; the
oxides of copper, iron, lead, tin, and zinc; the sulphurets of iron,
copper, mercury, antimony, and arsenic; the sulphates of zinc and iron;
the carbonates of iron, lead, and soda; nitrate of silver; and powder.

"*Medicine.--*Their knowledge was truly astonishing. In Tcharaka and
Sousruta, the two princes of Hindu medicine, is laid down the system
which Hippocrates appropriated later. Sousruta notably enunciates the
principles of preventive medicine or hygiene, which he places much above
curative medicine--too often, according to him, empyrical. Are we more
advanced to-day? It is not without interest to remark that the Arab
physicians, who enjoyed a merited celebrity in the middle ages--Averroes
among others--constantly spoke of the Hindu physicians, and regarded
them as the initiators of the Greeks and themselves.

"*Pharmacology.--*They knew all the simples, their properties, their
use, and upon this point have not yet ceased to give lessons to Europe.
Quite recently we have received from them the treatment of asthma, with
the datura.

"*Surgery.--*In this they are not less remarkable. They made the
operation for the stone, succeeded admirably in the operation for
cataract, and the extraction of the foetus, of which all the unusual or
dangerous cases are described by Tcharaka with an extraordinary
scientific accuracy.

"*Grammar.--*They formed the most marvellous language in the world--the
Sanscrit--which gave birth to the greater part of the idioms of the
Orient, and of Indo-European countries.

"*Poetry.--*They have treated all the styles, and shown themselves

###### <span id="page_620">p. 620</span>

supreme masters in all. Sakuntala, Avrita, the Hindu Phaedra, Saranga,
and a thousand other dramas have their superiors neither in Sophocles
nor Euripides, in Corneille nor Shakespere. Their descriptive poetry has
never been equalled. One must read, in the *Megadata,* "The Plaint of an
Exile," who implores a passing cloud to carry his remembrances to his
cottage, his relatives and friends, whom he will never see more, to form
an idea of the splendor to which this style has been carried in India.
Their fables have been copied by all modern and ancient peoples, who
have not even given themselves the trouble to color differently the
subject of these little dramas.

"*Music.--*They invented the gamut with its differences of tones and
half-tones much before Gui d'Arezzo. Here is the Hindu scale:

> Sa--Ri--Ga--Ma--Pa--Da--Ni--Sa.

"*Architecture.--*They seem to have exhausted all that the genius of man
is capable of conceiving. Domes, inexpressibly bold; tapering cupolas;
minarets, with marble lace; Gothic towers; Greek hemicycles; polychrome
style--all kinds and all epochs are there, betokening the origin and
date of the different colonies, which, in emigrating, carried with them
their souvenirs of their native art."

Such were the results attained by this ancient and imposing Brahmanical
civilization. What have we to offer for comparison? Beside such majestic
achievements of the past, what can we place that will seem so grandiose
and sublime as to warrant our boast of superiority over an ignorant
ancestry? Beside the discoverers of geometry and algebra, the
constructors of human speech, the parents of philosophy, the primal
expounders of religion, the adepts in psychological and physical
science, how even the greatest of our biologists and theologians seem
dwarfed! Name to us any modern discovery, and we venture to say, that
Indian history need not long be searched before the prototype will be
found of record. Here we are with the transit of science half
accomplished, and all our ideas in process of readjustment to the
theories of force-correlation, natural selection, atomic polarity, and
evolution. And here, to mock our conceit, our apprehensions, and our
despair, we may read what Manu said, perhaps 10,000 years before the
birth of Christ:

"The first germ of life was developed by water and heat" (*Manu,* book
i., sloka 8).

"Water ascends toward the sky in vapors; from the sun it descends in
rain, from the rain are born the plants, and from the plants, animals"
(book iii., sloka 76).

"Each being acquires the qualities of the one which immediately precedes
it, in such a manner that the farther a being gets away from the

###### <span id="page_621">p. 621</span>

primal atom of its series, the more he is possessed of qualities and
perfections" (book i., sloka 20).

"Man will traverse the universe, gradually ascending, and passing
through the rocks, the plants, the worms, insects, fish, serpents,
tortoises, wild animals, cattle, and higher animals. . . . Such is the
*inferior degree*" (Ibid.).

"These are the transformations declared, from the plant up to Brahma,
which have to take place in his world" (Ibid.).

"The Greek," says Jacolliot, "is but the Sanscrit. Pheidias and
Praxiteles have studied in Asia the chefs-d'oeuvre of Daonthia, Ramana,
and Aryavosta. Plato disappears before Dgeminy and Veda-Vyasa, whom he
literally copies. Aristotle is thrown into the shade by the
*Pourva-Mimansa* and the *Outtara-Mimansa,* in which one finds all the
systems of philosophy which we are now occupied in re-editing, from the
Spiritualism of Socrates and his school, the skepticism of Pyrrho,
Montaigne, and Kant, *down to the positivism of Littre.*"

Let those who doubt the exactness of the latter assertion read this
phrase, extracted textually from the *Outtara-Mimansa,* or *Vedanta,* of
Vyasa, who lived at an epoch which the Brahmanical chronology fixes at
10,400 years before our era:

"We can only study phenomena, verify them, and hold them to be
relatively true, but nothing in the universe, neither by perception nor
by induction, nor by the senses, nor by reasoning, being able to
demonstrate the existence of a Supreme Cause, which could, at a fixed
point of time, have given birth to the universe, Science has to discuss
neither the possibility nor impossibility of this Supreme Cause."

Thus, gradually but surely, will the whole of antiquity be vindicated.
Truth will be carefully sifted from exaggeration; much that is now
considered fiction may yet be proved fact, and the "facts and laws" of
modern science found to belong to the limbo of exploded myths. When,
centuries before our era, the Hindu Bramaheupto affirmed that the starry
sphere was immovable, and that the daily rising and setting of stars
confirms the motion of the earth upon its axis; and when Aristarchus of
Samos, born 267 years B.C., and the Pythagorean philosopher Nicete, the
Syracusan, maintained the same, what was the credit given to their
theories until the days of Copernicus and Galileo? And the system of
these two princes of science--a system which has revolutionized the
whole world--how long will it be allowed to remain as a complete and
undisturbed whole? Have we not, at the present moment, in Germany, a
learned savant, a Professor Schoepfer, who, in his public lectures at
Berlin, tries to demonstrate, 1, that the earth is immovable; 2, the sun
is but a little bigger than it seems; and 3, that Tycho-Brahe was
perfectly right

###### <span id="page_622">p. 622</span>

and Galileo perfectly wrong? <span id="fr_864"></span>[\*](#fn_863) And
what was Tycho-Brahe's theory? Why, that the earth stands immovable in
the centre of the universe, and that around it, as around its centre,
the whole of the celestial vault gravitates every twenty-four hours; and
finally, that the sun and moon, apart from this motion, proceed on
curved lines peculiar to themselves, while Mercury, with the rest of the
planets, describes an epicycloid.

We certainly have no intention to lose time nor devote space to either
combating or supporting this *new* theory, which suspiciously resembles
the *old* ones of Aristotle and even the Venerable Bede. We will leave
the learned army of modern Academicians to "wash their family linen
among themselves," to use an expression of the great Napoleon. But we
will, nevertheless, avail ourselves of such a good opportunity as this
defection affords to demand once more of science her diploma or patents
of infallibility. Alas! are these, then, the results of her boasted
progress?

It was hardly more than yesterday when, upon the strength of facts
within our own observation, and corroborated by the testimony of a
multitude of witnesses, we timidly ventured the assertion that tables,
mediums, and Hindu fakirs were occasionally levitated. And when we added
that, if such a phenomenon should happen but once in a century, "without
a visible mechanical cause, then that rising is a manifestation of a
natural law of which our scientists are yet ignorant," we were called
"iconoclastic," and charged, in our turn, by the newspapers, with
ignorance of the law of gravitation. Iconoclastic or not, we never
thought of charging science with denying the rotation of the earth on
its axis, or its revolution around the sun. Those two lamps, at least,
in the beacon of the Academy, we thought would be kept trimmed and
burning to the end of time. But, lo! here comes a Berlin professor and
crushes our last hopes that Science should prove herself exact in some
one particular. The cycle is truly at its lowest point, and a new era is
begun. The earth stands still, and Joshua is vindicated!

In days of old--in 1876--the world believed in centrifugal force, and
the Newtonian theory, which explained the flattening of the poles by the
rotatory motion of the earth around its axis, was orthodox. Upon this
hypothesis, the greater portion of the globular mass was believed to
gravitate toward the equator; and in its turn the centrifugal force,
acting on the mass with its mightiest power, forced this mass to
concentrate itself on the equator. Thus is it that the credulous
scientists believed the

###### <span id="page_623">p. 623</span>

earth to rotate around its axis; for, were it otherwise, there would
exist no centrifugal force, and without this force there could be no
gravitation toward the equatorial latitudes. It has been one of the
accepted proofs of the rotation of the earth, and it is this deduction,
with several others, that the Berlin professor declares that, "in common
with many other scientists," he "rejects."

"Is this not ridiculous, gentlemen," he concludes, "that we, confiding
in what we were taught at school, have accepted the rotation of the
earth around its axis as a fact fully demonstrated, while there is
nothing at all to prove it, and it *cannot* be demonstrated? Is it not
cause of astonishment that the scientists of the whole educated world,
commencing with Copernicus and Kepler, should have begun by accepting
such a movement of our planet, and then three and a half centuries later
be searching for such proofs? But, alas! though we search, we find none,
as was to be expected. All, all is vain!"

And thus it is that at one stroke the world loses its rotation, and the
universe is bereaved of its guardians and protectors, the centrifugal
and centripetal forces! Nay, ether itself, blown out of space, is but a
"fallacy," a myth born of a bad habit of using empty words; the sun is a
pretender to dimensions to which it was never entitled; the stars are
twinkling dots, and "were so expressly disposed at considerable
distances from one another by the Creator of the universe, probably with
the intention that they should simultaneously illumine the vast spaces
on the face of our globe"--says Dr. Schoepfer.

And is it so that even three centuries and a half have not sufficed the
men of exact science to construct one theory that not a single
university professor would dare challenge? If astronomy, the one science
built on the adamantine foundation of mathematics, the one of all others
deemed as infallible and unassailable as truth itself, can be thus
irreverently indicted for false pretences, what have we gained by
cheapening Plato to the profit of the Babinets? How, then, do they
venture to flout at the humblest observer who, being both honest and
intelligent, may say he has seen a mediumistic, or magical phenomenon?
And how dare they prescribe the "limits of philosophical inquiry," to
pass beyond which is not lawful? And these quarrelling hypothesists
still arraign as ignorant and superstitious those giant intellects of
the past, who handled natural forces like world-building Titans, and
raised mortality to an eminence where it allied itself with the gods!
Strange fate of a century boasting to have elevated exact science to its
*apex of fame,* and now invited to go back and begin it's A B C of
learning again!

Recapitulating the evidence contained in this work, if we begin with the
archaic and unknown ages of the Hermetic Pimander, and come

###### <span id="page_624">p. 624</span>

down to 1876, we find that one universal belief in magic has run through
all these centuries. We have presented the ideas of Trismegistus in his
dialogue with Asclepius; and without mentioning the thousand and one
proofs of the prevalence of this belief in the first centuries of
Christianity, to achieve our purpose we have but to quote from an
ancient and a modern author. The first will be the great philosopher
Porphyry, who several thousand years after the days of Hermes, remarks
in relation to the prevailing skepticism of his century, the following:
"We need not be amazed in seeing the vulgar masses (ὁι πολλοι) perceive
in statues merely stone and wood. Thus it is generally with those who,
ignorant in letters, find naught in *stylae* covered with inscriptions
but stone, and in written books naught but the tissue of the papyrus."
And 1,500 years later, we see Mr. Sergeant Cox, in stating the case of
the shameful prosecution of a medium by just such a blind materialist,
thus expressing his ideas: "Whether the medium is guilty or guiltless .
. . certain it is that the trial has had the unlooked-for effect of
directing the attention of the whole public to the fact that the
phenomena *are asserted to* exist, and by a great number of competent
investigators are *declared to be true,* and of the reality of which
every person may, if he pleases, satisfy himself by actual inspection,
thus sweeping away, thus and for ever, *the dark and debasing doctrines
of the materialists.*"

Still, in harmony with Porphyry and other theurgists, who affirmed the
different natures of the manifesting "spirits" and the personal spirit
or will of man, Mr. Sergeant Cox adds, without committing himself any
further to a personal decision: "True, there are differences of opinions
. . . and perhaps ever will be, as to the sources of the power that is
exhibited in these phenomena; but whether they are the product of the
psychic force of the circle . . . or, if spirits of the dead be the
agents, as others say, or elemental spirits (whatever it may be) as
asserted by a third party, this fact at least is established--that man
is not wholly material, that the mechanism of man is moved and directed
by some non-material--that is, some non-molecular structure, which
possesses not merely intelligence, but *can exercise also a force upon
matter,* that something to which, for lack of a better title, we have
given the name of soul. These glad tidings have by this trial been borne
to thousands and tens of thousands, whose happiness here, and hopes of a
hereafter, have been blighted by the materialists, who have preached so
persistently that soul was but a superstition, man but an automaton,
mind but a secretion, present existence purely animal, and the future--a
blank."

"Truth alone," says Pimander, "is eternal and immutable; *truth* is the
first of blessings; but truth is not and cannot be on earth: it is
possible that God sometimes gifts a few men together with the faculty of

###### <span id="page_625">p. 625</span>

comprehending divine things with that of rightly understanding truth;
but nothing is true on earth, for everything has matter on it, clothed
with a corporeal form subject to change, to alteration, to corruption,
and to new combinations. Man is not *the* truth, for only that which has
drawn its essence from itself, and remains itself, and unchangeable, is
true. How can that which changes so as not to finally be recognized, be
ever true? Truth, then, is that only which is immaterial and not
enclosed within a corporeal envelope, that which is colorless and
formless, exempt from change and alteration; that which is ETERNAL. All
of that which perishes is a lie; earth is but dissolution and
generation; every generation proceeds from a dissolution; the things of
earth are but *appearances* and imitations of truth; they are what the
picture is to reality. The things of earth are not the TRUTH! . . .
Death, for some persons, is an evil which strikes them with profound
terror. This is ignorance. . . . Death is the destruction of the body;
the being in it *dies not*. . . . The material body loses its form,
which is disintegrated in course of time; the senses which animated it
return to their source and resume their functions; but they gradually
lose their passions and their desires, and *the spirit* ascends to
heaven to become a HARMONY. In the first zone, it leaves behind itself
the faculty of increasing and decreasing; in the second, the power of
doing evil and the frauds of idleness; in the third, deceptions and
concupiscence; in the fourth, insatiable ambition; in the fifth,
arrogance, audacity, and temerity; in the sixth, all yearning after
dishonest acquisitions; and in the seventh, *untruthfulness.* The spirit
thus purified by the effect on him of the celestial harmonies, returns
once more to its primitive state, strong of a merit and power
self-acquired, and which belongs to it properly; and only then he begins
to dwell with those that sing eternally their praises of the **F**ATHER.
Hitherto, he is placed among the powers, and as such has attained to the
supreme blessing of knowledge. He is become a **GOD**! . . . No, the
things of earth are not the truth."

After having devoted their whole lives to the study of the records of
the old Egyptian wisdom, both Champollion-Figeac and Champollion,
Junior, publicly declared, notwithstanding many biassed judgments
hazarded by certain hasty and unwise critics, that the *Books of Hermes*
"truly contain a mass of Egyptian traditions which are constantly
corroborated by the most authentic records and monuments of Egypt of the
hoariest antiquity." <span id="fr_865"></span>[\*](#fn_864)

Closing up his voluminous summary of the psychological doctrines of the
Egyptians, the sublime teachings of the sacred Hermetic books, and

###### <span id="page_626">p. 626</span>

the attainments of the initiated priests in metaphysical and practical
philosophy, Champollion-Figeac inquires--as he well may, in view of the
then attainable evidence--"whether there ever was in the world another
association or caste of men which could equal them in credit, power,
learning, and capability, in the same degree of good or evil? No,
*never*! And this caste was subsequently *cursed* and stigmatized only
by those who, under I know not what kind of modern influences, have
considered it as the enemy of men and--science." <span
id="fr_866"></span>[\*](#fn_865)

At the time when Champollion wrote these words, Sanscrit was, we may
say, almost an unknown tongue for science. But little in the way of a
parallel could have been drawn between the respective merits of the
Brahmans and the Egyptian philosophers. Since then, however, it has been
discovered that the very same ideas, expressed in almost identical
language, may be read in the Buddhistic and Brahmanical literature. This
very philosophy of the unreality of mundane things and the illusion of
the senses--whose whole substance has been plagiarized in our own times
by the German metaphysicians--forms the groundwork of Kapila's and
Vyasa's philosophies, and may be found in Gautama Buddha's enunciation
of the "four truths," the cardinal dogmas of his doctrine. Pimander's
expression "he is become a god" is epitomized in the one word,
*Nirvana,* which our learned Orientalists most incorrectly consider as
the synonym of

annihilation!

This opinion of the two eminent Egyptologists is of the greatest value
to us if it were only as an answer to our opponents. The Champollions
were the first in Europe to take the student of archaeology by the hand,
and, leading him on into the silent crypts of the past, prove that
civilization did not begin with our generations; for "though the origins
of ancient Egypt are unknown, she is found to have been at the most
distant periods within the reach of historical research, with her great
laws, her established customs, her cities, her kings, and gods"; and
behind, far behind, these same epochs we find ruins belonging to other
still more distant and higher periods of civilization. "At Thebes,
portions of ruined buildings allow us to recognize remnants of still
anterior structures, the materials of which had served for the erection
of the very edifices which have now existed for thirty-six
centuries!" <span id="fr_867"></span>[\*\*](#fn_866) "Everything told us
by Herodotus and the Egyptian priests is found to be exact, and has been
corroborated by modern scientists," adds Champollion. <span
id="fr_868"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_867)

Whence the civilization of the Egyptians came, will be shown in volume
**II**., and in this respect it will be made to appear that our
deductions, though based upon the traditions of the Secret Doctrine, run
parallel

###### <span id="page_627">p. 627</span>

with those of a number of most respected authorities. There is a passage
in a well-known Hindu work which may well be recalled in this
connection.

"Under the reign of Viswamitra, first king of the Dynasty of Soma-Vanga,
in consequence of a battle which lasted five days, Manu-Vina, heir of
the ancient kings, being abandoned by the Brahmans, emigrated with all
his companions, passing through Arya, and the countries of Barria, till
he came to the shores of Masra" (*History of India,* by Collouca-Batta).
Unquestionably this Manu-Vina and Menes, the first Egyptian King, are
identical.

Arya, is Eran (Persia); Barria, is Arabia, and Masra, was the name of
Cairo, which to this day is called, *Masr,* Musr, and Misro. Phoenician
history names Maser as one of the ancestors of Hermes.

And now we will bid farewell to thaumatophobia and its advocates, and
consider thaumatomania under its multifarious aspects. In vol. II., we
intend to review the "miracles" of Paganism and weigh the evidence in
their favor in the same scales with Christian theology. There is a
conflict not merely impending but already begun between science and
theology, on the one hand, and spirit and its hoary science, magic, on
the other. Something of the possibilities of the latter have already
been displayed, but more is to come. The petty, mean world, for whose
approving nod scientists and magistrates, priests and Christians
compete, have begun their latter-day crusade by sentencing in the same
year two innocent men, one in France, the other in London, in defiance
of law and justice. Like the apostle of circumcision, they are ever
ready to thrice deny an unpopular connection for fear of ostracism by
their own fellows. The Psychomantics and the Psychophobists must soon
meet in fierce conflict. The anxiety to have their phenomena
investigated and supported by scientific authorities has given place
with the former to a frigid indifference. As a natural result of so much
prejudice and unfairness as have been exhibited, their respect for
scientists is waning fast, and the reciprocal epithets bandied between
the two parties are becoming far from complimentary to either. Which of
them is right and which wrong, time will soon show and future
generations understand. It is at least safe to prophesy that the Ultima
Thule of God's mysteries, and the key to them are to be sought elsewhere
than in the whirl of Avogadro's molecules.

People who either judge superficially, or, by reason of their natural
impatience would gaze at the blazing sun before their eyes are well
fitted to bear lamp-light, are apt to complain of the exasperating
obscurity of language which characterizes the works of the ancient
Hermetists and their successors. They declare their philosophical
treatises on magic incomprehensible. Over the first class we can afford
to waste no

###### <span id="page_628">p. 628</span>

time; the second, we would beg to moderate their anxiety, remembering
those sayings of Espagnet--"Truth lies hid in obscurity," and
"Philosophers never write more deceitfully than when plainly, nor ever
more truly than when obscurely." Furthermore, there is a third class,
whom it would compliment too much to say that they judge the subject at
all. They simply denounce *ex-cathedra.* The ancients they treat as
dreamy fools, and though but physicists and thaumatophobic positivists,
they commonly claim a monopoly of spiritual wisdom!

We will select Irenaeus Philaletha to answer this latter class. "In the
world our writings shall prove a curious-edged knife; to some they shall
carve out dainties, but to others they shall only serve to cut their
fingers; yet we are not to be blamed, for we do seriously admonish all
who shall attempt this work that they undertaketh the highest piece of
philosophy in nature; and though we write in English, yet our matter
will be as hard as Greek to some, who will think, nevertheless, that
they understand as well, when they misconstrue our meaning most
perversely; for is it imaginable that they who are fools in nature
should be wise in books, which are testimonies unto nature?"

The few elevated minds who interrogate nature instead of prescribing
laws for her guidance; who do not limit her possibilities by the
imperfections of their own powers; and who only disbelieve because they
do not know, we would remind of that apothegm of Narada, the ancient
Hindu philosopher:

> "Never utter these words: 'I do not know this--therefore it is false.'
> "  
> "One must study to know, know to understand, understand to judge."

#### END OF VOLUME I.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_804"></span>[575:\*](iu014.htm#fr_805) See Paul to the
Galatians, iv., 24, and Gospel according to Matthew, xiii. 10-15.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[575:\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_806) A. Wilder says
that "Gan-duniyas," is a name of Babylonia.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[576:\*](iu014.htm#fr_807) The appropriate
definition of the name "Turanian" is, any ethnic family that
ethnologists know nothing about.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[577:\*](iu014.htm#fr_808) See Berosus and
Sanchoniathon; Cory's "Ancient Fragments"; Movers, and others.

<span id="fn_808"></span>[578:\*](iu014.htm#fr_809) Movers, 86.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[578:\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_810) Ibid.

<span id="fn_810"></span>[578:\*\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_811) Sanchon.: in
Cory's "Fragments," p. 14.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[579:\*](iu014.htm#fr_812) In an old
Brahmanical book called the "Prophecies," by Ramatsariar, as well as in
the Southern **MSS**. in the legend of Christna, the latter gives nearly
word for word the first two chapters of Genesis. He recounts the
creation of man--whom he calls *Adima,* in Sanscrit, the 'first
man'--and the first woman is called Heva, that which completes life.
According to Louis Jacolliot ("La Bible dans l'Inde"), Christna existed,
and his legend was written, over 3,000 years B.C.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[580:\*](iu014.htm#fr_813) Ad*ak* in Hebrew is
<span id="img_iu1-580a"></span> ![](img/iu1-580a.jpg), and Eden, <span
id="img_iu1-580b"></span> ![](img/iu1-580b.jpg). The first is a woman's
name; the second the designation of a country. They are closely related
to each other; but hardly to Adam and Akkad--<span
id="img_iu1-580c"></span> ![](img/iu1-580c.jpg), which are spelled with
aleph.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[580:\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_814) The two words
answer to the terms, *Macroprosopos,* or macrocosm--the absolute and
boundless, and the *Microprosopos* of the "Kabala," the "short face," or
the microcosm--the finite and conditioned. It is not translated; nor is
it likely to be. The Thibetean monks say that it is the real "Sutras."
Some Buddhists believe that Buddha was, in a previous existence, Kapila
himself. We do not see how several Sanscrit scholars can entertain the
idea that Kapila was an atheist, while every legend shows him the most
ascetic mystic, the founder of the sect of the Yogis.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[580:\*\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_815) The "Brahmanas"
were translated by Dr. Haug; see his "Aitareya Brahmanam."

<span id="fn_815"></span>[580:\*\*\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_816) The
"Stan-gyour" is full of rules of magic, the study of occult powers, and
their acquisition, charms, incantations, etc.; and is as little
understood by its lay-interpreters as the Jewish "Bible" is by our
clergy, or the "Kabala" by the European Rabbis.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[580:\*\*\*\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_817) "Aitareya
Brahmana," Lecture by Max Muller.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[581:\*](iu014.htm#fr_818) Ibid., "Buddhist
Pilgrims."

<span id="fn_818"></span>[583:\*](iu014.htm#fr_819) "Progress of
Religious Ideas through Successive Ages," vol. i., p. 17.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[583:\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_820) "La Bible dans
l'Inde."

<span id="fn_820"></span>[584:\*](iu014.htm#fr_821) "La Bible dans
l'Inde."

<span id="fn_821"></span>[585:\*](iu014.htm#fr_822) "Presbyterian
Banner," December 20, 1876.

<span id="fn_822"></span>[586:\*](iu014.htm#fr_823) "La Bible dans
l'Inde."

<span id="fn_823"></span>[587:\*](iu014.htm#fr_824) See Max Muller's
"Lecture on the Vedas."

<span id="fn_824"></span>[589:\*](iu014.htm#fr_825) See Roth's "The
Burial in India"; Max Muller's "Comparative Mythology" (Lecture);
Wilson's article, "The Supposed Vaidic Authority for the Burning of
Hindu Widows," etc.

<span id="fn_825"></span>[589:\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_826) Bunsen gives as
the first year of Menes, 3645; Manetho as 3892 B.C. "Egypt's Place,"
etc., vol. v., 34; Key.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[589:\*\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_827) Louis Jacolliot,
in "The Bible in India," affirms the same.

<span id="fn_827"></span>[590:\*](iu014.htm#fr_828) Purana means ancient
and sacred history or tradition. See Loiseleur Des-longchamp's
translations of "Manu"; also L. Jacolliot's "La Genese dans l'Humanite."

<span id="fn_828"></span>[590:\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_829) There are
archaeologists, who, like Mr. James Fergusson, deny the great antiquity
of even one single monument in India. In his work, "Illustrations of the
Rock-Cut Temples of India," the author ventures to express the very
extraordinary opinion that "Egypt had ceased to be a nation before the
earliest of the cave-temples of India was excavated." In short, he does
not admit the existence of any cave anterior to the reign of Asoka, and
seems willing to prove that most of these rock-cut temples were executed
from the time of that pious Buddhist king, till the destruction of the
Andhra dynasty of Maghada, in the beginning of the fifth century. We
believe such a claim <span id="page_591">p. 591</span> perfectly
arbitrary. Further discoveries are sure to show how erroneous and
unwarranted it was.

<span id="fn_829"></span>[591:\*](iu014.htm#fr_830) It is a strange
coincidence that when first discovered, America was found to bear among
some native tribes the name of *Atlanta*.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[591:\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_831) Baldwin:
"Prehistoric Nations," p. 179.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[591:\*\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_832) Alberico
Vespuzio, the son of Anastasio Vespuzio or Vespuchy, is now gravely
<span id="page_592">p. 592</span> doubted in regard to the naming of the
New World. Indeed the name is said to have occurred in a work written
several centuries before. A. Wilder (Notes).

<span id="fn_832"></span>[592:\*](iu014.htm#fr_833) See Thomas Belt:
"The Naturalists in Nicaragua." London, 1873.

<span id="fn_833"></span>[592:\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_834) Torfieus:
"Historia Vinlandiae Antiquae."

<span id="fn_834"></span>[593:\*](iu014.htm#fr_835) 2 Kings, xxii. 14; 2
Chronicles, xxxiv. 22.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[594:\*\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_836) As we are going
to press with this chapter, we have received from Paris, through the
kindness of the Honorable John L. O'Sullivan, the complete works of
Louis Jacolliot in twenty-one volumes. They are chiefly upon India and
its old traditions, philosophy, and religion. This indefatigable writer
has collected a world of information from various sources, mostly
authentic. While we do not accept his personal views on many points,
still we freely acknowledge the extreme value of his copious
translations from the Indian sacred books. The more so, since we find
them corroborating in every respect the assertions we have made. Among
other instances is this matter of the submergence of continents in
prehistoric days.

In his "Histoire des Vierges: Les Peuples et les Continents Disparus,"
he says: "One of the most ancient legends of India, preserved in the
temples by oral and written tradition, relates that several hundred
thousand years ago there existed in the Pacific Ocean, an immense
continent which was destroyed by geological upheaval, and the fragments
of which must be sought in Madagascar, Ceylon, Sumatra, Java, Borneo,
and the principal isles of Polynesia.

"The high plateaux of Hindustan and Asia, according to this hypothesis,
would only have been represented in those distant epochs by great
islands contiguous to the central continent. . . . According to the
Brahmans this country had attained a high civilization, and the
peninsula of Hindustan, enlarged by the displacement of the waters, at
the time of the grand cataclysm, has but continued the chain of the
primitive traditions born in this place. These traditions give the name
of *Rutas* to the peoples which inhabited this immense equinoctial
continent, and from their speech *was derived the Sanscrit.*" (We will
have something to say of this language in our second volume.)

"The Indo-Hellenic tradition, preserved by the most intelligent
population which emigrated from the plains of India, equally relates the
existence of a continent and a people to which it gives the name of
Atlantis and Atlantides, and which it locates in the Atlantic in the
northern portion of the Tropics.

"Apart from the fact that the supposition of an ancient continent in
those latitudes, the vestiges of which may be found in the volcanic
islands and mountainous surface of the Azores, the Canaries and Cape
Verd, is not devoid of geographical probability, the Greeks, who,
moreover, never dared to pass beyond the pillars of Hercules, on account
of their dread of the mysterious ocean, appeared too late in antiquity
for the stories preserved by Plato to be anything else than an echo of
the Indian legend. Moreover, when we cast a look on a planisphere, at
the sight of the islands and islets strewn from the Malayan Archipelago
to Polynesia, from the straits of Sund to Easter Island, it is
impossible, upon the hypothesis of continents preceding those which we
inhabit, not to place there the most important of all.

"A religious belief, common to Malacca and Polynesia, that is to say to
the two opposite extremes of the Oceanic world, affirms 'that all these
islands once formed two immense countries, inhabited by yellow men and
black men, always at war; and that the gods, wearied with their
quarrels, having charged Ocean to pacify them, the latter swallowed up
the two continents, and since, it had been impossible to make him give
up his captives. Alone, the mountain-peaks and high plateaux escaped the
flood, by the power of the gods, who perceived too late the mistake they
had committed.' <span id="page_595">p. 595</span> "Whatever there may be
in these traditions, and whatever may have been the place where a
civilization more ancient than that of Rome, of Greece, of Egypt, and of
India was developed, it is certain that this civilization did exist, and
that it is highly important for science to recover its traces, however
feeble and fugitive they may be" (pp. 13-15).

This last tradition, translated by Louis Jacolliot from the Sanscrit
manuscripts, corroborates the one we have given from the "Records of the
Secret Doctrine." The war mentioned between the yellow and the black
men, relates to a struggle between the "sons of God" and the "sons of
giants," or the inhabitants and magicians of the Atlantis.

The final conclusion of M. Jacolliot, who visited personally all the
islands of Polynesia, and devoted years to the study of the religion,
language, and traditions of nearly all the peoples, is as follows:

"As to the Polynesian continent which disappeared at the time of the
final geological cataclysms, its existence rests on such proofs that to
be logical we can doubt no longer.

"The three summits of this continent, Sandwich Islands, New Zealand,
Easter Island, are distant from each other from fifteen to eighteen
hundred leagues, and the groups of intermediate islands, Viti, Samoa,
Tonga, Foutouna, Ouvea, Marquesas, Tahiti, Pournouton, Gambiers, are
themselves distant from these extreme points from seven or eight hundred
to one thousand leagues.

"All navigators agree in saying that the extreme and the central groups
could never have communicated in view of their actual geographical
position, and with the insufficient means they had at hand. It is
physically impossible to cross such distances in a pirogue . . . without
a compass, and travel months without provisions.

"On the other hand, the aborigines of the Sandwich Islands, of Viti, of
New Zealand, of the central groups, of Samoa, Tahiti, etc., *had never
known each other, had never heard of each other* before the arrival of
the Europeans. *And yet, each of these people maintained that their
island had at one time formed a part of an immense stretch of land which
extended toward the West, on the side of Asia.* And all, brought
together, were found to speak the same language, to have the same
usages, the same customs, the same religious belief. And all to the
question, 'Where is the cradle of your race?' for sole response,
*extended their hand toward the setting sun*" (Ibid., p. 308).

<span id="fn_836"></span>[596:\*](iu014.htm#fr_837) These "magic
mirrors," generally black, are another proof of the universality of an
identical belief. In India these mirrors are prepared in the province of
Agra and are also fabricated in Thibet and China. And we find them in
Ancient Egypt, from whence, according to the native historian quoted by
Brasseur de Bourbourg, the ancestors of the Quiches brought them to
Mexico; the Peruvian sun-worshippers also used it. When the Spaniards
had landed, says the historian, the King of the Quiches, ordered his
priests to consult the mirror, in order to learn the fate of his
kingdom. "The *demon* reflected the present and the future as in a
mirror," he adds (De Bourbourg: "Mexique," p. 184).

<span id="fn_837"></span>[597:\*](iu014.htm#fr_838) Pay'quina, or
*Payaquina,* so called because its waves used to drift particles of gold
from the Brazil. We found a few specks of genuine metal in a handful of
sand that we brought back to Europe.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[599:\*](iu014.htm#fr_839) The regions
somewhere about *Udyana* and *Kashmere,* as the translator and editor of
Marco Polo (Colonel Yule), believes. Vol. i., p. 173.

<span id="fn_839"></span>[599:\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_840) "Voyage des
Pelerins, Bouddhistes," vol. i.; "Histoire de la Vie de Hiouen-Thsang,"
etc., traduit du Chinois en francais, par Stanislas Julien.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[600:\*](iu014.htm#fr_841) Lao-tsi, the Chinese
philosopher.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[600:\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_842) "The Book of Ser
Marco Polo," vol. i., p. 318. See also, in this connection, the
experiments of Mr. Crookes, described in chapter vi. of this work.

<span id="fn_842"></span>[601:\*](iu014.htm#fr_843) Max Muller:
"Buddhist Pilgrims."

<span id="fn_843"></span>[601:\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_844) Berlin Academy of
Sciences, 1846.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[601:\*\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_845) Colonel Yule
makes a remark in relation to the above Chinese mysticism which for its
noble fairness we quote most willingly. "In 1871," he says, "I saw in
Bond street an exhibition of the (so-called) 'spirit' drawings, *i.e*.,
drawings executed by a 'medium' under extraneous and invisible guidance.
A number of these extraordinary productions (for extraordinary they were
undoubtedly) professed to represent the 'Spiritual Flowers' of such and
such persons; and the explanation of these as presented in the catalogue
was in substance exactly that given in the text. It is highly improbable
that the artist had any cognizance of Schott's Essays, and the
coincidence was certainly very striking" ("The Book of Ser Marco Polo,"
vol. i., p. 444).

<span id="fn_845"></span>[602:\*](iu014.htm#fr_846) Schott: "Essay on
Buddhism," p. 103.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[603:\*](iu014.htm#fr_847) "The Book of Ser
Marco Polo," vol. i., Preface to the second edition, p. viii.

<span id="fn_847"></span>[604:\*](iu014.htm#fr_848) Ibid., vol. i., p.
203.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[604:\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_849) "Visdelon," p.
130.

<span id="fn_849"></span>[604:\*\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_850) "Pliny," vii.,
2.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[604:\*\*\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_851)
"Philostratus," book ii., chap. iv.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[604:\*\*\*\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_852) Ibid., book
iv., p. 382; "Book of Ser Marco Polo," vol. i., p. 206.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[605:\*](iu014.htm#fr_853) There are pious
critics who deny the world the same right to judge the "Bible" on the
testimony of deductive logic as "any other book." Even exact science
must bow to this decree. In the concluding paragraph of an article
devoted to a terrible onslaught on Baron Bunsen's "Chronology," which
*does not quite agree* with the "Bible," a writer exclaims, "the subject
we have proposed to ourselves is completed. . . . We have endeavored to
meet Chevalier Bunsen's charges against the inspiration of the "Bible"
on its own ground. . . . An inspired book . . . never can, as an
expression of its own teaching, or as a part of its own record, bear
witness to any untrue or ignorant statement of fact, whether in history
or doctrine. *If it be untrue in its witness of one, who shall trust its
truth in the witness of the other?*" ("The Journal of Sacred Literature
and Biblical Record," edited by the Rev. H. Burgess, Oct., 1859, p. 70.)

<span id="fn_853"></span>[605:\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_854) Remusat: "Histoire
du Khotan," p. 74; "Marco Polo," vol. i., p. 206.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[606:\*](iu014.htm#fr_855) Like the *Psylli,*
or serpent-charmers of Libya, whose gift is hereditary.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[606:\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_856) "Ser Marco Polo,"
vol. ii., p. 321.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[612:\*](iu014.htm#fr_857) "The Spiritualist,"
London, Nov. 10, 1876.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[614:\*](iu014.htm#fr_858) Read any of the
papers, of the summer and autumn of 1876.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[614:\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_859) Tite-Livy, v. dec.
i.,--Val. Max., 1, cap. vii.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[614:\*\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_860) See "Les Hauts
Phenomenes de la Magie"; "La Magie au **XIX**me Siecle"; "Dieu et les
Dieux," etc.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[615:\*](iu014.htm#fr_861) "De Idol. Vanit.,"
lib. I., p. 452.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[616:\*](iu014.htm#fr_862) These, after their
bodily death, unable to soar higher, attached to terrestrial regions,
delight in the society of the kind of elementals which by their affinity
with vice attract them the most. They identify themselves with these to
such a degree that they very soon lose sight of their own identity, and
become a part of the elementals, the help of which they need to
communicate with mortals. But as the nature-spirits are not *immortal*,
so the human elementaries who have lost their divine guide--spirit--can
last no longer than the essence of the elements which compose their
astral bodies holds together.

<span id="fn_862"></span>[617:\*](iu014.htm#fr_863) L. Jacolliot:
"Voyage au Pays des Perles."

<span id="fn_863"></span>[622:\*](iu014.htm#fr_864) "Ultimate Deductions
of Science; The Earth Motionless." A lecture demonstrating that our
globe does neither turn about its own axis nor around the sun; delivered
in Berlin by Doctor Schoepfer. Seventh Edition.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[625:\*](iu014.htm#fr_865) Champ.-Figeac:
"Egypte," p. 143.

<span id="fn_865"></span>[626:\*](iu014.htm#fr_866) Ibid., p. 119.

<span id="fn_866"></span>[626:\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_867) Ibid., p. 2.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[626:\*\*\*](iu014.htm#fr_868) Ibid., p. 11.
