[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Theosophy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](iu011)  [Next](iu013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### <span id="page_461">p. 461</span>

### CHAPTER XIII.

> "**A**LCHYMIST. Thou always speakest riddles. Tell me if thou art that
> fountain of which Bernard Lord Trevigan writ?  
> "**M**ERCURY. I am not that fountain, but I am the water. The fountain
> compasseth me about."--**S**ANDIVOGIUS,
>
> New Light of Alchymy.

> "All that we profess to do is this; to find out the secrets of the
> human frame, to know why the parts ossify and the blood stagnates, and
> to apply continual preventatives to the effects of time. *This is not
> magic;* it is the art of medicine rightly
> understood."--**B**ULWER-**L**YTTON.

> "Lo, warrior! now the cross of Red  
> Points to the grave of the mighty dead;  
> Within it burns a wondrous light,  
> To chase the spirits that love the night.  
> That lamp shall burn unquenchably  
> Until the eternal doom shall be."  
> . . . . . . . .  
> "No earthly flame blazed e'er so bright."--**S**IR **W**ALTER
> **S**COTT.

THERE are persons whose minds would be incapable of appreciating the
intellectual grandeur of the ancients, even in physical science, were
they to receive the most complete demonstration of their profound
learning and achievements. Notwithstanding the lesson of caution which
more than one unexpected discovery has taught them, they still pursue
their old plan of denying, and, what is still worse, of ridiculing that
which they have no means of either proving or disproving. So, for
instance, they will pooh-pooh the idea of talismans having any efficacy
one way or the other. That the seven spirits of the *Apocalypse* have
direct relation to the seven occult powers in nature, appears
incomprehensible and absurd to their feeble intellects; and the bare
thought of a magician claiming to work wonders through certain
kabalistic rites convulses them with laughter. Perceiving only a
geometrical figure traced upon a paper, a bit of metal, or other
substance, they cannot imagine how any reasonable being should ascribe
to either any occult potency. But those who have taken the pains to
inform themselves know that the ancients achieved as great discoveries
in psychology as in physics, and that their explorations left few
secrets to be discovered.

For our part, when we realize that a pentacle is a synthetic figure
which expresses in concrete form a profound truth of nature, we can see
nothing more ridiculous in it than in the figures of Euclid, and nothing
half so comical as the symbols in a modern work on chemistry. What to
the uninitiated reader can appear more absurd than that the symbol

###### <span id="page_462">p. 462</span>

NA\[2\]CO\[2\],--means soda! and that C\[2\]H\[6\]O is but another way
of writing alcohol! How very amusing that the alchemists should express
their Azoth, or creative principle of nature (astral light), by the
symbol

<span id="img_iu1-462"></span> ![](img/iu1-462.jpg)

which embraces three things: 1st, The divine hypothesis; 2d, The
philosophical synthesis; 3d, The physical synthesis--that is to say, a
belief, an idea, and a force. But how perfectly natural that a modern
chemist who wishes to indicate to the students in his laboratory the
reaction of a sodic-carbonate with cream-of-tartar in solution, should
employ the following symbol:

> (Na\[2\]CO\[3\]+2HKC\[4\]H\[4\]O\[6\]+Aq)=  
> (2NaKC\[4\]H\[4\]O\[6\],+H\[2\]O+Aq) +CO\[2\]

If the uninspired reader may be pardoned for looking aghast at this
abracadabra of chemical science, why should not its teachers restrain
their mirth until they have learned the philosophical value of the
symbolism of the ancients? At least they might spare themselves from
being as ridiculous as Monsieur de Mirville, who, confounding the Azoth
of the Hermetic philosophers with the azote of the chemists, asserted
that the former worshipped nitrogen gas! <span
id="fr_651"></span>[\*](#fn_650)

Apply a piece of iron to a magnet, and it becomes imbued with its
subtile principle and capable of imparting it to other iron in its turn.
It neither weighs more nor appears different from what it was before.
And yet, one of the most subtile potencies of nature has entered into
its substance. A talisman, in itself perhaps a worthless bit of metal, a
scrap of paper, or a shred of any fabric, has nevertheless been imbued
by the influence of that greatest of all magnets, the human will, with a
potency for good or ill just as recognizable and as real in its effects
as the subtile property which the iron acquired by contact with the
physical magnet. Let the bloodhound snuff an article of clothing that
has been worn by the fugitive, and he will track him through swamp and
forest to his hiding-place. Give one of Professor Buchanan's
"psychometers" a manuscript, no matter how old, and he will describe to
you the character

###### <span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

of the writer, and perhaps even his personal appearance. Hand a
clairvoyant a lock of hair or some article that has been in contact with
the person of whom it is desired to know something, and she will come
into sympathy with him so intimate that she may trace him through his
whole life.

Breeders tell us that young animals should not be herded with old ones;
and intelligent physicians forbid parents to have young children occupy
their own beds. When David was old and feeble his vital forces were
recruited by having a young person brought in close contact with him so
that he could absorb her strength. The late Empress of Russia, the
sister of the present German Emperor, was so feeble the last years of
her life that she was seriously advised by her physicians to keep in her
bed at night a robust and healthy young peasant-girl. Whoever has read
the description given by Dr. Kerner of the Seeress of Prevorst, Mme.
Hauffe, must well remember her words. She repeatedly stated that she
supported life merely on the atmosphere of the people surrounding her
and their *magnetic emanations,* which were quickened in an
extraordinary way by her presence. The seeress was very plainly a
magnetic vampire, who absorbed by drawing to herself the life of those
who were strong enough to spare her their vitality in the shape of
*volatilized* blood. Dr. Kerner remarks that these persons were all more
or less affected by this forcible loss.

With these familiar illustrations of the possibility of a subtile fluid
communicated from one individual to another, or to substances which he
touches, it becomes less difficult to understand that by a determined
concentration of the will an otherwise inert object may become imbued
with protective or destructive power according to the purpose directing.

A magnetic emanation, unconsciously produced, is sure to be overpowered
by any stronger one with which it may come into opposition. But when an
intelligent and powerful will directs the blind force, and concentrates
it upon a given spot, the weaker emanation will often master the
stronger. A human *will* has the same effect on the

Akasa.

Upon one occasion, we witnessed in Bengal an exhibition of will-power
that illustrates a highly interesting phase of the subject. An adept in
magic made a few passes over a piece of common tin, the inside of a
dish-cover, that lay conveniently by, and while regarding it attentively
for a few moments, seemed to grasp the imponderable fluid by handfuls
and throw it against the surface. When the tin had been exposed to the
full glare of light for about six seconds, the bright surface was
suddenly covered as with a film. Then patches of a darker hue began
coming out on its surface; and when in about three minutes the tin was
handed back to us, we found imprinted upon it a picture, or

###### <span id="page_464">p. 464</span>

rather a photograph, of the landscape that stretched out before us;
faithful as nature itself, and every color perfect. It remained for
about forty-eight hours and then slowly faded away.

This phenomenon is easily explained. The will of the adept condensed
upon the tin a film of *akasa* which made it for the time being like a
sensitized photographic plate. Light did the rest.

Such an exhibition as this of the potency of the will to effect even
objective physical results, will prepare the student to comprehend its
efficacy in the cure of disease by imparting the desired virtue to
inanimate objects which are placed in contact with the patient. When we
see such psychologists as Maudsley <span
id="fr_652"></span>[\*](#fn_651) quoting, without contradiction, the
stories of some miraculous cures effected by Swedenborg's
father--stories which do not differ from hundreds of other cures by
other "fanatics"--as he calls them--magicians, and natural healers, and,
without attempting to explain their facts, stooping to laugh at the
intensity of their faith, without asking himself whether the secret of
that healing potency were not in the control given by that faith over
occult forces--we grieve that there should be so much learning and so
little philosophy, in our time.

Upon our word, we cannot see that the modern chemist is any less a
magician than the ancient theurgist or Hermetic philosopher, except in
this: that the latter, recognizing the duality of nature, had twice as
wide a field for experimental research as the chemist. The ancients
animated statues, and the Hermetists called into being, out of the
elements, the shapes of salamanders, gnomes, undines, and sylphs, which
they did not pretend to create, but simply to make visible by holding
open the door of nature, so that, under favoring conditions, they might
step into view. The chemist brings into contact two elements contained
in the atmosphere, and by developing a latent force of affinity, creates
a new body--water. In the spheroidal and diaphanous pearls which are
born of this union of gases, come the germs of organic life, and in
their molecular interstices lurk heat, electricity, and light, just as
they do in the human body. Whence comes this life into the drop of water
just born of the union of two gases? And what is the water itself? Have
the oxygen and hydrogen undergone some transformation which obliterates
their qualities simultaneously with the obliteration of their form? Here
is the answer of modern science: "Whether the oxygen and hydrogen exist
as such, in the water, or whether they are produced by some unknown and
unconceived transformation of its substance, is a question about which
we may speculate, but in regard to which we have no knowledge." <span
id="fr_653"></span>[\*\*](#fn_652) Knowing

###### <span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

nothing about so simple a matter as the molecular constitution of water,
or the deeper problem of the appearance of life within it, would it not
be well for Mr. Maudsley to exemplify his own principle, and "maintain a
*calm acquiescence in ignorance until light comes*"? <span
id="fr_654"></span>[\*](#fn_653)

The claims of the friends of esoteric science, that Paracelsus produced,
chemically, *homunculi* from certain combinations as yet unknown to
exact science, are, as a matter of course, relegated to the storehouse
of exploded humbugs. But why should they? If the *homunculi* were not
made by Paracelsus they were developed by other adepts, and that not a
thousand years ago. They were produced, in fact, upon exactly the same
principle as that by which the chemist and physicist calls to life his
*animalcula.* A few years ago, an English gentleman, Andrew Crosse, of
Somersetshire produced *acari* in the following manner: "Black flint
burned to redness and reduced to powder was mixed with carbonate of
potash, and exposed to a strong heat for fifteen minutes; and the
mixture was poured into a blacklead crucible in an air furnace. It was
reduced to powder while warm, mixed with boiling water; kept boiling for
some minutes, and then hydrochloric acid was added to supersaturation.
After being exposed to voltaic action for twenty-six days, a perfect
insect of the *acari* tribe made its appearance, and in the course of a
few weeks about a hundred more. The experiment was repeated with other
chemical fluids with like results." A Mr. Weeks also produced the
*acari* in ferrocyanide of potassium.

This discovery produced a great excitement. Mr. Crosse was now accused
of impiety and aiming at creation. He replied, denying the implication
and saying he considered "*to create was to form a something out of a
nothing*." <span id="fr_655"></span>[\*\*](#fn_654)

Another gentleman, considered by several persons as a man of great
science, has told us repeatedly that he was on the eve of proving that
even unfructified eggs could be hatched by having a negative electric
current caused to pass through them.

The mandrakes (*dudim* or love-fruit) found in the field by Reuben,
Jacob's son, which excited the fancy of Rachel, was the kabalistic
*mandragora*, notwithstanding denial; and the verses which refer to it
belong to the *crudest* passages, in their esoteric meaning, of the
whole work. The mandrake is a plant having the rudimentary shape of a
human creature; with a head, two arms, and two legs forming roots. The
superstition that when pulled out of the ground it cries with a human
voice, is not utterly baseless. It does produce a kind of squeaking
sound, on

###### <span id="page_466">p. 466</span>

account of the resinous substance of its root, which it is rather
difficult to extract; and it has more than one hidden property in it
perfectly unknown to the botanist.

The reader who would obtain a clear idea of the commutation of forces
and the resemblance between the life-principles of plants, animals, and
human beings, may profitably consult a paper on the correlation of
nervous and mental forces by Professor Alexander Bain, of the University
of Aberdeen. This mandragora seems to occupy upon earth the point where
the vegetable and animal kingdoms touch, as the zoophites and polypi do
in the sea; the boundary being in each case so indistinct as to make it
almost imperceptible where the one ceases and the other begins. It may
seem improbable that there should be *homunculi,* but will any
naturalist, in view of the recent expansion of science, dare say it is
impossible? "Who," says Bain, "is to limit the possibilities of
existence?"

The unexplained mysteries of nature are many and of those presumably
explained hardly one may be said to have become absolutely intelligible.
There is not a plant or mineral which has disclosed the last of its
properties to the scientists. What do the naturalists know of the
intimate nature of the vegetable and mineral kingdoms? How can they feel
confident that for every one of the discovered properties there may not
be many powers concealed in the *inner* nature of the plant or stone?
And that they are only waiting to be brought in relation with some other
plant, mineral, or force of nature to manifest themselves in what is
termed a "supernatural manner." Wherever Pliny, the naturalist, AElian,
and even Diodorus, who sought with such a laudable perseverance to
extricate historical truth from its medley of exaggerations and fables,
have attributed to some plant or mineral an occult property unknown to
our modern botanists and physicists, their assertions have been laid
aside without further ceremony as absurd, and no more referred to.

It has been the speculation of men of science from time immemorial what
this vital force or life-principle is. To our mind the "secret doctrine"
alone is able to furnish the clew. Exact science recognizes only five
powers in nature--one *molar,* and four *molecular;* kabalists, seven;
and in these two additional ones is enwrapped the whole mystery of life.
One of these is immortal spirit, whose reflection is connected by
invisible links even with inorganic matter; the other, we leave to every
one to discover for himself. Says Professor Joseph Le Conte: "What is
the nature of the difference between the living organism and the dead
organism? We can detect *none,* physical or chemical. All the physical
and chemical forces withdrawn from the common fund of nature, and
embodied in the living organism, seem to be still embodied

###### <span id="page_467">p. 467</span>

in the dead, until little by little it is returned by decomposition. Yet
the difference is immense, is inconceivably great. What is the nature of
this difference expressed in the formula of material science? What is
that that is gone, and whither is it gone? There is something here that
science cannot yet understand. Yet it is just this loss which takes
place in death, and before decomposition, which is in the highest sense
vital force!" <span id="fr_656"></span>[\*](#fn_655)

Difficult, nay impossible, as it seems to science to find out the
invisible, universal motor of all--*Life,* to explain its nature, or
even to suggest a reasonable hypothesis for the same, the mystery is but
half a mystery, not merely for the great adepts and seers, but even for
true and firm believers in a spiritual world. To the simple believer,
unblessed with a personal organism, the delicate, nervous sensitiveness
of which would enable him--as it enables a seer--to perceive the visible
universe reflected as in a clear glass in the Invisible one, and, as it
were, objectively, there remains divine *faith.* The latter is firmly
rooted in his inner senses; in his unerring intuition, with which cold
reason has naught to do, he *feels* it cannot play him false. Let
human-born, erroneous dogmas, and theological sophistry contradict each
other; let one crowd off the other, and the subtile casuistry of one
creed fell to the ground the crafty reasoning of another one; truth
remains one, and there is not a religion, whether Christian or heathen,
that is not firmly built upon the rock of ages--God and immortal spirit.

Every animal is more or less endowed with the faculty of perceiving, if
not spirits, at least something which remains for the time being
invisible to common men, and can only be discerned by a clairvoyant. We
have made hundreds of experiments with cats, dogs, monkeys of various
kinds, and, once, with a tame tiger. A round black mirror, known as the
"magic crystal," was strongly mesmerized by a native Hindu gentleman,
formerly an inhabitant of Dindigul, and now residing in a more secluded
spot, among the mountains known as the Western Ghauts. He had tamed a
young cub, brought to him from the Malabar coast, in which part of India
the tigers are proverbially ferocious; and it is with this interesting
animal that we made our experiments.

Like the ancient Marsi and Psylli, the renowned serpent-charmers, this
gentleman claimed to be possessed of the mysterious power of taming any
kind of animal. The tiger was reduced to a chronic *mental numbness,* so
to say; he had become as inoffensive and harmless as a dog. Children
could tease and pull him by the ears, and he would only shake himself
and howl like a dog. But whenever forced to look into the

###### <span id="page_468">p. 468</span>

"magic mirror," the poor animal was instantly excited to a sort of
frenzy. His eyes became full of a *human* terror; howling in despair,
unable to turn away from the mirror to which his gaze seemed riveted as
by a magnetic spell, he would writhe and tremble till he convulsed with
fear at some vision which to us remained unknown. He would then lie
down, feebly groaning but still gazing in the glass. When it was taken
away from him, the animal would lie panting and seemingly prostrated for
about two hours. What did he see? What spirit-picture from his own
invisible, *animal*-world, could produce such a terrific effect on the
wild and naturally ferocious and daring beast? Who can tell? Perhaps
*he* who produced the scene.

The same effect on animals was observed during spiritual *seances* with
some holy mendicants; the same when a Syrian, half-heathen and
half-Christian, from Kunankulam (Cochin State), a reputed sorcerer, who
was invited to join us for the sake of experimenting.

We were nine persons in all--seven men and two women, one of the latter
a native. Besides us, there were in the room, the young tiger, intensely
occupied on a bone; a *wanderoo,* or lion-monkey, which, with its black
coat and snow-white goatee and whiskers, and cunning, sparkling eyes,
looked the personification of mischief; and a beautiful golden oriole,
quietly cleaning its radiant-colored tail on a perch, placed near a
large window of the veranda. In India, "spiritual" seances are not held
in the dark, as in America; and no conditions, but perfect silence and
harmony, are required. It was in the full glare of daylight streaming
through the opened doors and windows, with a far-away buzz of life from
the neighboring forests, and jungles sending us the echo of myriads of
insects, birds, and animals. We sat in the midst of a garden in which
the house was built, and instead of breathing the stifling atmosphere of
a seance-room, we were amid the fire-colored clusters of the
erythrina--the coral tree--inhaling the fragrant aromas of trees and
shrubs, and the flowers of the bignonia, whose white blossoms trembled
in the soft breeze. In short, we were surrounded with light, harmony,
and perfumes. Large nosegays of flowers and shrubs, sacred to the native
gods, were gathered for the purpose, and brought into the rooms. We had
the sweet basil, the Vishnu-flower, without which no religious ceremony
in Bengal will ever take place; and the branches of the *Ficus
religiosa,* the tree dedicated to the same bright deity, intermingling
their leaves with the rosy blossoms of the sacred lotos and the Indian
tuberose, profusely ornamented the walls.

While the "blessed one"--represented by a very dirty, but, nevertheless,
really holy fakir--remained plunged in self-contemplation, and some
spiritual wonders were taking place under the direction of his will,

###### <span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

the monkey and the bird exhibited but few signs of restlessness. The
tiger alone visibly trembled at intervals, and stared around the room,
as if his phosphorically-shining green orbs were following some
invisible presence as it floated up and down. That which was as yet
unperceived by human eyes, must have therefore been *objective* to him.
As to the wanderoo, all its liveliness had fled; it seemed drowsy, and
sat crouching and motionless. The bird gave few, if any, signs of
uneasiness. There was a sound as of gently-flapping wings in the air;
the flowers went travelling about the room, displaced by invisible
hands; and, as a glorious azure-tinted flower fell on the folded paws of
the monkey, it gave a nervous start, and sought refuge under its
master's white robe. These displays lasted for an hour, and it would be
too long to relate all of them; the most curious of all, being the one
which closed that season of wonders. Somebody complaining of the heat,
we had a shower of delicately-perfumed dew. The drops fell fast and
large, and conveyed a feeling of inexpressible refreshment, drying the
instant after touching our persons.

When the fakir had brought his exhibition of *white* magic to a close,
the "sorcerer," or conjurer, as they are called, prepared to display his
power. We were treated to a succession of the wonders that the accounts
of travellers have made familiar to the public; showing, among other
things, the fact that animals naturally possess the clairvoyant faculty,
and even, it would seem, the ability to discern between the good and the
bad spirits. All of the sorcerer's feats were preceded by fumigations.
He burned branches of resinous trees and shrubs, which sent up volumes
of smoke. Although there was nothing about this calculated to affright
an animal using only his natural eyes, the tiger, monkey, and bird
exhibited an indescribable terror. We suggested that the animals might
be frightened at the blazing brands, the familiar custom of burning
fires round the camp to keep off wild beasts, recurring to our mind. To
leave no doubt upon this point, the Syrian approached the crouching
tiger with a branch of the Bael-tree <span
id="fr_657"></span>[\*](#fn_656) (sacred to Siva), and waved it several
times over his head, muttering, meanwhile, his incantations. The brute
instantly displayed a panic of terror beyond description. His eyes
started from their sockets like blazing fire-balls; he foamed at the
mouth; he flung himself upon the floor, as if seeking some hole in which
to hide himself; he uttered scream after scream, that awoke a hundred
responsive echoes from the jungle and the woods. Finally, taking a last
look at the spot from which his eyes had never wandered, he made a
desperate plunge, which snapped his chain, and

###### <span id="page_470">p. 470</span>

dashed through the window of the veranda, carrying a piece of the
frame-work with him. The monkey had fled long before, and the bird fell
from the perch as though paralyzed.

We did not ask either the fakir or sorcerer for an explanation of the
method by which their respective phenomena were effected. If we had,
unquestionably they would have replied as did a fakir to a French
traveller, who tells his story in a recent number of a New York
newspaper, called the *Franco-American*, as follows:

"Many of these Hindu jugglers who live in the silence of the pagodas
perform feats far surpassing the prestidigitations of Robert Houdin, and
there are many others who produce the most curious phenomena in
magnetism and catalepsy upon the first objects that come across their
way, that I have often wondered whether the Brahmans, with their occult
sciences, have not made great discoveries in the questions which have
recently been agitated in Europe.

"On one occasion, while I and others were in a cafe with Sir Maswell, he
ordered his dobochy to introduce the charmer. In a few moments a lean
Hindu, almost naked, with an ascetic face and bronzed color entered.
Around his neck, arms, thighs, and body were coiled serpents of
different sizes. After saluting us, he said, 'God be with you, I am
Chibh-Chondor, son of Chibh-Gontnalh-Mava.'

" 'We desire to see what you can do,' said our host.

" 'I obey the orders of Siva, who has sent me here,' replied the fakir,
squatting down on one of the marble slabs.

"The serpents raised their heads and hissed, but without showing any
anger. Then taking a small pipe, attached to a wick in his hair, he
produced scarcely audible sounds, imitating the *tailapaca*, a bird that
feeds upon bruised cocoanuts. Here the serpents uncoiled themselves, and
one after another glided to the floor. As soon as they touched the
ground they raised about one-third of their bodies, and began to keep
time to their master's music. Suddenly the fakir dropped his instrument
and made several passes with his hands over the serpents, of whom there
were about ten, all of the most deadly species of Indian cobra. His eye
assumed a strange expression. We all felt an undefinable uneasiness, and
sought to turn away our gaze from him. At this moment a small
shocra <span id="fr_658"></span>[\*](#fn_657) (monkey) whose business
was to hand fire in a small brasier for lighting cigars, yielded to his
influence, lay down, and fell asleep. Five minutes passed thus, and we
felt that if the manipulations were to continue a few seconds more we
should all fall asleep. Chondor then rose, and making two more passes
over the shocra, said to it: 'Give

###### <span id="page_471">p. 471</span>

the commander some fire.' The young monkey rose, and without tottering,
came and offered fire to its master. It was pinched, pulled about, till
there was no doubt of its being actually asleep. Nor would it move from
Sir Maswell's side till ordered to do so by the fakir.

"We then examined the cobras. Paralyzed by magnetic influence, they lay
at full length on the ground. On taking them up we found them stiff as
sticks. They were in a state of complete catalepsy. The fakir then
awakened them, on which they returned and again coiled themselves round
his body. We inquired whether he could make us feel his influence. He
made a few passes over our legs, and instantly we lost the use of these
limbs; we could not leave our seats. He released us a easily as he had
paralyzed us.

"Chibh-Chondor closed his seance by experimenting upon inanimate
objects. By mere passes with his hands in the direction of the object to
be acted upon, and without leaving his seat, he paled and extinguished
lights in the furthest parts of the room, moved the furniture, including
the divans upon which we sat, opened and closed doors. Catching sight of
a Hindu who was drawing water from a well in the garden, he made a pass
in his direction, and the rope suddenly stopped in its descent,
resisting all the efforts of the astonished gardener. With another pass
the rope again descended.

"I asked Chibh-Chondor: 'Do you employ the same means in acting upon
inanimate objects that you do upon living creatures?'

"He replied, 'I have only one means.'

" 'What is it?'

" 'The will. Man, who is the end of all intellectual and material
forces, must dominate over all. The Brahmans know nothing besides this.'
"

"Sanang Setzen," says Colonel Yule, <span
id="fr_659"></span>[\*](#fn_658) "enumerates a variety of the wonderful
acts which could be performed through the *Dharani* (mystic Hindu
charms). Such were sticking a peg into solid rock; restoring the dead to
life; turning a dead body into gold; penetrating everywhere *as air
does* (in astral form); flying; catching wild beasts with the hand;
reading thoughts; making water flow backward; eating tiles; sitting in
the air with the legs doubled under, etc." Old legends ascribe to Simon
Magus precisely the same powers. "He made statues to walk; leaped into
the fire without being burned; flew in the air; made bread of stones;
changed his shape; assumed two faces at once; converted himself into a
pillar; caused closed doors to fly open spontaneously; made the vessels
in a house move of themselves, etc." The Jesuit Delrio laments

###### <span id="page_472">p. 472</span>

that credulous princes, otherwise of pious repute, should have allowed
*diabolical* tricks to be played before them, "as for example, things of
iron, and silver goblets, or other heavy articles, to be moved by
bounds, from one end of the table to the other, *without the use of a
magnet,* or of any attachment." <span id="fr_660"></span>[\*](#fn_659)
We believe WILL-POWER the most powerful of magnets. The existence of
such magical power in certain persons *is proved,* but the existence of
the Devil is a fiction, which no theology is able to demonstrate.

"There are certain men whom the Tartars honor above all in the world,"
says Friar Ricold, "viz., the *Baxitae,* who are a kind of idol-priests.
These are men from India, persons of deep wisdom, *well-conducted and of
the gravest morals.* They are usually with magic arts . . . they exhibit
many illusions, and predict future events. For instance, one of eminence
among them was said to fly; but the truth, however, was as it proved,
that he did not fly, but did walk close to the surface of the ground
without touching it; *and would seem to sit down without having any
substance to support him. <span id="fr_661"></span>[\*\*](#fn_660)* This
last performance was witnessed by Ibn Batuta, at Delhi," adds Colonel
Yule, who quotes the friar in the *Book of Ser Marco Polo,* "in the
presence of Sultan Mahomet Tughlak; and it was professedly exhibited by
a Brahman at Madras in the present century, a descendant doubtless of
those Brahmans whom Apollonius saw walking two cubits from the ground.
It is also described by the worthy Francis Valentyn, as a performance
known and practiced in his own day in India. It is related, he says,
that 'a man will first go and sit on three sticks put together so as to
form a tripod; after which, first one stick, then a second, then a third
shall be removed from under him, and the man shall not fall but shall
still remain sitting in the air! Yet I have spoken with two friends who
had seen this at one and the same time; and one of them, I may add,
mistrusting his own eyes, had taken the trouble to feel about with a
long stick if there were nothing on which the body rested; yet, as the
gentleman told me, he could neither feel nor see any such thing.' " We
have stated elsewhere that the same thing was accomplished last year,
before the Prince of Wales and his suite.

Such feats as the above are nothing in comparison to what is done by
professed jugglers; "feats," remarks the above-quoted author, "which
might be regarded as simply inventions if told by one author only, but
which seem to deserve *prominent notice* from being recounted by a
series of authors, certainly independent of one another, and writing at
long intervals of time and place. Our first witness is Ibn Batuta, and

###### <span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

it will be necessary to quote him as well as the others in full, in
order to show how closely their evidence tallies. The Arab traveller was
present at a great entertainment at the court of the Viceroy of Khansa.
'That same night a juggler, who was one of the Khan's slaves, made his
appearance, and the Amir said to him, "Come and show us some of your
marvels." Upon this he took a wooden ball, with several holes in it,
through which long thongs were passed, and laying hold of one of these,
slung it into the air. It went so high that we lost sight of it
altogether. . . . (We were in the middle of the palace-court.) There now
remained only a little of the end of a thong in the conjurer's hand, and
he desired one of the boys who assisted him to lay hold of it and mount.
He did so, climbing by the thong, and we lost sight of him also! The
conjurer then called to him three times, but, getting no answer, he
snatched up a knife as if in a great rage, laid hold of the thong, and
disappeared also! By and bye, he threw down one of the boy's hands, then
a foot, then the other hand, and then the other foot, then the trunk,
and last of all the head! Then he came down himself, puffing and
panting, and with his clothes all bloody kissed the ground before the
Amir, and said something to him in Chinese. The Amir gave some order in
reply, and our friend then took the lad's limbs, laid them together in
their places, and gave a kick, when, presto! there was the boy, who got
up and stood before us! All this astonished me beyond measure, and I had
an attack of palpitation like that which overcame me once before in the
presence of the Sultan of India, when he showed me something of the same
kind. They gave me a cordial, however, which cured the attack. The Kaji
Afkharuddin was next to me, and quoth he, "Wallah! 't is my opinion
there has been neither going up nor coming down, neither marring, nor
mending! 'T is all *hocus-pocus*!" ' "

And who doubts but that it is a "hocus-pocus," an illusion, or *Maya,*
as the Hindus express it? But when such an illusion can be forced on,
say, ten thousand people at the same time, as we have seen it performed
during a public festival, surely the means by which such an astounding
hallucination can be produced merits the attention of science! When by
such *magic* a man who stands before you, in a room, the doors of which
you have closed and of which the keys are in your hand, suddenly
disappears, vanishes like a flash of light, and you see him *nowhere*
but hear his voice from different parts of the room addressing you and
laughing at your perplexity, surely such an *art* is not unworthy either
of Mr. Huxley or Dr. Carpenter. Is it not quite as well worth spending
time over, as the lesser mystery--why barnyard cocks crow at midnight?

What Ibn Batuta, the Moor, saw in China about the year 1348, Colonel
Yule shows Edward Melton, "an Anglo-Dutch traveller," witnessing

###### <span id="page_474">p. 474</span>

in Batavia about the year 1670: "One of the same gang" (of conjurers),
says Melton, <span id="fr_662"></span>[\*](#fn_661) "took a small ball
of cord, and grasping one end of the cord in his hand slung the other up
into the air with such force that its extremity was beyond reach of our
sight. He then climbed up the cord with indescribable swiftness. . . . I
stood full of astonishment, not conceiving where he had disappeared;
when lo! a leg came tumbling down out of the air. A moment later a hand
came down, etc. . . . In short, all the members of the body came
successively tumbling from the air and were cast together by the
attendant into the basket. The last fragment of all was the head, and no
sooner had that touched the ground than he who had snatched up all the
limbs and put them in the basket, turned them all out again topsy turvy.
Then straightway we saw *with these eyes all those limbs creep together*
again, and, in short, form a whole man, who at once could stand and go
just as before without showing the least damage! . . . Never in my life
was I so astonished . . . and I doubted now no longer that these
misguided men did it by the help of the Devil."

In the memoirs of the Emperor Jahangire, the performances of seven
jugglers from Bengal, who exhibited before him, are thus described:
"*Ninth.* They produced a man whom they divided limb from limb, actually
severing his head from the body. They scattered these mutilated members
along the ground, and in this state they lay some time. They then
extended a sheet over the spot, and one of the men putting himself under
the sheet, in a few minutes came from below, followed by the individual
supposed to have been cut into joints, in perfect health and condition.
. . . *Twenty-third.* They produced a chain of fifty cubits in length,
and in my presence threw one end of it toward the sky, *where it
remained as if fastened to something in the air.* A dog was then brought
forward and being placed at the lower end of the chain, immediately ran
up, and reaching the other end, *immediately disappeared in the air.* In
the same manner a hog, a panther, a lion, and a tiger were successively
sent up the chain, and all equally disappeared at the upper end of the
chain. At last they took down the chain, and put it into the bag, no one
ever discovering in what way the different animals were made to vanish
into the air in the mysterious manner above described." <span
id="fr_663"></span>[\*\*](#fn_662)

We have in our possession a picture painted from such a Persian
conjurer, with a man, or rather the various limbs of what was a minute
before a man, scattered before him. We have seen such conjurers, and
witnessed such performances more than once and in various places.

###### <span id="page_475">p. 475</span>

Bearing ever in mind that we repudiate the idea of a miracle and
returning once more to phenomena more serious, we would now ask what
logical objection can be urged against the claim that the reanimation of
the dead was accomplished by many thaumaturgists? The fakir described in
the *Franco-Americain,* might have gone far enough to say that this
will-power of man is so tremendously potential that it can reanimate a
body apparently dead, by drawing back the flitting soul that has not yet
quite ruptured the thread that through life had bound the two together.
Dozens of such fakirs have allowed themselves to be buried alive before
thousands of witnesses, and weeks afterward have been resuscitated. And
if fakirs have the secret of this artificial process, identical with, or
analogous to, hibernation, why not allow that their ancestors, the
Gymnosophists, and Apollonius of Tyana, who had studied with the latter
in India, and Jesus, and other prophets and seers, who all knew more
about the mysteries of life and death than any of our modern men of
science, might have resuscitated dead men and women? And being quite
familiar with that power--that mysterious *something* "that science
cannot yet understand," as Professor Le Conte confesses--knowing,
moreover, "whence it came and whither it was going," Elisha, Jesus,
Paul, and Apollonius, enthusiastic ascetics and learned initiates, might
have recalled to life with ease any man who "was not dead but sleeping,"
and that without any miracle.

If the molecules of the cadaver are imbued with the physical and
chemical forces of the living organism, <span
id="fr_664"></span>[\*](#fn_663) what is to prevent them from being set
again in motion, provided we know the nature of the vital force, and how
to command it? The materialist can certainly offer no objection, for
with him it is no question of reinfusing a soul. For him the soul has no
existence, and the human body may be regarded simply as a vital
engine--a locomotive which will start upon the application of heat and
force, and stop when they are withdrawn. To the theologian the case
offers greater difficulties, for, in his view, death cuts asunder the
tie which binds soul and body, and the one can no more be returned into
the other without miracle than the born infant can be compelled to
resume its foetal life after parturition and the severing of the
umbilicus. But the Hermetic philosopher stands between these two
irreconcilable antagonists, "*master of the situation.* He knows the
nature of the soul--a form composed of nervous fluid and atmospheric
ether--and knows how the vital force can be made active or passive at
will, so long as there is no final destruction of some necessary organ.
The claims of Gaffarilus--which, by the bye, appeared so preposterous in
1650 <span id="fr_665"></span>[\*\*](#fn_664)--were later corroborated
by science.

###### <span id="page_476">p. 476</span>

He maintained that every object existing in nature, provided it was not
artificial, when once burned still retained its form in the ashes, in
which it remained till raised again. Du Chesne, an eminent chemist,
assured himself of the fact. Kircher, Digby, and Vallemont have
demonstrated that the forms of plants could be resuscitated from their
ashes. At a meeting of naturalists in 1834, at Stuttgart, a receipt for
producing such experiments was found in a work of Oetinger. <span
id="fr_666"></span>[\*](#fn_665) Ashes of burned plants contained in
vials, when heated, exhibited again their various forms. "A small
obscure cloud gradually rose in the vial, took a defined form, and
presented to the eye the flower or plant the ashes consisted of." "The
earthly husk," wrote Oetinger, "remains in the retort, while the
volatile essence ascends, *like a spirit,* perfect in form, but void of
substance." <span id="fr_667"></span>[\*\*](#fn_666)

And, if the astral form of even a plant when its body is dead still
lingers in the ashes, will skeptics persist in saying that the soul of
*man,* the *inner* ego, is after the death of the grosser form at once
dissolved, and is no more? "At death," says the philosopher, "the one
body exudes from the other, by osmose and through the brain; it is held
near its old garment by a double attraction, physical and spiritual,
until the latter decomposes; and if the proper conditions are given the
soul can reinhabit it and resume the suspended life. It does it in
sleep; it does it more thoroughly in trance; most surprisingly at the
command and with the assistance of the Hermetic adept. Iamblichus
declared that a person endowed with such resuscitating powers is 'full
of God.' All the subordinate spirits of the upper spheres are at his
command, for he is no longer a mortal, but himself a god. In his
*Epistle to the Corinthians,* Paul remarks that 'the spirits of the
prophets *are subject to the prophets.*' "

Some persons have the natural and some the acquired power of withdrawing
the *inner* from the *outer* body, at will, and causing it to perform
long journeys, and be seen by those whom it visits. Numerous are the
instances recorded by unimpeachable witnesses of the "doubles" of
persons having been seen and conversed with, hundreds of miles from the
places where the persons themselves were known to be. Hermotimus, if we
may credit Pliny and Plutarch, <span
id="fr_668"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_667) could at will fall into a trance
and then his *second* soul proceeded to any distant place he chose.

The Abbe Tritheim, the famous author of *Steganographie,* who lived in
the seventeenth century, could converse with his friends by the mere
power of his will. "I can make my thoughts known to the initiated,"

###### <span id="page_477">p. 477</span>

he wrote, "at a distance of many hundred miles, without word, writing,
or cipher, by any messenger. The latter cannot betray me, for he knows
nothing. If needs be, I can dispense with the messenger. If any
correspondent should be buried in the deepest dungeon, I could still
convey to him my thoughts as clearly and as frequently as I chose, and
this quite simply, without superstition, without the aid of spirits."
Cordanus could also send his spirit, or any messages he chose. When he
did so, he felt "as if a door was opened, and I myself immediately
passed through it, leaving the body behind me." <span
id="fr_669"></span>[\*](#fn_668) The case of a high German official, a
counsellor Wesermann, was mentioned in a scientific paper. <span
id="fr_670"></span>[\*\*](#fn_669) He claimed to be able to cause any
friend or acquaintance, at any distance, to dream of every subject he
chose, or see any person he liked. His claims were proved good, and
testified to on several occasions by skeptics and learned professional
persons. He could also cause his double to appear wherever he liked; and
be seen by several persons at one time. By whispering in their ears a
sentence prepared and agreed upon beforehand by unbelievers, and for the
purpose, his power to project the double was demonstrated beyond any
cavil.

According to Napier, Osborne, Major Lawes, Quenouillet, Nikiforovitch,
and many other modern witnesses, fakirs are now proved to be able, by a
long course of diet, preparation, and repose, to bring their bodies into
a condition which enables them to be buried six feet under ground for an
indefinite period. Sir Claude Wade was present at the court of Rundjit
Singh, when the fakir, mentioned by the Honorable Captain Osborne, was
buried alive for six weeks, in a box placed in a cell three feet below
the floor of the room. <span id="fr_671"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_670) To
prevent the chance of deception, a guard comprising two companies of
soldiers had been detailed, and four sentries "were furnished and
relieved every two hours, night and day, to guard the building from
intrusion. . . . On opening it," says Sir Claude, "we saw a figure
enclosed in a bag of white linen fastened by a string over the head . .
. the servant then began pouring warm water over the figure . . . the
legs and arms of the body were shrivelled and stiff, the face full, the
head reclining on the shoulder like that of a corpse. I then called to
the medical gentleman who was attending me, to come down and inspect the
body, which he did, but could discover no pulsation in the heart, the
temples, or the arm. There was, however, *a heat about the region of the
brain,* which no other part of the body exhibited."

Regretting that the limits of our space forbid the quotation of the

###### <span id="page_478">p. 478</span>

details of this interesting story, we will only add, that the process of
resuscitation included bathing with hot water, friction, the removal of
wax and cotton pledgets from the nostrils and ears, the rubbing of the
eyelids with ghee or clarified butter, and, what will appear most
curious to many, the application of a hot wheaten cake, about an inch
thick "to the top of the head." After the cake had been applied for the
third time, the body was violently convulsed, the nostrils became
inflated, the respiration ensued, and the limbs assumed a natural
fulness; but the pulsation was still faintly perceptible. "The tongue
was then anointed with ghee; the eyeballs became dilated and recovered
their natural color, and the fakir recognized those present and spoke."
It should be noticed that not only had the nostrils and ears been
plugged, but the tongue had been thrust back so as to close the gullet,
thus effectually stopping the orifices against the admission of
atmospheric air. While in India, a fakir told us that this was done not
only to prevent the action of the air upon the organic tissues, but also
to guard against the deposit of the germs of decay, which in case of
suspended animation would cause decomposition exactly as they do in any
other meat exposed to air. There are also localities in which a fakir
would refuse to be buried; such as the many spots in Southern India
infested with the white ants, which annoying termites are considered
among the most dangerous enemies of man and his property. They are so
voracious as to devour everything they find except perhaps metals. As to
wood, there is no kind through which they would not burrow; and even
bricks and mortar offer but little impediment to their formidable
armies. They will patiently work through mortar, destroying it particle
by particle; and a fakir, however holy himself, and strong his temporary
coffin, would not risk finding his body devoured when it was time for
his resuscitation.

Then, here is a case, only one of many, substantiated by the testimony
of two English noblemen--one of them an army officer--and a Hindu
Prince, who was as great a skeptic as themselves. It places science in
this embarrassing dilemma: it must either give the lie to many
unimpeachable witnesses, or admit that if one fakir can resuscitate
after six weeks, any other fakir can also; and if a fakir, why not a
Lazarus, a Shunamite boy, or the daughter of Jairus? <span
id="fr_672"></span>[\*](#fn_671)

###### <span id="page_479">p. 479</span>

And now, perhaps, it may not be out of place to inquire what assurance
can any physician have, beyond *external* evidence, that the body is
really dead? The best authorities agree in saying that there are none.
Dr. Todd Thomson, of London, <span id="fr_673"></span>[\*](#fn_672) says
most positively that "the immobility of the body, even its cadaverous
aspect, the coldness of surface, the absence of respiration and
pulsation, and the sunken state of the eye, are no unequivocal evidences
that *life* is wholly extinct." Nothing but total decomposition is an
irrefutable proof that life has fled for ever and that the tabernacle is
tenantless. Demokritus asserted that there existed no *certain* signs of
real death. <span id="fr_674"></span>[\*\*](#fn_673) Pliny maintained
the same. <span id="fr_675"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_674) Asclepiades, a
learned physician and one of the most distinguished men of his day, held
that the assurance was still more difficult in the cases of women than
in those of men.

Todd Thomson, above quoted, gives several remarkable cases of such a
suspended animation. Among others he mentions a certain Francis Neville,
a Norman gentleman, who twice apparently died, and was twice in the act
of being buried. But, at the moment when the coffin was being lowered in
the grave, he spontaneously revived. In the seventeenth century, Lady
Russell, to all appearance died, and was about to be buried, but as the
bell was tolling for her funeral, she sat up in her coffin and
exclaimed, "It is time to go to church!" Diemerbroeck mentions a peasant
who gave no signs of life for three days, but when placed in his coffin,
near the grave, revived and lived many years afterward. In 1836, a
respectable citizen of Brussels fell into a profound lethargy on a
Sunday morning. On Monday, as his attendants were preparing to screw the
lid of the coffin, the supposed corpse sat up, rubbed his eyes, and
called for his coffee and a newspaper. <span
id="fr_676"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_675)

Such cases of apparent death are not very infrequently reported in the
newspaper press. As we write (April, 1877), we find in a London letter
to the New York *Times,* the following paragraph: "Miss Annie Goodale,
the actress, died three weeks ago. Up to yesterday she was not buried.
The corpse is warm and limp, and the features as soft and mobile as when
in life. Several physicians have examined her, and have ordered that the
body shall be watched night and day. The poor lady is evidently in a
trance, but whether she is destined to come to life it is impossible to
say."

###### <span id="page_480">p. 480</span>

Science regards man as an aggregation of atoms temporarily united by a
mysterious force called the life-principle. To the materialist, the only
difference between a living and a dead body is, that in the one case,
that force is active, in the other latent. When it is extinct or
entirely latent the molecules obey a superior attraction, which draws
them asunder and scatters them through space.

This dispersion must be death, if it is possible to conceive such a
thing as death, where the very molecules of the dead body manifest an
intense vital energy. If death is but the stoppage of a digesting,
locomotive, and thought-grinding machine, how can death be actual and
not relative, before that machine is thoroughly broken up and its
particles dispersed? So long as any of them cling together, the
centripetal vital force may overmatch the dispersive centrifugal action.
Says Eliphas Levi: "Change attests movement, and movement only reveals
life. The corpse would not decompose if it were dead; all the molecules
which compose it are living and struggle to separate. And would you
think that the spirit frees itself first of all to exist no more? That
thought and love can die when the grossest forms of matter do not die?
If the change should be called death, we die and are born again every
day, for every day our forms undergo change." <span
id="fr_677"></span>[\*](#fn_676)

The kabalists say that a man is not dead when his body is entombed.
Death is never sudden; for, according to Hermes, nothing goes in nature
by violent transitions. Everything is gradual, and as it required a long
and gradual development to produce the living human being, so time is
required to completely withdraw vitality from the carcass. "Death can no
more be an absolute end, than birth a real beginning. Birth proves the
preexistence of the being, as death proves immortality," says the same
French kabalist.

While implicitly believing in the restoration of the daughter of Jairus,
the ruler of the synagogue, and in other Bible-miracles, well-educated
Christians, who otherwise would feel indignant at being called
superstitious, meet all such cases as that of Apollonius and the girl
said by his biographer to have been recalled to life by him, with
scornful skepticism. Diogenes Laertius, who mentions a woman restored to
life by Empedocles, is treated with no more respect; and the name of
Pagan thaumaturgist, in the eyes of Christians, is but a synonym for
impostor. Our scientists are at least one degree more rational; they
embrace all Bible prophets and apostles, and the heathen miracle-doers
in two categories of hallucinated fools and deceitful tricksters.

But Christians and materialists might, with a very little effort on
their

###### <span id="page_481">p. 481</span>

part, show themselves fair and logical at the same time. To produce such
a miracle, they have but to consent to understand what they read, and
submit it to the unprejudiced criticism of their best judgment. Let us
see how far it is possible. Setting aside the incredible fiction of
Lazarus, we will select two cases: the ruler's daughter, recalled to
life by Jesus, and the Corinthian bride, resuscitated by Apollonius. In
the former case, totally disregarding the significant expression of
Jesus--"*She is not dead but sleepeth*," the clergy force their god to
become a breaker of his own laws and grant unjustly to one what he
denies to all others, and with no better object in view than to produce
a useless miracle. In the second case, notwithstanding the words of the
biographer of Apollonius, so plain and precise that there is not the
slightest cause to misunderstand them, they charge Philostratus with
deliberate imposture. Who could be fairer than he, who less open to the
charge of mystification, when, in describing the resuscitation of the
young girl by the Tyanian sage, in the presence of a large concourse of
people, the biographer says, "she had *seemed* to die."

In other words, he very clearly indicates a case of suspended animation;
and then adds immediately, "as the rain fell very fast on the young
girl," while she was being carried to the pile, "with her face turned
upwards, this, *also,* might have excited her senses." <span
id="fr_678"></span>[\*](#fn_677) Does this not show most plainly that
Philostratus saw *no* miracle in that resuscitation? Does it not rather
imply, if anything, the great learning and skill of Apollonius, "who
like Asclepiades had the merit of distinguishing at a glance between
real and apparent death"? <span id="fr_679"></span>[\*\*](#fn_678)

A resuscitation, after the soul and spirit have entirely separated from
the body, and the last electric thread is severed, is as impossible as
for a once disembodied spirit to reincarnate itself once more on this
earth, except as described in previous chapters. "A leaf, once fallen
off, does not reattach itself to the branch," says Eliphas Levi. "The
caterpillar becomes a butterfly, but the butterfly does not again return
to the grub. Nature closes the door behind all that passes, and pushes
life forward. Forms pass, thought remains, and does not recall that
which it has once exhausted." <span id="fr_680"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_679)

Why should it be imagined that Asclepiades and Apollonius enjoyed
exceptional powers for the discernment of actual death? Has any modern
school of medicine this knowledge to impart to its students? Let their
authorities answer for them. These prodigies of Jesus and Apollonius

###### <span id="page_482">p. 482</span>

are so well attested that they appear authentic. Whether in either or
both cases life was simply suspended or not, the important fact remains
that by some power, peculiar to themselves, both the wonder-workers
recalled the *seemingly dead* to life in an instant. <span
id="fr_681"></span>[\*](#fn_680)

Is it because the modern physician has not yet found the secret which
the theurgists evidently possessed that its possibility is denied?

Neglected as psychology now is, and with the strangely chaotic state in
which physiology is confessed to be by its most fair students, certainly
it is not very likely that our men of science will soon rediscover the
lost knowledge of the ancients. In the days of old, when prophets were
not treated as charlatans, nor thaumaturgists as impostors, there were
colleges instituted for teaching prophecy and occult sciences in
general. Samuel is recorded as the chief of such an institution at
Ramah; Elisha, also, at Jericho. The schools of *hazim*, prophets or
seers, were celebrated throughout the country. Hillel had a regular
academy, and Socrates is well known to have sent away several of his
disciples to study *manticism.* The study of magic, or wisdom, included
every branch of science, the metaphysical as well as the physical,
psychology and physiology in their common and occult phases, and the
study of alchemy was universal, for it was both a physical and a
spiritual science. Therefore why doubt or wonder that the ancients, who
studied nature under its double aspect, achieved discoveries which to
our modern physicists, who study but its dead letter, are a closed book?

Thus, the question at issue is not whether a *dead* body can be
resuscitated--for, to assert that would be to assume the possibility of
a miracle, which is absurd--but, to assure ourselves whether the medical
authorities pretend to determine the precise moment of death. The
kabalists say that death occurs at the instant when both the astral
body, or life-principle, and the spirit part forever with the corporeal
body. The scientific physician who denies both astral body and spirit,
and admits the existence of nothing more than the life-principle, judges
death to occur when life is apparently extinct. When the beating of the
heart and the action of the lungs cease, and *rigor mortis* is
manifested, and especially when decomposition begins, they pronounce the
patient dead. But the annals of medicine teem with examples of
"suspended animation"

###### <span id="page_483">p. 483</span>

as the result of asphyxia by drowning, the inhalation of gases and other
causes; life being restored in the case of drowning persons even after
they had been apparently dead for twelve hours.

In cases of somnambulic trance, none of the ordinary signs of death are
lacking; breathing and the pulse are extinct; animal-heat has
disappeared; the muscles are rigid, the eye glazed, and the body is
colorless. In the celebrated case of Colonel Townshend, he threw himself
into this state in the presence of three medical men; who, after a time,
were persuaded that he was really dead, and were about leaving the room,
when he slowly revived. He describes his peculiar gift by saying that he
"could die or expire when he pleased, and yet, by an effort, or
*somehow* he could come to life again."

There occurred in Moscow, a few years since, a remarkable instance of
apparent death. The wife of a wealthy merchant lay in the cataleptic
state seventeen days, during which the authorities made several attempts
to bury her; but, as decomposition had not set in, the family averted
the ceremony, and at the end of that time she was restored to life.

The above instances show that the most learned men in the medical
profession are unable to be certain when a person is dead. What they
call "suspended animation," is that state from which the patient
spontaneously recovers, through an effort of his own spirit, which may
be provoked by any one of many causes. In these cases, the astral body
has not parted from the physical body; its external functions are simply
suspended; the subject is in a state of torpor, and the restoration is
nothing but a recovery from it.

But, in the case of what physiologists would call "real death," but
which is not actually so, the astral body has withdrawn; perhaps local
decomposition has set in. How shall the man be brought to life again?
The answer is, the interior body must be forced back into the exterior
one, and vitality reawakened in the latter. The clock has run down, it
must be wound. If death is absolute; if the organs have not only ceased
to act, but have lost the susceptibility of renewed action, then the
whole universe would have to be thrown into chaos to resuscitate the
corpse--a miracle would be demanded. But, as we said before, the man is
not dead when he is cold, stiff, pulseless, breathless, and even showing
signs of decomposition; he is not dead when buried, nor afterward, until
a certain point is reached. That point is, *when the vital organs have
become so decomposed, that if reanimated, they could not perform their
customary functions;* when the mainspring and cogs of the machine, so to
speak, are so eaten away by rust, that they would snap upon the turning
of the key. Until that point is reached, the astral body may be caused,
without miracle, to reenter its former tabernacle, either by an effort
of its

###### <span id="page_484">p. 484</span>

own will, or under the resistless impulse of the will of one who knows
the potencies of nature and how to direct them. The spark is not
extinguished, but only latent--latent as the fire in the flint, or the
heat in the cold iron.

In cases of the most profound cataleptic clairvoyance, such as obtained
by Du Potet, and described very graphically by the late Prof. William
Gregory, in his *Letters on Animal Magnetism,* the spirit is so far
disengaged from the body that it would be impossible for it to reenter
it without an effort of the mesmerizer's will. The subject is
practically dead, and, if left to itself, the spirit would escape
forever. Although independent of the torpid physical casing, the
half-freed spirit is still tied to it by a magnetic cord, which is
described by clairvoyants as appearing dark and smoky by contrast with
the ineffable brightness of the astral atmosphere through which they
look. Plutarch, relating the story of Thespesius, who fell from a great
height, and lay three days apparently dead, gives us the experience of
the latter during his state of partial decease. "Thespesius," says he,
"then observed that he was different from the dead by whom he was
surrounded. . . . They were transparent and environed by a radiance, but
he seemed to trail after him a dark radiation or line of shadow." His
whole description, minute and circumstantial in its details, appears to
be corroborated by the clairvoyants of every period, and, so far as this
class of testimony can be taken, is important. The kabalists, as we find
them interpreted by Eliphas Levi, in his *Science des Esprits,* say
that, "When a man falls into the last sleep, he is plunged at first into
a sort of dream, before gaining consciousness in the other side of life.
He sees, then, either in a beautiful vision, or in a terrible nightmare,
the paradise or hell, in which he believed during his mortal existence.
This is why it often happens, that the affrighted soul breaks violently
back into the terrestrial life it has just left, and why some who were
really dead, *i.e*., who, if left alone and quiet, would have peaceably
passed away forever in a state of unconscious lethargy, when entombed
too soon, reawake to life in the grave."

In this connection, the reader may perhaps recall the well-known case of
the old man who had left some generous gifts in his will to his orphaned
nieces; which document, just before his death, he had confided to his
rich son, with injunctions to carry out his wishes. But, he had not been
dead more than a few hours before the son, finding himself alone with
the corpse, tore the will and burned it. The sight of this impious deed
apparently recalled the hovering spirit, and the old man, rising from
his couch of death, uttered a fierce malediction upon the
horror-stricken wretch, and then fell back again, and yielded up his
spirit--this time forever. Dion Boucicault makes use of an incident of
this kind in his powerful

###### <span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

drama *Louis XI*.; and Charles Kean created a profound impression in the
character of the French monarch, when the dead man revives for an
instant and clutches the crown as the heir-apparent approaches it.

Levi says that resuscitation is not impossible while the vital organism
remains undestroyed, and the astral spirit is yet within reach.
"Nature," he says, "accomplishes nothing by sudden jerks, and eternal
death is always preceded by a state which partakes somewhat of the
nature of lethargy. It is a torpor which a great shock or the magnetism
of a powerful will can overcome." He accounts in this manner for the
resuscitation of the dead man thrown upon the bones of Elisha. He
explains it by saying that the soul was hovering at that moment near the
body; the burial party, according to tradition, were attacked by
robbers; and their fright communicating itself sympathetically to it,
the soul was seized with horror at the idea of its remains being
desecrated, and "reentered violently into its body to raise and save
it." Those who believe in the survival of the soul can see in this
incident nothing of a supernatural character--it is only a perfect
manifestation of natural law. To narrate to the materialist such a case,
however well attested, would be but an idle talk; the theologian, always
looking beyond nature for a special providence, regards it as a prodigy.
Eliphas Levi says: "They attributed the resuscitation to the contact
with the bones of Elisha; and worship of relics dates logically from his
epoch."

Balfour Stewart is right--scientists "know nothing, or next to nothing,
of the ultimate structure and properties of matter, whether organic or
inorganic."

We are now on such firm ground, that we will take another step in
advance. *The same knowledge and control of the occult forces, including
the vital force which enabled the fakir temporarily to leave and then
reenter his body, and Jesus, Apollonius, and Elisha to recall their
several subjects to life, made it possible for the ancient hierophants
to animate statues, and cause them to act and speak like living
creatures.* It is the same knowledge and power which made it possible
for Paracelsus to create his homunculi; for Aaron to change his rod into
a serpent and a budding branch; Moses to cover Egypt with frogs and
other pests; and the Egyptian theurgist of our day to vivify his pigmy
Mandragora, which has physical life but no soul. It was no more
wonderful that upon presenting the necessary conditions Moses should
call into life large reptiles and insects, than that, under like
favoring conditions, the physical scientist should call into life the
small ones which he names bacteria.

And now, in connection with ancient miracle-doers and prophets, let us
bring forward the claims of the modern mediums. Nearly every form of
phenomena recorded in the sacred and profane histories of the world

###### <span id="page_486">p. 486</span>

we find them claiming to reproduce in our days. Selecting, among the
variety of seeming wonders, levitation of ponderable inanimate objects
as well as of human bodies, we will give our attention to the conditions
under which the phenomenon is manifested. History records the names of
Pagan theurgists, Christian saints, Hindu fakirs, and spiritual mediums
who have been thus levitated, and who remained suspended in the air,
sometimes for a considerable time. The phenomenon has not been confined
to one country or epoch, but almost invariably the subjects have been
religious ecstatics, adepts in magic, or, as now, spiritual mediums.

We assume the fact to be so well established as to require no labored
effort on our part at this time to furnish proof that unconscious
manifestations of spirit-power, as well as conscious feats of high
magic, have happened in all countries, in all ages, and with hierophants
as well as through irresponsible mediums. When the present perfected
European civilization was yet in an inchoate state, occult philosophy,
already hoary with age, speculated upon the attributes of man by analogy
with those of his Creator. Individuals later, whose names will remain
forever immortal, inscribed on the portal of the spiritual history of
man, have afforded in their persons examples of how far could be
developed the god-like powers of the *microcosmos.* Describing the
*Doctrines and Principal Teachers of the Alexandrian School,* Professor
A. Wilder says: "Plotinus taught that there was in the soul a returning
impulse, love, which attracted it inward toward its origin and centre,
the eternal good. While the person who does not understand how the soul
contains the beautiful within itself will seek by laborious effort to
realize beauty without, the wise man recognizes it within himself,
develops the idea by withdrawal into himself, concentrating his
attention, and so floating upward toward the divine fountain, the stream
of which flows within him. The infinite is not known through the reason
. . . but by a faculty superior to reason, by entering upon a state in
which the individual, so to speak, ceases to be his finite self, in
which state divine essence is communicated to him. This is ECSTASY."

Of Apollonius, who asserted that he could see "the present and the
future in a clear mirror," on account of his abstemious mode of life,
the professor very beautifully observes: "This is what may be termed
*spiritual photography.* The soul is the camera in which facts and
events, future, past, and present, are alike fixed; and the mind becomes
conscious of them. Beyond our every-day world of limits, all is as one
day or state, the past and future comprised in the present." <span
id="fr_682"></span>[\*](#fn_681)

Were these God-like men "mediums," as the orthodox spiritualists

###### <span id="page_487">p. 487</span>

will have it? By no means, if by the term we understand those
"sick-sensitives" who are born with a peculiar organization, and who in
proportion as their powers are developed become more and more subject to
the irresistible influence of miscellaneous spirits, purely human,
elementary, or elemental. Unquestionably so, if we consider every
individual a medium in whose magnetic atmosphere the denizens of higher
invisible spheres can move, and act, and live. In such a sense every
person is a medium. Mediumship may be either 1st, self-developed; 2d, by
extraneous influences; or 3d, may remain latent throughout life. *The
reader must bear in mind the definition of the term, for, unless this is
clearly understood, confusion will be inevitable.* Mediumship of this
kind may be either active or passive, repellent or receptive, positive
or negative. Mediumship is measured by the quality of the aura with
which the individual is surrounded. This may be dense, cloudy, noisome,
mephitic, nauseating to the pure spirit, and attract only those foul
beings who delight in it, as the eel does in turbid waters, or, it may
be pure, crystalline, limpid, opalescent as the morning dew. All depends
upon the moral character of the medium.

About such men as Apollonius, Iamblichus, Plotinus, and Porphyry, there
gathered this heavenly nimbus. It was evolved by the power of their own
souls in close unison with their spirits; by the superhuman morality and
sanctity of their lives, and aided by frequent interior ecstatic
contemplation. Such holy men pure spiritual influences could approach.
Radiating around an atmosphere of divine beneficence, they caused evil
spirits to flee before them. Not only is it not possible for such to
exist in their aura, but they cannot even remain in that of obsessed
persons, if the thaumaturgist exercises his will, or even approaches
them. This is MEDIATORSHIP, not *mediumship.* Such persons are temples
in which dwells the spirit of the living God; but if the temple is
defiled by the admission of an evil passion, thought or desire, the
mediator falls into the sphere of sorcery. The door is opened; the pure
spirits retire and the evil ones rush in. This is still mediatorship,
evil as it is; the sorcerer, like the pure magician, forms his own aura
and subjects to his will congenial inferior spirits.

But mediumship, as now understood and manifested, is a different thing.
Circumstances, independent of his own volition, may, either at birth or
subsequently, modify a person's aura, so that strange manifestations,
physical or mental, diabolical or angelic, may take place. Such
mediumship, as well as the above-mentioned mediatorship, has existed on
earth since the first appearance here of living man. The former is the
yielding of weak, mortal flesh to the control and suggestions of spirits
and intelligences other than one's own immortal demon. It is literally

###### <span id="page_488">p. 488</span>

obsession and *possession;* and mediums who pride themselves on being
the faithful slaves of their "guides," and who repudiate with
indignation the idea of "controlling" the manifestations, "could not
very well deny the fact without inconsistency. This mediumship is
typified in the story of Eve succumbing to the reasonings of the
serpent; of Pandora peeping in the forbidden casket and letting loose on
the world, sorrow and evil, and by Mary Magdalene, who from having been
obsessed by 'seven devils' was finally redeemed by the triumphant
struggle of her immortal spirit, touched by the presence of a holy
mediator, against the dweller." This mediumship, whether beneficent or
maleficent, is always *passive.* Happy are the pure in heart, who repel
unconsciously, by that very cleanness of their inner nature, the dark
spirits of evil. For verily they have no other weapons of defense but
that inborn goodness and purity. Mediumism, as practiced in our days, is
a more undesirable gift than the robe of Nessus.

"The tree is known by its fruits." Side by side with passive mediums in
the progress of the world's history, appear active mediators. We
designate them by this name for lack of a better one. The ancient
witches and wizards, and those who had a "familiar spirit," generally
made of their gifts a trade; and the Obeah woman of En-Dor, so well
defined by Henry More, though she may have killed her calf for Saul,
accepted hire from other visitors. In India, the jugglers, who by the
way are less so than many a modern medium, and the *Essaoua* or
sorcerers and serpent-charmers of Asia and Africa, all exercise their
gifts for money. Not so with the mediators, or hierophants. Buddha was a
mendicant and refused his father's throne. The "Son of Man had not where
to lay his head"; the chosen apostles provided "neither gold, nor
silver, nor brass in their purses." Apollonius gave one half of his
fortune to his relatives, the other half to the poor; Iamblichus and
Plotinus were renowned for charity and self-denial; the fakirs, or holy
mendicants, of India are fairly described by Jacolliot; the Pythagorean
Essenes and Therapeutae believed their hands defiled by the contact of
money. When the apostles were offered money to impart their spiritual
powers, Peter, notwithstanding that the Bible shows him a coward and
thrice a renegade, still indignantly spurned the offer, saying: "Thy
money perish with thee, because thou hast thought that the gift of God
may be purchased with money." These men were mediators, guided merely by
their own personal spirit, or divine soul, and availing themselves of
the help of spirits but so far as these remain in the right path.

Far from us be the thought of casting an unjust slur on physical
mediums. Harassed by various intelligences, reduced by the overpowering

###### <span id="page_489">p. 489</span>

influence--which their weak and nervous natures are unable to shake
off--to a morbid state, which at last becomes chronic, they are impeded
by these "influences" from undertaking other occupation. They become
mentally and physically unfit for any other. Who can judge them harshly
when, driven to the last extremity, they are constrained to accept
mediumship as a business? And heaven knows, as recent events have too
well proved, whether the calling is one to be envied by any one! It is
not mediums, real, *true*, and genuine mediums that we would ever blame,
but their patrons, the spiritualists.

Plotinus, when asked to attend public worship of the gods, is said to
have proudly answered: "It is for them (the spirits) to come to me."
Iamblichus asserted and proved in his own case, that our soul can attain
communion with the highest intelligences, with "natures loftier than
itself," and carefully drove away from his theurgical ceremonies <span
id="fr_683"></span>[\*](#fn_682) every inferior spirit, or bad daemon,
which he taught his disciples to recognize. Proclus, who "elaborated the
entire theosophy and theurgy of his predecessors into a complete
system," <span id="fr_684"></span>[\*\*](#fn_683) according to Professor
Wilder, "believed with Iamblichus in the attaining of a divine power,
which, overcoming the mundane life, rendered the individual an organ of
the Deity." He even taught that there was a "mystic password that would
carry a person from one order of spiritual beings to another, higher and
higher, till he arrived at the absolute divine." Apollonius spurned the
sorcerers and "common soothsayers," and declared that it was his
"peculiar abstemious mode of life" which "produced such an acuteness of
the senses and created other faculties, so that the greatest and most
remarkable things can take place." Jesus declared man *the lord of the
Sabbath,* and at his command the terrestrial and elementary spirits fled
from their temporary abodes; a power which was shared by Apollonius and
many of the Brotherhood of the Essenes of Judea and Mount Carmel.

It is undeniable that there must have been some good reasons why the
ancients persecuted *unregulated* mediums. Otherwise why, at the time of
Moses and David and Samuel, should they have encouraged prophecy and
divination, astrology and soothsaying, and maintained schools and
colleges in which these natural gifts were strengthened and developed,
while witches and those who divined by the spirit of *Ob* were put to
death? Even at the time of Christ, the poor oppressed mediums were
driven to the tombs and waste places without the city walls. Why this
apparent gross injustice? Why should banishment, persecution, and death
be the portion of the physical mediums of those days, and whole

###### <span id="page_490">p. 490</span>

communities of thaumaturgists--like the Essenes--be not merely tolerated
but revered? It is because the ancients, unlike ourselves, could "try"
the spirits and discern the difference between the good and the evil
ones, the human and the elemental. They also knew that unregulated
spirit intercourse brought ruin upon the individual and disaster to the
community.

This view of mediumship may be novel and perhaps repugnant to many
modern spiritualists; but still it is the view taught in the ancient
philosophy, and supported by the experience of mankind from time
immemorial.

It is erroneous to speak of a medium having *powers* developed. A
passive medium has no power. He has a certain moral and physical
condition which induces emanations, or an aura, in which his controlling
intelligences can live, and by which they manifest themselves. He is
only the vehicle through which *they* display their power. This aura
varies day by day, and, as would appear from Mr. Crookes' experiments,
even hour by hour. It is an external effect resulting from interior
causes. The medium's moral state determines the kind of spirits that
come; and the spirits that come reciprocally influence the medium,
intellectually, physically, and morally. The perfection of his
mediumship is in ratio to his passivity, and the danger he incurs is in
equal degree. When he is fully "developed"--perfectly passive--his own
astral spirit may be benumbed, and even crowded out of his body, which
is then occupied by an elemental, or, what is worse, by a human fiend of
the eighth sphere, who proceeds to use it as his own. But too often the
cause of the most celebrated crime is to be sought in such possessions.

Physical mediumship depending upon passivity, its antidote suggests
itself naturally; *let the medium cease being passive.* Spirits never
control persons of positive character who are determined to resist all
extraneous influences. The weak and feeble-minded whom they can make
their victims they drive into vice. If these miracle-making elementals
and disembodied devils called elementary were indeed the guardian angels
that they have passed for, these last thirty years, why have they not
given their faithful mediums at least good health and domestic
happiness? Why do they desert them at the most critical moments of trial
when under accusations of fraud? It is notorious that the best physical
mediums are either sickly or, sometimes, what is still worse, inclined
to some abnormal vice or other. Why do not these healing "guides," who
make their mediums play the therapeutists and thaumaturgists to others,
give them the boon of robust physical vigor? The ancient thaumaturgist
and apostle, generally, if not invariably, enjoyed good health; their
magnetism never conveyed to the sick patient any physical or moral
taint; and they never were

###### <span id="page_491">p. 491</span>

accused of VAMPIRISM, which a spiritual paper very justly charges upon
some medium-healers. <span id="fr_685"></span>[\*](#fn_684)

If we apply the above law of mediumship and mediatorship to the subject
of levitation, with which we opened our present discussion, what shall
we find? Here we have a medium and one of the mediator-class
levitated--the former at a seance, the latter at prayer, or in ecstatic
contemplation. The medium being passive must *be lifted* up; the
ecstatic being active must levitate himself. The former is elevated by
his familiar spirits--whoever or whatever they may be--the latter, by
the power of his own aspiring soul. Can both be indiscriminately termed

mediums?

But nevertheless we may be answered that the same phenomena are produced
in the presence of a modern medium as of an ancient saint. Undoubtedly;
and so it was in the days of Moses; for we believe that the triumph
claimed for him in *Exodus* over Pharaoh's magicians is simply a
national boast on the part of the "chosen people." That the power which
produced his phenomena produced that of the magicians also, who were
moreover the first tutors of Moses and instructed him in their "wisdom,"
is most probable. But even in those days they seemed to have well
appreciated the difference between phenomena apparently identical. The
tutelar national deity of the Hebrews (who is *not* the Highest
Father) <span id="fr_686"></span>[\*\*](#fn_685) forbids expressly, in
*Deuteronomy*, <span id="fr_687"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_686) his people "to
learn to do after the abominations of other nations. . . . To pass
through *the fire,* or use *divination,* or be an observer of times or
an enchanter, or a *witch*, or a consulter with *familiar spirits,* or a
necromancer."

What difference was there then between all the above-enumerated
phenomena as performed by the "other nations" and when enacted by the
prophets? Evidently, there was some good reason for it; and we find it
in John's *First Epistle,* iv., which says: "believe not *every* spirit,
but *try* the spirits, whether they are of God, because many false
prophets are gone out into the world."

###### <span id="page_492">p. 492</span>

The only standard within the reach of spiritualists and present-day
mediums by which they can *try* the spirits, is to judge 1, by their
actions and speech; 2, by their readiness to manifest themselves; and 3,
whether the object in view is worthy of the apparition of a
"*disembodied*" spirit, or can excuse any one for disturbing *the dead.*
Saul was on the eve of destruction, himself and his sons, yet Samuel
inquired of him: "Why hast thou *disquieted* me, to bring me up?" <span
id="fr_688"></span>[\*](#fn_687) But the "intelligences" that visit the
circle-rooms, come at the beck of every trifler who would while away a
tedious hour.

In the number of the *London* *Spiritualist* for July 14th, we find a
long article, in which the author seeks to prove that "the marvelous
wonders of the present day, which belong to so-called modern
spiritualism, are identical in character with the experiences of the
patriarchs and apostles of old."

We are forced to contradict, point-blank, such an assertion. They are
identical only so far that the same forces and occult powers of nature
produce them. But though these powers and forces may be, and most
assuredly are, all directed by unseen intelligences, the latter differ
more in essence, character, and purposes than mankind itself, composed,
as it now stands, of white, black, brown, red, and yellow men, and
numbering saints and criminals, geniuses and idiots. The writer may
avail himself of the services of a tame orang-outang or a South Sea
islander; but the fact alone that he has a servant makes neither the
latter nor himself identical with Aristotle and Alexander. The writer
compares Ezekiel "lifted up" and taken into the "east gate of the Lord's
house," <span id="fr_689"></span>[\*\*](#fn_688) with the levitations of
certain mediums, and the three Hebrew youths in the "burning fiery
furnace," with other *fire-proof* mediums; the John King "spirit-light"
is assimilated with the "burning lamp" of Abraham; and finally, after
many such comparisons, the case of the Davenport Brothers, released from
the jail of Oswego, is confronted with that of Peter delivered from
prison by the "angel of the Lord"!

Now, except the story of Saul and Samuel, there is not a case instanced
in the *Bible* of the "*evocation* of the dead." As to being lawful, the
assertion is contradicted by every prophet. Moses issues a decree of
death against those who raise the spirits of the dead, the
"necromancers." Nowhere throughout the *Old Testament,* nor in Homer,
nor Virgil is communion with the dead termed otherwise than necromancy.

###### <span id="page_493">p. 493</span>

Philo Judaeus makes Saul say, that if he banishes from the land every
diviner and necromancer his name will survive him.

One of the greatest reasons for it was the doctrine of the ancients,
that no soul from the "abode of the blessed" will return to earth,
unless, indeed, upon rare occasions its apparition might be required to
accomplish some great object in view, and so bring benefit upon
humanity. In this latter instance the "soul" has no need to be *evoked.*
It sent its portentous message either by an evanescent *simulacrum* of
itself, or through *messengers,* who could appear in *material* form,
and personate faithfully the departed. The souls that could so easily be
evoked were deemed neither safe nor useful to commune with. They were
the souls, or *larvae* rather, from the infernal region of the
limbo--the *sheol,* the region known by the kabalists as the eighth
sphere, but far different from the orthodox Hell or Hades of the ancient
mythologists. Horace describes this evocation and the ceremonial
accompanying it, and Maimonides gives us particulars of the Jewish rite.
Every necromantic ceremony was performed on high places and hills, and
blood was used for the purpose of placating these human *ghouls.* <span
id="fr_690"></span>[\*](#fn_689)

"I cannot prevent the witches from picking up their bones," says the
poet. "See the blood they pour in the ditch to allure the *souls* that
will utter their oracles!" <span id="fr_691"></span>[\*\*](#fn_690)
"*Cruor in fossam confusus, ut inde manes elicirent, animas responsa
daturas*."

"The *souls*," says Porphyry, "prefer, to everything else,
*freshly-spilt blood,* which seems for a short time to restore to them
some of the faculties of life." <span
id="fr_692"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_691)

As for materializations, they are many and various in the sacred
records. But, were they effected under the same conditions as at modern
seances? Darkness, it appears, was not required in those days of
patriarchs and magic powers. The three angels who appeared to Abraham
drank in the full blaze of the sun, for "he sat in the tent-door *in the
heat of the day*," <span id="fr_693"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_692) says the
book of *Genesis.* The spirits of Elias and Moses appeared equally in
daytime, as it is not probable that Christ and the Apostles would be
climbing a high mountain during the night. Jesus is represented as
having appeared to Mary Magdalene in the garden in the early morning; to
the Apostles, at three distinct times, and generally by day; once "when
the morning was come" (*John* xxi. 4). Even when the ass of Balaam saw
the "materialized" angel, it was in the full light of noon.

We are fully prepared to agree with the writer in question, that we find
in the life of Christ--and we may add in the *Old Testament*, too--

###### <span id="page_494">p. 494</span>

"an uninterrupted record of spiritualistic manifestations," but nothing
*mediumistic,* of a physical character though, if we except the visit of
Saul to Sedecla, the Obeah woman of En-Dor. This is a distinction of
vital importance.

True, the promise of the Master was clearly stated: "Aye, and greater
works than these shall ye do"--works of mediatorship. According to Joel,
the time would come when there would be an outpouring of the divine
spirit: "Your sons and your daughters," says he, "shall prophesy, your
old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions." The time
has come and they do all these things now; Spiritualism has its seers
and martyrs, its prophets and healers. Like Moses, and David, and
Jehoram, there are mediums who have direct writings from genuine
planetary and human spirits; and the best of it brings the mediums no
pecuniary recompense. The greatest friend of the cause in France,
Leymarie, now languishes in a prison-cell, and, as he says with touching
pathos, is "no longer a man, but *a number*" on the prison register.

There are a few, a very few, orators on the spiritualistic platform who
speak by inspiration, and if they know what is said at all they are in
the condition described by Daniel: "And I retained no strength. Yet
heard I the voice of his words: and when I heard the voice of his words,
then was I in a deep sleep." <span id="fr_694"></span>[\*](#fn_693) And
there are mediums, these whom we have spoken of, for whom the prophecy
in Samuel might have been written: "The spirit of the Lord will come
upon thee, thou shalt prophesy with them, and shalt be *turned into
another man*." <span id="fr_695"></span>[\*\*](#fn_694) But where, in
the long line of Bible-wonders, do we read of flying guitars, and
tinkling tambourines, and jangling bells being offered in pitch-dark
rooms as evidences of immortality?

When Christ was accused of casting out devils by the power of Beelzebub,
he denied it, and sharply retorted by asking, "By whom do your sons or
disciples cast them out?" Again, spiritualists affirm that Jesus was a
medium, that he was controlled by one or many spirits; but when the
charge was made to him direct he said that he was nothing of the kind.
"Say we not well, that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil?"
daimonion, an Obeah, or familiar spirit in the Hebrew text. Jesus
answered, "I have not a devil." <span
id="fr_696"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_695)

The writer from whom we have above quoted, attempts also a parallel
between the aerial flights of Philip and Ezekiel and of Mrs. Guppy and
other modern mediums. He is ignorant or oblivious of the fact that

###### <span id="page_495">p. 495</span>

while levitation occurred as an effect in both classes of cases, the
producing causes were totally dissimilar. The nature of this difference
we have adverted to already. Levitation may be produced consciously or
unconsciously to the subject. The juggler determines beforehand that he
will be levitated, for how long a time, and to what height; he regulates
the occult forces accordingly. The fakir produces the same effect by the
power of his aspiration and will, and, except when in the ecstatic
state, keeps control over his movements. So does the priest of Siam,
when, in the sacred pagoda, he mounts fifty feet in the air with taper
in hand, and flits from idol to idol, lighting up the niches,
self-supported, and stepping as confidently as though he were upon solid
ground. This, persons have seen and testify to. The officers of the
Russian squadron which recently circumnavigated the globe, and was
stationed for a long time in Japanese waters, relate the fact that,
besides many other marvels, they saw jugglers walk in mid-air from
tree-top to tree-top, without the slightest support. <span
id="fr_697"></span>[\*](#fn_696) They also saw the pole and
tape-climbing feats, described by Colonel Olcott in his *People from the
Other World,* and which have been so much called in question by certain
spiritualists and mediums whose zeal is greater than their learning. The
quotations from Col. Yule and other writers, elsewhere given in this
work, seem to place the matter beyond doubt that these effects are
produced.

Such phenomena, when occurring apart from religious rites, in India,
Japan, Thibet, Siam, and other "heathen" countries, phenomena a hundred
times more various and astounding than ever seen in civilized Europe or
America, are never attributed to the spirits of the departed. The Pitris
have naught to do with such public exhibitions. And we have but to
consult the list of the principal demons or elemental spirits to find
that their very names indicate their professions, or, to express it
clearly, the tricks to which each variety is best adapted. So we have
the Madan, a generic name indicating wicked elemental spirits, half
brutes, half monsters, for Madan signifies one that looks like a cow. He
is the friend of the malicious sorcerers and helps them to effect their
evil purposes of revenge by striking men and cattle with sudden illness
and death.

The *Shudala-Madan,* or graveyard fiend, answers to our ghouls. He
delights where crime and murder were committed, near burial-spots and
places of execution. He helps the juggler in all the fire-phenomena as
well as Kutti Shattan, the little juggling imps. Shudala, they say, is a
half-fire, half-water demon, for he received from Siva permission to
assume any shape he chose, transform one thing into another; and when

###### <span id="page_496">p. 496</span>

he is not in fire, he is in water. It is he who blinds people "to see
that which *they do not see*." *Shula Madan,* is another mischievous
spook. He is the *furnace*-demon, skilled in pottery and baking. If you
keep friends with him, he will not injure you; but woe to him who incurs
his wrath. Shula likes compliments and flattery, and as he generally
keeps underground it is to him that a juggler must look to help him
raise a tree from a seed in a quarter of an hour and ripen its fruit.

Kumil-Madan, is the *undine* proper. He is an elemental spirit of the
water, and his name means *blowing like a bubble.* He is a very merry
imp; and will help a friend in anything relative to his department; he
will shower rain and show the future and the present to those who will
resort to hydromancy or divination by water.

Poruthu Madan, is the "wrestling" demon; he is the strongest of all; and
whenever there are feats shown in which physical force is required, such
as *levitations,* or taming of wild animals, he will help the performer
by keeping him above the soil or will overpower a wild beast before the
tamer has time to utter his incantation. So, every "physical
manifestation" has its own class of elemental spirits to superintend
them.

Returning now to levitations of human bodies and inanimate bodies, in
modern circle-rooms, we must refer the reader to the Introductory
chapter of this work. (See "AEthrobasy.") In connection with the story
of Simon the Magician, we have shown the explanation of the ancients as
to how the levitation and transport of heavy bodies could be produced.
We will now try and suggest a hypothesis for the same in relation to
*mediums, i.e.,* persons supposed to be unconscious at the moment of the
phenomena, which the believers claim to be produced by disembodied
"spirits." We need not repeat that which has been sufficiently explained
before. Conscious aethrobasy under magneto-electrical conditions is
possible only to *adepts* who can never be overpowered by an influence
foreign to themselves, but remain sole masters of their WILL.

Thus levitation, we will say, must always occur in obedience to law--a
law as inexorable as that which makes a body unaffected by it remain
upon the ground. And where should we seek for that law outside of the
theory of molecular attraction? It is a scientific hypothesis that the
form of force which first brings nebulous or star matter together into a
whirling vortex is electricity; and modern chemistry is being totally
reconstructed upon the theory of electric polarities of atoms. The
waterspout, the tornado, the whirlwind, the cyclone, and the hurricane,
are all doubtless the result of electrical action. This phenomenon has
been studied from above as well as from below, observations having been
made both upon the ground and from a balloon floating above the vortex
of a thunder-storm.

###### <span id="page_497">p. 497</span>

Observe now, that this force, under the conditions of a dry and warm
atmosphere at the earth's surface, can accumulate a dynamic energy
capable of lifting enormous bodies of water, of compressing the
particles of atmosphere, and of sweeping across a country, tearing up
forests, lifting rocks, and scattering buildings in fragments over the
ground. Wild's electric machine causes induced currents of
magneto-electricity so enormously powerful as to produce light by which
small print may be read, on a dark night, at a distance of two miles
from the place where it is operating.

As long ago as the year 1600, Gilbert, in his *De Magnete,* enunciated
the principle that the globe itself is one vast magnet, and some of our
advanced electricians are now beginning to realize that man, too,
possesses this property, and that the mutual attractions and repulsions
of individuals toward each other may at least in part find their
explanation in this fact. The experience of attendants upon
spiritualistic circles corroborates this opinion. Says Professor
Nicholas Wagner, of the University of St. Petersburg: "Heat, or *perhaps
the electricity of the investigators* sitting in the circle, must
concentrate itself in the table and gradually develop into motions. At
the same time, or a little afterward, the psychical force unites to
assist the two other powers. By *psychical force,* I mean that which
evolves itself out of all the other forces of our organism. The
combination into one general something of several separate forces, and
capable, when combined, of manifesting itself in degree, according to
the individuality." The progress of the phenomena he considers to be
affected by the cold or the dryness of the atmosphere. Now, remembering
what has been said as to the subtler forms of energy which the
Hermetists have proved to exist in nature, and accepting the hypothesis
enunciated by Mr. Wagner that "the power which calls out these
manifestations is centred in the mediums," may not the medium, by
furnishing in himself a nucleus as perfect in its way as the system of
permanent steel magnets in Wild's battery, produce astral currents
sufficiently strong to lift in their vortex a body even as ponderable as
a human form? It is not necessary that the object lifted should assume a
gyratory motion, for the phenomenon we are observing, unlike the
whirlwind, is directed by an intelligence, which is capable of keeping
the body to be raised within the ascending current and preventing its
rotation.

Levitation in this case would be a purely mechanical phenomenon. The
inert body of the passive medium is lifted by a vortex created either by
the elemental spirits--possibly, in some cases, by human ones, and
sometimes through purely morbific causes, as in the cases of Professor
Perty's sick somnambules. The levitation of the adept is, on the
contrary, a magneto-electric effect, as we have just stated. He has made

###### <span id="page_498">p. 498</span>

the polarity of his body opposite to that of the atmosphere, and
identical with that of the earth; hence, attractable by the former,
retaining his consciousness the while. A like phenomenal levitation is
possible, also, when disease has changed the corporeal polarity of a
patient, as disease always does in a greater or lesser degree. But, in
such case, the lifted person would not be likely to remain conscious.

In one series of observations upon whirlwinds, made in 1859, in the
basin of the Rocky Mountains, "a newspaper was caught up . . . to a
height of some two hundred feet; and there it oscillated to and fro
across the track for some considerable time, whilst accompanying the
onward motion." <span id="fr_698"></span>[\*](#fn_697) Of course
scientists will say that a parallel cannot be instituted between this
case and that of human levitation; that no vortex can be formed in a
room by which a medium could be raised; but this is a question of astral
light and spirit, which have their own peculiar dynamical laws. Those
who understand the latter, affirm that a concourse of people laboring
under mental excitement, which reacts upon the physical system, throw
off electromagnetic emanations, which, when sufficiently intense, can
throw the whole circumambient atmosphere into perturbation. Force enough
may actually be generated to create an electrical vortex, sufficiently
powerful to produce many a strange phenomenon. With this hint, the
whirling of the dervishes, and the wild dances, swayings,
gesticulations, music, and shouts of devotees will be understood as all
having a common object in view--namely, the creation of such astral
conditions as favor psychological and physical phenomena. The
*rationale* of religious revivals will also be better understood if this
principle is borne in mind.

But there is still another point to be considered. If the medium is a
nucleus of magnetism and a conductor of that force, he would be subject
to the same laws as a metallic conductor, and be attracted to his
magnet. If, therefore, a magnetic centre of the requisite power was
formed directly over him by the unseen powers presiding over the
manifestations, why should not his body be lifted toward it, despite
terrestrial gravity? We know that, in the case of a medium who is
unconscious of the progress of the operation, it is necessary to first
admit the fact of such an intelligence, and next, the possibility of the
experiment being conducted as described; but, in view of the
multifarious evidences offered, not only in

###### <span id="page_499">p. 499</span>

our own researches, which claim no authority, but also in those of Mr.
Crookes, and a great number of others, in many lands and at different
epochs, we shall not turn aside from the main object of offering this
hypothesis in the profitless endeavor to strengthen a case which
scientific men will not consider with patience, even when sanctioned by
the most distinguished of their own body.

As early as 1836, the public was apprised of certain phenomena which
were as extraordinary, if not more so than all the manifestations which
are produced in our days. The famous correspondence between two
well-known mesmerizers, Deleuze and Billot, was published in France, and
the wonders discussed for a time in every society. Billot firmly
believed in the apparition of spirits, for, as he says, he has both
seen, heard, and felt them. Deleuze was as much convinced of this truth
as Billot, and declared that man's immortality and the return of the
dead, or rather of their shadows, was the best demonstrated fact in his
opinion. Material objects were brought to him from distant places by
invisible hands, and he communicated on most important subjects with the
invisible intelligences. "In regard to this," he remarks, "I cannot
conceive how spiritual beings are able to carry material objects." More
skeptical, less intuitional than Billot, nevertheless, he agreed with
the latter that "the question of spiritualism is not one of opinions,
but *of facts*."

Such is precisely the conclusion to which Professor Wagner, of St.
Petersburg, was finally driven. In the second pamphlet on *Mediumistic
Phenomena,* issued by him in December, 1875, he administers the
following rebuke to Mr. Shkliarevsky, one of his materialistic critics:
"So long as the spiritual manifestations were weak and sporadic, we men
of science could afford to deceive ourselves with theories of
unconscious muscular action, or unconscious cerebrations of our brains,
and tumble the rest into one heap as juggleries. . . . But now these
wonders have grown too striking; the spirits show themselves in the
shape of tangible, materialized forms, which can be touched and handled
at will by any learned skeptic like yourself, and even be weighed and
measured. We can struggle no longer, for every resistance becomes
absurd--it threatens lunacy. Try then to realize this, and to humble
yourself before the possibility of impossible facts."

Iron is only magnetized temporarily, but steel permanently, by contact
with the lodestone. Now steel is but iron which has passed through a
carbonizing process, and yet that process has quite changed the nature
of the metal, so far as its relations to the lodestone are concerned. In
like manner, it may be said that the medium is but an ordinary person
who is magnetized by influx from the astral light; and as the permanence

###### <span id="page_500">p. 500</span>

of the magnetic property in the metal is measured by its more or less
steel-like character, so may we not say that the intensity and
permanency of mediumistic power is in proportion to the saturation of
the medium with the magnetic or astral force?

This condition of saturation may be congenital, or brought about in
anyone of these ways:--by the mesmeric process; by spirit-agency; or by
self-will. Moreover, the condition seems hereditable, like any other
physical or mental peculiarity; many, and we may even say most great
mediums having had mediumship exhibited in some form by one or more
progenitors. Mesmeric subjects easily pass into the higher forms of
clairvoyance and mediumship (now so called), as Gregory, Deleuze,
Puysegur, Du Potet, and other authorities inform us. As to the process
of self-saturation, we have only to turn to the account of the priestly
devotees of Japan, Siam, China, India, Thibet, and Egypt, as well as of
European countries, to be satisfied of its reality. Long persistence in
a fixed determination to subjugate matter, brings about a condition in
which not only is one insensible to external impressions, but even death
itself may be simulated, as we have already seen. The ecstatic so
enormously reinforces his will-power, as to draw into himself, as into a
vortex, the potencies resident in the astral light to supplement his own
natural store.

The phenomena of mesmerism are explicable upon no other hypothesis than
the projection of a current of force from the operator into the subject.
If a man can project this force by an exercise of the will, what
prevents his attracting it toward himself by reversing the current?
Unless, indeed, it be urged that the force is generated within his body
and cannot be attracted from any supply without. But even under such an
hypothesis, if he can generate a superabundant supply to saturate
another person, or even an inanimate object by his will, why cannot he
generate it in excess for self-saturation?

In his work on *Anthropology,* Professor J. R. Buchanan notes the
tendency of the natural gestures to follow the direction of the
phrenological organs; the attitude of combativeness being downward and
backward; that of hope and spirituality upward and forward; that of
firmness upward and backward; and so on. The adepts of Hermetic science
know this principle so well that they explain the levitation of their
own bodies, whenever it happens unawares, by saying that the thought is
so intently fixed upon a point above them, that when the body is
thoroughly imbued with the astral influence, it follows the mental
aspiration and rises into the air as easily as a cork held beneath the
water rises to the surface when its buoyancy is allowed to assert
itself. The giddiness felt by certain persons when standing upon the
brink of a chasm is explained upon

###### <span id="page_501">p. 501</span>

the same principle. Young children, who have little or no active
imagination, and in whom experience has not had sufficient time to
develop fear, are seldom, if ever, giddy; but the adult of a certain
mental temperament, seeing the chasm and picturing in his imaginative
fancy the consequences of a fall, allows himself to be drawn by the
attraction of the earth, and *unless the spell of fascination* be
broken, his body will follow his thought to the foot of the precipice.

That this giddiness is purely a temperamental affair, is shown in the
fact that some persons never experience the sensation, and inquiry will
probably reveal the fact that such are deficient in the imaginative
faculty. We have a case in view--a gentleman who, in 1858, had so firm a
nerve that he horrified the witnesses by standing upon the coping of the
*Arc de Triomphe,* in Paris, with folded arms, and his feet half over
the edge; but, having since become short-sighted, was taken with a panic
upon attempting to cross a plank-walk over the courtyard of a hotel,
where the footway was more than two feet and a half wide, and there was
no danger. He looked at the flagging below, gave his fancy free play,
and would have fallen had he not quickly sat down.

It is a dogma of science that perpetual motion is impossible; it is
another dogma, that the allegation that the Hermetists discovered the
elixir of life, and that certain of them, by partaking of it, prolonged
their existence far beyond the usual term, is a superstitious absurdity.
And the claim that the baser metals have been transmuted into gold, and
that the universal solvent was discovered, excites only contemptuous
derision in a century which has crowned the edifice of philosophy with a
cope-stone of protoplasm. The first is declared a *physical
impossibility*; as much so, according to Babinet, the astronomer, as the
"levitation of an object without contact"; <span
id="fr_699"></span>[\*](#fn_698) the second, a physiological vagary
begotten of a disordered mind; the third, a chemical absurdity.

Balfour Stewart says that while the man of science cannot assert that
"he is intimately acquainted with all the forces of nature, and cannot
prove that perpetual motion is impossible; for, in truth, he knows very
little of these forces . . . he does think *that he has entered into the
spirit and design of nature,* and therefore he denies at once the
possibility of such a machine." <span id="fr_700"></span>[\*\*](#fn_699)
If he has discovered the design of nature, he certainly has not *the
spirit,* for he denies its existence in one sense; and denying spirit he
prevents that perfect understanding of universal law which would redeem
modern philosophy from its thousand mortifying dilemmas and mistakes. If
Professor B. Stewart's negation is founded

###### <span id="page_502">p. 502</span>

upon no better analogy than that of his French contemporary, Babinet, he
is in danger of a like humiliating catastrophe. The universe itself
illustrates the actuality of perpetual motion; and the atomic theory,
which has proved such a balm to the exhausted minds of our cosmic
explorers, is based upon it. The telescope searching through space, and
the microscope probing the mysteries of the little world in a drop of
water, reveal the same law in operation; and, as everything below is
like everything above, who would presume to say that when the
conservation of energy is better understood, and the two additional
forces of the kabalists are added to the catalogue of orthodox science,
it may not be discovered how to construct a machine which shall run
without friction and supply itself with energy in proportion to its
wastes? "Fifty years ago," says the venerable Mr. de Lara, "a Hamburg
paper, quoting from an English one an account of the opening of the
Manchester and Liverpool Railway, pronounced it a gross fabrication;
capping the climax by saying, 'even so far extends the credulity of the
English' "; the moral is apparent. The recent discovery of the compound
called METALLINE, by an American chemist, makes it appear probable that
friction can, in a large degree, be overcome. One thing is certain, when
a man shall have discovered the perpetual motion he will be able to
understand by analogy all the secrets of nature; progress in direct
ratio with resistance.

We may say the same of the elixir of life, by which is understood
physical life, the soul being of course deathless only by reason of its
divine immortal union with spirit. But *continual* or *perpetual* does
not mean endless. The kabalists have never claimed that either an
endless physical life or unending motion is possible. The Hermetic axiom
maintains that only the First Cause and its direct emanations, our
spirits (scintillas from the eternal central sun which will be
reabsorbed by it at the end of time) are incorruptible and eternal. But,
in possession of a knowledge of occult natural forces, yet undiscovered
by the materialists, they asserted that both physical life and
mechanical motion could be prolonged indefinitely. The philosophers'
stone had more than one meaning attached to its mysterious origin. Says
Professor Wilder: "The study of alchemy was even more universal than the
several writers upon it appear to have known, and was always the
auxiliary of, if not identical with, the occult sciences of magic,
necromancy, and astrology; probably from the same fact that they were
originally but forms of a spiritualism which was generally extant in all
ages of human history."

Our greatest wonder is, that the very men who view the human body simply
as a "digesting machine," should object to the idea that if some
equivalent for metalline could be applied between its molecules, it

###### <span id="page_503">p. 503</span>

should run without friction. Man's body is taken from the earth, or
dust, according to *Genesis;* which allegory bars the claims of modern
analysts to original discovery of the nature of the inorganic
constituents of human body. If the author of *Genesis* knew this, and
Aristotle taught the identity between the life-principle of plants,
animals, and men, our affiliation with mother earth seems to have been
settled long ago.

Elie de Beaumont has recently reasserted the old doctrine of Hermes that
there is a terrestrial circulation comparable to that of the blood of
man. Now, since it is a doctrine as old as time, that nature is
continually renewing her wasted energies by absorption from the source
of energy, why should the child differ from the parent? Why may not man,
by discovering the source and nature of this recuperative energy,
extract from the earth herself the juice or quintessence with which to
replenish his own forces? This *may* have been the great secret of the
alchemists. Stop the circulation of the terrestrial fluids and we have
stagnation, putrefaction, death; stop the circulation of the fluids in
man, and stagnation, absorption, calcification from old age, and death
ensue. If the alchemists had simply discovered some chemical compound
capable of keeping the channels of our circulation unclogged, would not
all the rest easily follow? And why, we ask, if the surface-waters of
certain mineral springs have such virtue in the cure of disease and the
restoration of physical vigor, is it illogical to say that if we could
get the first runnings from the alembic of nature in the bowels of the
earth, we might, perhaps, find that the fountain of youth was no myth
after all. Jennings asserts that the elixir was produced out of the
secret chemical laboratories of nature by some adepts; and Robert Boyle,
the chemist, mentions a medicated wine or cordial which Dr. Lefevre
tried with wonderful effect upon an old woman.

Alchemy is as old as tradition itself. "The first authentic record on
this subject," says William Godwin, "is an edict of Diocletian, about
300 years after Christ, ordering a diligent search to be made in Egypt
for all the ancient books which treated of the art of making gold and
silver, that they might be consigned to the flames. This edict
necessarily presumes a certain antiquity to the pursuit; and *fabulous*
history has recorded Solomon, Pythagoras, and Hermes among its
distinguished votaries."

And this question of transmutation--this alkahest or universal solvent,
which comes next after the elixir vitae in the order of the three
alchemical agents? Is the idea so absurd as to be totally unworthy of
consideration in this age of chemical discovery? How shall we dispose of
the historical anecdotes of men who actually made gold and gave it away,
and of those who testify to having seen them do it? Libavius,

###### <span id="page_504">p. 504</span>

Geberus, Arnoldus, Thomas Aquinas, Bernardus Comes, Joannes, Penotus,
Quercetanus Geber, the Arabian father of European alchemy, Eugenius
Philalethes, Baptista Porta, Rubeus, Dornesius, Vogelius, Irenaeus
Philaletha Cosmopolita, and many mediaeval alchemists and Hermetic
philosophers assert the fact. Must we believe them all visionaries and
lunatics, these otherwise great and learned scholars? Francesco Picus,
in his work *De Auro,* gives eighteen instances of gold being produced
in his presence by artificial means; and Thomas Vaughan, <span
id="fr_701"></span>[\*](#fn_700) going to a goldsmith to sell 1,200
marks worth of gold, when the man suspiciously remarked that the gold
was too pure to have ever come out of a mine, ran away, leaving the
money behind him. In a preceding chapter we have brought forward the
testimony of a number of authors to this effect.

Marco Polo tells us that in some mountains of Thibet, which he calls
*Chingintalas,* there are veins of the substance from which *Salamander*
is made: "For the real truth is, that the salamander is no beast, as
they allege in our parts of the world, but is a substance found in the
earth." <span id="fr_702"></span>[\*\*](#fn_701) Then he adds that a
Turk of the name of Zurficar, told him that he had been procuring
salamanders for the Great Khan, in those regions, for the space of three
years. "He said that the way they got them was by digging in that
mountain till they found a certain vein. The substance of this vein was
then taken and crushed, and, when so treated, it divides, as it were,
into fibres of wool, which they set forth to dry. When dry, these fibres
were pounded and washed, so as to leave only the fibres, like fibres of
wool. These were then spun. . . . When first made, these napkins are not
very white, but, by putting them into the fire for a while, they come
out as white as snow."

Therefore, as several authorities testify, this mineral substance is the
famous *Asbestos, <span id="fr_703"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_702)* which the
Rev. A. Williamson says is found in Shantung. But, it is not only
incombustible thread which is made from it. An oil, having several most
extraordinary properties, is extracted from it, and the secret of its
virtues remains with certain lamas and Hindu adepts. When rubbed into
the body, it leaves no external stain or mark, but, nevertheless, after
having been so rubbed, the part can be scrubbed with soap and hot or
cold water, without the virtue of the ointment being affected in the
least. The person so rubbed may boldly step into the hottest fire;
unless suffocated, he will remain uninjured. Another property of the oil
is that, when combined with *another substance,* that we are

###### <span id="page_505">p. 505</span>

not at liberty to name, and left stagnant under the rays of the moon, on
certain nights indicated by native astrologers, it will breed strange
creatures. Infusoria we may call them in one sense, but then these grow
and develop. Speaking of Kashmere, Marco Polo observes that they have an
astonishing acquaintance with the *devilries* of enchantment, insomuch
that they

make their idols to speak.

To this day, the greatest magian mystics of these regions may be found
in Kashmere. The various religious sects of this country were always
credited with preternatural powers, and were the resort of adepts and
sages. As Colonel Yule remarks, "Vambery tells us that even in our day,
the Kasmiri dervishes are preeminent among their Mahometan brethren for
*cunning,* secret arts, skill in exorcisms and magic." <span
id="fr_704"></span>[\*](#fn_703)

But, all modern chemists are not equally dogmatic in their negation of
the possibility of such a transmutation. Dr. Peisse, Desprez, and even
the all-denying Louis Figuier, of Paris, seem to be far from rejecting
the idea. Dr. Wilder says: "The possibility of reducing the elements to
their primal form, as they are supposed to have existed in the igneous
mass from which the earth-crust is believed to have been formed, is not
considered by physicists to be so absurd an idea as has been intimated.
There is a relationship between metals, often so close as to indicate an
original identity. Persons called alchemists may, therefore, have
devoted their energies to investigations into these matters, as
Lavoisier, Davy, Faraday, and others of our day have explained the
mysteries of chemistry." <span id="fr_705"></span>[\*\*](#fn_704) A
learned Theosophist, a practicing physician of this country, one who has
studied the occult sciences and alchemy for over thirty years, has
succeeded in reducing the elements to their primal form, and made what
is termed "the pre-Adamite earth." It appears in the form of an earthy
precipitate from pure water, which, on being disturbed, presents the
most opalescent and vivid colors.

"The secret," say the alchemists, as if enjoying the ignorance of the
uninitiated, "is an amalgamation of the salt, sulphur, and mercury
combined three times in Azoth, by a triple sublimation and a triple
fixation."

"How ridiculously absurd!" will exclaim a learned modern chemist. Well,
the disciples of the great Hermes understand the above as well as a
graduate of Harvard University comprehends the meaning of his Professor
of Chemistry, when the latter says: "With one hydroxyl group we can only
produce monatomic compounds; use two hydroxyl groups, and we can form
around the same skeleton a number of diatomic compounds.

###### <span id="page_506">p. 506</span>

. . . Attach to the nucleus three hydroxyl groups, and there result
triatomic compounds, among which is a very familiar substance

<span id="img_iu1-506a"></span> ![](img/iu1-506a.jpg)

> Glycerine."

"Attach thyself," says the alchemist, "to the four letters of the
tetragram disposed in the following manner:

<span id="img_iu1-506b"></span> ![](img/iu1-506b.jpg)

The letters of the ineffable name are there, although thou mayest not
discern them at first. The incommunicable axiom is kabalistically
contained therein, and this is what is called the magic arcanum by the
masters." The arcanum--the fourth emanation of the Akasa, the principle
of **L**IFE, which is represented in its third transmutation by the
fiery sun, the eye of the world, or of Osiris, as the Egyptians termed
it. An eye tenderly watching its youngest daughter, wife, and
sister--Isis, our mother earth. See what Hermes, the thrice-great
master, says of her: "Her father is the sun, her mother is the moon." It
attracts and caresses, and then repulses her by a projectile power. It
is for the Hermetic student to watch its motions, to catch its subtile
currents, to guide and direct them with the help of the *athanor,* the
Archimedean lever of the alchemist. What is this mysterious athanor? Can
the physicist tell us--he who sees and examines it daily? Aye, he sees;
but does he comprehend the secret-ciphered characters traced by the
divine finger on every sea-shell in the ocean's deep; on every leaf that
trembles in the breeze; in the bright star, whose stellar lines are in
his sight but so many more or less luminous lines of hydrogen?

"God *geometrizes*," said Plato. <span id="fr_706"></span>[\*](#fn_705)
"The laws of nature are the thoughts

###### <span id="page_507">p. 507</span>

of God"; exclaimed Oersted, 2,000 years later. "His thoughts are
immutable," repeated the solitary student of Hermetic lore, "therefore
it is in the perfect harmony and equilibrium of all things that we must
seek the truth." And thus, proceeding from the indivisible unity, he
found emanating from it two contrary forces, each acting through the
other and producing equilibrium, and the three were but one, the
Pythagorean Eternal Monad. The primordial point is a circle; the circle
squaring itself from the four cardinal points becomes a quaternary, the
perfect square, having at each of its four angles a letter of the
mirific name, the sacred TETRAGRAM. It is the four Buddhas who came and
have passed away; the Pythagorean *tetractys--*absorbed and resolved by
the one eternal NO-**BEING**.

Tradition declares that on the dead body of Hermes, at Hebron, was found
by an Isarim, an initiate, the tablet known as the *Smaragdine.* It
contains, in a few sentences, the essence of the Hermetic wisdom. To
those who read but with their bodily eyes, the precepts will suggest
nothing new or extraordinary, for it merely begins by saying that it
speaks not fictitious things, but that which is true and most certain.

"What is below is like that which is above, and what is above is similar
to that which is below to accomplish the wonders of one thing.

"As all things were produced by the mediation of one being, so all
things were produced from this one

by adaptation.

"Its father is the sun, its mother is the moon.

"It is the cause of all perfection throughout the whole earth.

"Its power is perfect

if it is changed into earth.

"Separate the earth from the fire, the subtile from the gross, acting
prudently and with judgment.

"Ascend with the greatest sagacity from the earth to heaven, and then
descend again to earth, and unite together the power of things inferior
and superior; thus you will possess the light of the whole world, and
all obscurity will fly away from you.

"This thing has more fortitude than fortitude itself, because *it will
overcome every subtile thing* and

penetrate every solid thing.

"By it the world was formed."

This mysterious thing is the universal, magical agent, the astral light,
which in the correlations of its forces furnishes the alkahest, the
philosopher's

###### <span id="page_508">p. 508</span>

stone, and the elixir of life. Hermetic philosophy names it Azoth, the
soul of the world, the celestial virgin, the great Magnes, etc., etc.
Physical science knows it as "heat, light, electricity, and magnetism";
but ignoring its spiritual properties and the occult potency contained
in ether, rejects everything it ignores. It explains and depicts the
crystalline forms of the snow-flakes, their modifications of an
hexagonal prism which shoot out an infinity of delicate needles. It has
studied them so perfectly that it has even calculated, with the most
wondrous mathematical precision, that all these needles diverge from
each other at an angle of 60°. Can it tell us as well the cause of this
"endless variety of the most exquisite forms," <span
id="fr_707"></span>[\*](#fn_706) each of which is a most perfect
geometrical figure in itself? These frozen, starlike and flower-like
blossoms, may be, for all materialistic science knows, a shower of
messages snowed by spiritual hands from the worlds above for spiritual
eyes below to read.

The philosophical cross, the two lines running in opposite directions,
the horizontal and the perpendicular, the height and breadth, which the
geometrizing Deity divides at the intersecting point, and which forms
the magical as well as the scientific quaternary, when it is inscribed
within the perfect square, is the basis of the occultist. Within its
mystical precinct lies the master-key which opens the door of every
science, physical as well as spiritual. It symbolizes our human
existence, for the circle of life circumscribes the four points of the
cross, which represent in succession birth, life, death, and
IMMORTALITY. Everything in this world is a trinity completed by the
quaternary, <span id="fr_708"></span>[\*\*](#fn_707) and every element
is divisible on this same principle. Physiology can divide man *ad
infinitum,* as physical science has divided the four primal and
principal elements in several dozens of others; she will not succeed in
changing either. Birth, life, and death will ever be a trinity completed
only at the cyclic end. Even were science to change the longed-for
immortality into annihilation, it still will ever be a quaternary; for
God "geometrizes!"

Therefore, perhaps alchemy will one day be allowed to talk of her salt,
mercury, sulphur, and azoth, her symbols and mirific letters, and
repeat, with the exponent of the *Synthesis of Organic Compounds,* that
"it must be remembered that the grouping is *no play of fancy,* and that
a good reason can be given for the position of every letter." <span
id="fr_709"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_708)

Dr. Peisse, of Paris, wrote in 1863, the following:

"One word, *a propos,* of alchemy. What must we think of the Hermetic

###### <span id="page_509">p. 509</span>

art? Is it lawful to believe that we can transmute metals, make gold?
Well, positive men, *esprits forts* of the nineteenth century, know that
Mr. Figuier, doctor of science and medicine, chemical analyst in the
School of Pharmacy, of Paris, does not wish to express himself upon the
subject. He doubts, he hesitates. He knows several alchemists (for there
are such) who, basing themselves upon modern chemical discoveries, and
especially on the singular circumstance of the equivalents demonstrated
by M. Dumas, pretend that metals are not simple bodies, true elements in
the absolute sense, and that in consequence they may be produced by the
process of decomposition. . . . This encourages me to take a step
further, and candidly avow that I would be only moderately surprised to
see some one make gold. I have only one reason to give, but sufficient
it seems; which is, that gold has not always existed; it has been made
by some chemical travail or other in the bosom of the fused matter of
our globe; <span id="fr_710"></span>[\*](#fn_709) perhaps some of it may
be even now in process of formation. The pretended simple bodies of our
chemistry are very probably secondary products, in the formation of the
terrestrial mass. It has been proved so with water, one of the most
respectable elements of ancient physics. To-day, we create water. Why
should we not make gold? An eminent experimentalist, Mr. Desprez, has
made the diamond. True, this diamond is only *a scientific diamond,* a
philosophical diamond, which would be worth nothing; but, no matter, my
position holds good. Besides, we are not left to simple conjectures.
There is a man living, who, in a paper addressed to the scientific
bodies, in 1853, has underscored these words--I have discovered the
method of producing artificial gold, I have made gold. This adept is Mr.
Theodore Tiffereau, ex-preparator of chemistry in the *Ecole
Professionelle et Superieure* of Nantes." <span
id="fr_711"></span>[\*\*](#fn_710) Cardinal de Rohan, the famous victim
of the diamond necklace conspiracy, testified that he had seen the Count
Cagliostro make both gold and diamonds. We presume that those who agree
with Professor T. Sterry Hunt, **F.R.S**., will have no patience with
the theory of Dr. Peisse, for they believe that all of our metalliferous
deposits are due to the action of organic life. And so, until they do
come to some composition of their differences, so as to let us know for
a certainty the nature of gold, and whether it is the product of
interior volcanic alchemy or surface segregation and filtration, we will
leave them to settle their quarrel between themselves, and give credit
meanwhile to the old philosophers.

###### <span id="page_510">p. 510</span>

Professor Balfour Stewart, whom no one would think of classing among
illiberal minds; who, with far more fairness and more frequently than
any of his colleagues admits the failings of modern science, shows
himself, nevertheless, as biassed as other scientists on this question.
Perpetual light being only another name for perpetual motion, he tells
us, and the latter being impossible because we have no means of
equilibrating the waste of combustible material, a Hermetic light is,
therefore, an impossibility. <span id="fr_712"></span>[\*](#fn_711)
Noting the fact that a "perpetual light was supposed to result from
*magical* powers," and remarking further that such a light is "certainly
not of this earth, where light and all other forms of superior energy
are essentially evanescent," this gentleman argues as though the
Hermetic philosophers had always claimed that the flame under discussion
was an ordinary earthly flame, resulting from the combustion of
luminiferous material. In this the philosophers have been constantly
misunderstood and misrepresented.

How many great minds--unbelievers from the start--after having studied
the "secret doctrine," have changed their opinions and found out how
mistaken they were. And how contradictory it seems to find one moment
Balfour Stewart quoting some philosophical morals of Bacon--whom he
terms the father of experimental science--and saying " . . . surely we
ought to learn a lesson from these remarks . . . and be very cautious
*before we dismiss any branch of knowledge* or train of thought as
essentially unprofitable," and then dismissing the next moment, as
*utterly impossible,* the claims of the alchemists! He shows Aristotle
as "entertaining the idea that light is not any body, or the emanation
of any body, and that therefore light is an energy or act"; and yet,
although the ancients were the first to show, through Demokritus, to
John Dalton the doctrine of atoms, and through Pythagoras and even the
oldest of the Chaldean oracles, that of ether as a universal agent,
their ideas, says Stewart, "were not prolific." He admits that they
"possessed great genius and intellectual power," but adds that "they
were deficient in physical conceptions, and, in consequence, their ideas
were not prolific." <span id="fr_713"></span>[\*\*](#fn_712)

The whole of the present work is a protest against such a loose way of
judging the ancients. To be thoroughly competent to criticise their
ideas, and assure one's self whether their ideas were distinct and
"appropriate to the facts," one must have sifted these ideas to the very
bottom. It is idle to repeat that which we have frequently said, and
that which every scholar ought to know; namely, that the quintessence of
their knowledge was in the hands of the priests, who never wrote them,
and in those of the "initiates" who, like Plato, *did not dare* write
them.

###### <span id="page_511">p. 511</span>

Therefore, those few speculations on the material and spiritual
universes, which they did put in writing, could not enable posterity to
judge them rightly, even had not the early Christian Vandals, the later
crusaders, and the fanatics of the middle ages destroyed three parts of
that which remained of the Alexandrian library and its later schools.
Professor Draper shows that the Cardinal Ximenes alone "delivered to the
flames in the squares of Granada, 80,000 Arabic manuscripts, many of
them translations of classical authors." In the Vatican libraries, whole
passages in the most rare and precious treatises of the ancients were
found erased and blotted out, for the sake of interlining them with
absurd psalmodies!

Who then, of those who turn away from the "secret doctrine" as being
"unphilosophical" and, therefore, unworthy of a scientific thought, has
a right to say that he studied the ancients; that he is aware of all
that they knew, and knowing now far more, knows also that they knew
little, if anything. This "secret doctrine" contains the alpha and the
omega of universal science; therein lies the corner and the keystone of
all the ancient and modern knowledge; and alone in this
"unphilosophical" doctrine remains buried the *absolute* in the
philosophy of the dark problems of life and death.

"The great energies of Nature are known to us only by their effects,"
said Paley. Paraphrasing the sentence, we will say that the great
achievements of the days of old are known to posterity only by their
effects. If one takes a book on alchemy, and sees in it the speculations
on gold and light by the brothers of the Rosie Cross, he will find
himself certainly startled, for the simple reason that he will not
understand them at all. "The Hermetic gold," he may read, "is the
outflow of the sunbeam, or of light suffused invisibly and magically
into the body of the world. Light is sublimated gold, rescued magically
by invisible stellar attraction, out of material depths. Gold is thus
the deposit of light, which of itself generates. Light in the celestial
world is subtile, vaporous, magically exalted gold, or '*spirit of
flame*.' Gold draws inferior natures in the metals, and intensifying and
multiplying, converts into itself." <span
id="fr_714"></span>[\*](#fn_713)

Nevertheless, facts are facts; and, as Billot says of spiritualism, we
will remark of occultism generally and of alchemy in particular--it is
not a matter of opinion but of *facts,* men of science call an
inextinguishable lamp an *impossibility,* but nevertheless persons in
our own age as well as in the days of ignorance and superstition have
found them burning bright in old vaults shut up for centuries; and other
persons there are who

###### <span id="page_512">p. 512</span>

possess the secret of keeping such fires for several ages. Men of
science say that ancient and modern spiritualism, magic, and mesmerism,
are charlatanry or delusion; but there are 800 millions on the face of
the globe, of perfectly sane men and women, who believe in all these.
Whom are we to credit?

"Demokritus," says Lucian, <span id="fr_715"></span>[\*](#fn_714)
"believed in no (miracles) . . . he applied himself to discover the
method by which the theurgists could produce them; in a word, his
philosophy brought him to the conclusion that magic was entirely
confined to the application and *the imitation* of the laws and the
works of nature."

Now, the opinion of the "laughing philosopher" is of the greatest
importance to us, since the Magi left by Xerxes, at Abdera, were his
instructors, and he had studied magic, moreover, for a considerably long
time with the Egyptian priests. <span id="fr_716"></span>[\*\*](#fn_715)
For nearly ninety years of the one hundred and nine of his life, this
great philosopher had made experiments, and noted them down in a book,
which, according to Petronius, <span
id="fr_717"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_716) *treated of nature--*facts that he
had verified himself. And we find him not only disbelieving in and
utterly rejecting *miracles,* but asserting that every one of those that
were authenticated by eye-witnesses, had, and could have taken place;
for all, even the most *incredible,* was produced according to the
"*hidden laws of nature*." <span id="fr_718"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_717)

"The day will never come, when any one of the propositions of Euclid
will be denied," <span id="fr_719"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_718) says
Professor Draper, exalting the Aristoteleans at the expense of the
Pythagoreans and Platonists. Shall we, in such a case, disbelieve a
number of well-informed authorities (Lempriere among others), who assert
that the fifteen books of the *Elements* are not to be wholly attributed
to Euclid; and that many of the most valuable truths and demonstrations
contained in them owe their existence to Pythagoras, Thales, and
Eudoxus? That Euclid, notwithstanding his genius, was *the first* who
reduced them to order, and only interwove theories of his own to render
the whole a complete and connected system of geometry? And if these
authorities are right, then it is again to that central sun of
metaphysical science--Pythagoras and his school, that the moderns are
indebted directly for such men as Eratosthenes, the world-famous
geometer and cosmographer, Archimedes, and even Ptolemy, notwithstanding
his obstinate errors. Were it not for the exact science of such men, and
for fragments of their works that they left us to base Galilean
speculations upon, the great priests of the nineteenth century

###### <span id="page_513">p. 513</span>

might find themselves, perhaps, still in the bondage of the Church; and
philosophizing, in 1876, on the Augustine and Bedean cosmogony, the
rotation of the canopy of heaven round the earth, and the majestic
flatness of the latter.

The nineteenth century seems positively doomed to humiliating
confessions. Feltre (Italy) erects a public statue "to *Panfilo
Castaldi, the illustrious inventor of movable printing types*," and adds
in its inscription the generous confession that Italy renders to him
"*this tribute of honor too long deferred*." But no sooner is the statue
placed, than the Feltreians are advised by Colonel Yule to "burn it *in
honest lime*." He proves that many a traveller besides Marco Polo had
brought home from China movable wooden types and specimens of Chinese
books, the entire text of which was printed with such wooden
blocks. <span id="fr_720"></span>[\*](#fn_719) We have seen in several
Thibetan lamaseries, where they have printing-offices, such blocks
preserved as curiosities. They are known to be of the greatest
antiquity, inasmuch as types were perfected, and the old ones abandoned
contemporaneously with the earliest records of Buddhistic lamaism.
Therefore, they must have existed in China before the Christian era.

Let every one ponder over the wise words of Professor Roscoe, in his
lecture on *Spectrum Analysis.* "The infant truths must be made useful.
Neither you nor I, perhaps, can see the *how* or the *when*, but that
the time may come at any moment, when the most obscure of nature's
secrets shall at once be employed for the benefit of mankind, no one who
knows anything of science, can for one instant doubt. Who could have
foretold that the discovery that a dead frog's legs jump when they are
touched by two different metals, should have led in a few short years to
the discovery of the electric telegraph?"

Professor Roscoe, visiting Kirchhoff and Bunsen when they were making
their great discoveries of the nature of the Fraunhoffer lines, says
that it *flashed* upon his mind at once that there is iron in the sun;
therein presenting one more evidence to add to a million predecessors,
that great discoveries usually come with a *flash,* and not by
induction. There are many more flashes in store for us. It may be found,
perhaps, that one of the last sparkles of modern science--the beautiful
green spectrum of silver--is nothing new, but was, notwithstanding the
paucity "and great inferiority of their optical instruments," well known
to the ancient chemists and physicists. Silver and green were associated
together as far back as the days of Hermes. Luna, or Astarte (the
Hermetic silver), is one of the two chief symbols of the Rosicrucians.
It is a Hermetic

###### <span id="page_514">p. 514</span>

axiom, that "the cause of the splendor and variety of colors lies deep
in the affinities of nature; and that there is a singular and mysterious
alliance between color and sound." The kabalists place their "middle
nature" in direct relation with the moon; and the green ray occupies the
centre point between the others, being placed in the middle of the
spectrum. The Egyptian priests chanted the *seven* vowels as a hymn
addressed to Serapis; <span id="fr_721"></span>[\*](#fn_720) and at the
sound of the *seventh* vowel, as at the "*seventh* ray" of the rising
sun, the statue of Memnon responded. Recent discoveries have proved the
wonderful properties of the blue-violet light--the *seventh* ray of the
prismatic spectrum, the most powerfully chemical of all, which
corresponds with the highest note in the musical scale. The Rosicrucian
theory, that the whole universe is a musical instrument, is the
Pythagorean doctrine of the music of the spheres. Sounds and colors are
all spiritual numerals; as the seven prismatic rays proceed from one
spot in heaven, so the seven powers of nature, each of them a number,
are the seven radiations of the Unity, the central, spiritual **S**UN.

"Happy is he who comprehends the spiritual numerals, and perceives their
mighty influence!" exclaims Plato. And happy, we may add, is he who,
treading the maze of force-correlations, does not neglect to trace them
to this invisible Sun!

Future experimenters will reap the honor of demonstrating that musical
tones have a wonderful effect upon the growth of vegetation. And with
the enunciation of this unscientific fallacy, we will close the chapter,
and proceed to remind the patient reader of certain things that the
ancients knew, and the moderns *think* they know.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_650"></span>[462:\*](iu012.htm#fr_651) See Eliphas Levi:
"La Science des Esprits."

<span id="fn_651"></span>[464:\*](iu012.htm#fr_652) Henry Maudsley:
"Body and Mind."

<span id="fn_652"></span>[464:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_653) Josiah Cooke, Jr.:
"The New Chemistry."

<span id="fn_653"></span>[465:\*](iu012.htm#fr_654) Henry Maudsley: "The
Limits of Philosophical Inquiry," p. 266.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[465:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_655) "Scientific
American," August 12, 1868.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[467:\*](iu012.htm#fr_656) Le Conte:
"Correlation of Vital with Chemical and Physical Forces."

<span id="fn_656"></span>[469:\*](iu012.htm#fr_657) The wood-apple.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[470:\*](iu012.htm#fr_658) Incorrect; the
Hindustani word for monkey is *rukh-charha*. Probably *chokra*, a little
native servant is meant.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[471:\*](iu012.htm#fr_659) "Book of Ser Marco
Polo," vol. i., pp. 306, 307.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[472:\*](iu012.htm#fr_660) Delrio: "Disquis.
Magic," pp. 34, 100.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[472:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_661) Col. H. Yule: "The
Book of Ser Marco Polo," vol. i., p. 308.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[474:\*](iu012.htm#fr_662) Edward Melton:
"Engelsch Edelmans, Zeldzaame en Gedenkwaardige Zee en Land Reizen,
etc.," p. 468. Amsterdam, 1702.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[474:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_663) "Memoirs of the
Emperor Jahangire," pp. 99, 102.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[475:\*](iu012.htm#fr_664) J. Hughes Bennett:
"Text Book of Physiology," Lippincott's American Edition, pp. 37-50.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[475:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_665) "Curiosites
Inouies."

<span id="fn_665"></span>[476:\*](iu012.htm#fr_666) "Thoughts on the
Birth and Generation of Things."

<span id="fn_666"></span>[476:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_667) C. Crowe:
"Night-Side of Nature," p. 111.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[476:\*\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_668) Pliny: "Hist.
Nat.," vii., c. 52; and Plutarch: "Discourse concerning Socrates'
Daemon," 22.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[477:\*](iu012.htm#fr_669) "De Res. Var.," v.
iii., i., viii., c. 43. Plutarch: "Discourse concerning Socrates'
Daemon," 22.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[477:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_670) Nasse:
"Zeitschrift fur Psychische Aerzte," 1820.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[477:\*\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_671) Osborne: "Camp
and Court of Rundjit Singh"; Braid: "On Trance."

<span id="fn_671"></span>[478:\*](iu012.htm#fr_672) Mrs. Catherine
Crowe, in her "Night-Side of Nature," p. 118, gives us the particulars
of a similar burial of a fakir, in the presence of General Ventura,
together with the Maharajah, and many of his Sirdars. The political
agent at Loodhiana was "present when he was disinterred, ten months
after he had been buried." The coffin, or box, containing the fakir
"being buried in a vault, the earth was thrown over it and trod down,
after which a crop of barley was sown on the spot, and sentries placed
to watch it. "The Maharajah, however, was so skeptical that in spite of
all <span id="page_479">p. 479</span> these precautions, he had him,
twice in the ten months, dug up and examined, and each time he was found
to be *exactly in the same state* as when they had shut him up."

<span id="fn_672"></span>[479:\*](iu012.htm#fr_673) Todd: Appendix to
"Occult Science," vol. i.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[479:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_674) "A Cornel. Cels.,"
lib. ii., cap. vi.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[479:\*\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_675) "Hist. Nat.,"
lib. vii., cap. lii.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[479:\*\*\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_676) "Morning
Herald," July 21, 1836.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[480:\*](iu012.htm#fr_677) "La Science des
Esprits."

<span id="fn_677"></span>[481:\*](iu012.htm#fr_678) "Vit. Apollon.
Tyan.," lib. iv., ch. xvi.

<span id="fn_678"></span>[481:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_679) Salverte:
"Sciences Occultes," vol. ii.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[481:\*\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_680) "La Science des
Esprits."

<span id="fn_680"></span>[482:\*](iu012.htm#fr_681) It would be
beneficial to humanity were our modern physicians possessed of the same
inestimable faculty; for then we would have on record less horrid deaths
*after* inhumation. Mrs. Catherine Crowe, in the "Night-Side of Nature,"
records in the chapter on "Cases of Trances" *five* such cases, in
England alone, and during the present century. Among them is Dr. Walker
of Dublin and a Mr. S----, whose stepmother was accused of poisoning
him, and who, upon being disinterred, was found lying on his face.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[486:\*](iu012.htm#fr_682) A. Wilder:
"Neo-platonism and Alchemy."

<span id="fn_682"></span>[489:\*](iu012.htm#fr_683) Iamblichus was the
founder of the Neo-platonic theurgy.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[489:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_684) See the "Sketch of
the Eclectic Philosophy of the Alexandrian School."

<span id="fn_684"></span>[491:\*](iu012.htm#fr_685) See "Medium and
Daybreak," July 7, 1876, p. 428.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[491:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_686) In Volume II., we
will distinctly prove that the *Old Testament* mentions the worship of
more than one god by the Israelites. The El-Shadi of Abraham and Jacob
was not the Jehovah of Moses, or the Lord God worshipped by them for
forty years in the wilderness. And the God of Hosts of Amos is not, if
we are to believe his own words, the Mosaic God, the Sinaitic deity, for
this is what we read: "I hate, I despise your feast-days . . . your
meat-offerings, I will not accept them. . . . Have ye offered unto *me*
sacrifices and offerings in the wilderness forty years, O house of
Israel? . . . No, but *ye have borne the tabernacle of your Moloch and
Chiun* (Saturn), your images, the star of your god, which ye made to
yourselves. . . . Therefore, will I cause you to go into captivity . . .
saith the *Lord, whose name is The God of hosts*" (Amos v. 21-27).

<span id="fn_686"></span>[491:\*\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_687) Chapter xviii.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[492:\*](iu012.htm#fr_688) This word "*up*"
from the spirit of a prophet whose abode ought certainly to be in heaven
and who therefore ought to have said "to bring me down," is very
suggestive in itself to a Christian who locates paradise and hell at two
opposite points.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[492:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_689) Ezekiel iii.
12-14.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[493:\*](iu012.htm#fr_690) William Howitt:
"History of the Supernatural," vol. ii., ch. i.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[493:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_691) Lib. i., Sat. 8.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[493:\*\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_692) Porphyry: "Of
Sacrifices."

<span id="fn_692"></span>[493:\*\*\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_693) Genesis
xviii., i.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[494:\*](iu012.htm#fr_694) Daniel x. 8.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[494:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_695) I Samuel, x. 6.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[494:\*\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_696) Gospel according
to John vii. 20.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[495:\*](iu012.htm#fr_697) Our informant, who
was an eye-witness, is Mr. N----ff of St. Petersburg, who was attached
to the flag-ship *Almaz*, if we are not mistaken.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[498:\*](iu012.htm#fr_698) "What forces were in
operation to cause this oscillation of the newspaper?" asks J. W.
Phelps, who quotes the case--"These were the rapid upward motion of
heated air, the downward motion of cold air, the translatory motion of
the surface breeze, and the circular motion of the whirlwind. But how
could these combine so as to produce the oscillation?" (Lecture on
"Force Electrically Explained.")

<span id="fn_698"></span>[501:\*](iu012.htm#fr_699) "Revue des Deux
Mondes," p. 414, 1858.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[501:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_700) "Conservation of
Energy," p. 140.

<span id="fn_700"></span>[504:\*](iu012.htm#fr_701) Eugenius
Philalethes.

<span id="fn_701"></span>[504:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_702) "Book of Ser Marco
Polo," vol. i., p. 215.

<span id="fn_702"></span>[504:\*\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_703) See Sage's
"Dictionnaire des Tissus," vol. ii., pp. 1-12.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[505:\*](iu012.htm#fr_704) "Book of Ser Marco
Polo," vol. i., p. 230.

<span id="fn_704"></span>[505:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_705) "Alchemy, or the
Hermetic Philosophy," p. 25.

<span id="fn_705"></span>[506:\*](iu012.htm#fr_706) See Plutarch:
"Symposiacs," viii. 2. "Diogenianas began and said: 'Let us admit Plato
to the conference and inquire upon what account he says--supposing it to
be <span id="page_507">p. 507</span> his sentence--that *God always
plays the geometer*.' I said: 'This sentence was not plainly set down in
any of his books; yet there are good arguments that it is his, and it is
very much like his expression.' Tyndares presently subjoined: 'He
praises geometry as a science that takes off men from sensible objects,
and makes them apply themselves to the intelligible and Eternal
Nature--the contemplation of which is the end of philosophy, as a view
of the mysteries of initiation into holy rites.' "

<span id="fn_706"></span>[508:\*](iu012.htm#fr_707) Prof. Ed. L.
Youmans: "Descriptive Chemistry."

<span id="fn_707"></span>[508:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_708) In ancient nations
the Deity was a trine supplemented by a goddess--the *arba-il,* or
fourfold God.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[508:\*\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_709) Josiah Cooke:
"The New Chemistry."

<span id="fn_709"></span>[509:\*](iu012.htm#fr_710) Prof. Sterry Hunt's
theory of metalliferous deposits contradicts this; but is it right?

<span id="fn_710"></span>[509:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_711) Peisse: "La
Medecine et les Medecins," vol. i., pp. 59, 283.

<span id="fn_711"></span>[510:\*](iu012.htm#fr_712) "The Conservation of
Energy."

<span id="fn_712"></span>[510:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_713) Ibid., p. 136.

<span id="fn_713"></span>[511:\*](iu012.htm#fr_714) Extracts from
Robertus di Fluctibus in "The Rosicrucians."

<span id="fn_714"></span>[512:\*](iu012.htm#fr_715) "Philopseud."

<span id="fn_715"></span>[512:\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_716) Diog. Laert. in
"Demokrit. Vitae."

<span id="fn_716"></span>[512:\*\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_717) "Satyric. Vitrus
D. Architect," lib. ix., cap. iii.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[512:\*\*\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_718) Pliny: "Hist.
Nat."

<span id="fn_718"></span>[512:\*\*\*\*\*](iu012.htm#fr_719) "Conflict
between Religion and Science."

<span id="fn_719"></span>[513:\*](iu012.htm#fr_720) "Book of Ser Marco
Polo," vol. i., pp. 133-135.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[514:\*](iu012.htm#fr_721) "Dionysius of
Halicarnassus."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](iu013)
